ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY rft'frtyvW H m'4o ^ Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Price $ domestic postpaid or $ GPO Bookstore Stock Number CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER T H E RECORD CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT CHAPTER OUTLOOK AND POLICY CHAPTER T H E ECONOMIC ROLE OF WOMEN CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SYSTEM IN TRANSITION APPENDIX A. SUPPLEMENTS TO CHAPTERS IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS APPENDIX B. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDED C. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page in ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : As predicted was a very good year for the American economy From the end of to the end of total output rose by about ll/2 percent. This is one of the largest 1-year increases in the past years This growth took place in a largely peacetime economy ; it was not achieved by a war-fed inflationary boom. In fact real defense spending declined percent during the year. More important is the fact that the big increase of production in the year just ended was accompanied by a reduced rate of inflation. Consumer prices increased a little more than percent from to a far cry from the runaway inflation rate of percent that confronted us in A year ago looking ahead to I said that the great problem was to get the unemployment rate down from the 6-percent level where it was in During the rate was reduced to a little over percent We should get this down further and expect to do so but what was accomplished was gratifying. It is especially significant that the total number of people at work rose by million from to the largest 1-year increase in years Everything was not ideal in in the economy any more than in other aspects of our national life. Rising food prices were a major concern. The U.S. balance of trade with other countries did not improve as we had hoped. But all-in-all it was a very good year The economic performance of owed much to sound and forceful Government policy. The history of this policy goes back before and back before the dramatic moves taken on August It goes back to the decision made in to bring to an end the dangerous inflation that had started in the mid-sixties. The decision was carried out by slowing down the rise of Federal spending and continuing the temporary tax increase that had been enacted in and by tightening monetary conditions. As a result much of the cause of the inflation was removed and the rise in the cost of living was moderated. Without these steps the subsequent success of price and wage controls would have been impossible Curbing inflation and cutting back on defense production necessarily involved a downturn in the economy and a rise of unemployment. To keep this from going too far fiscal and monetary policy shifted in an expansive direction in And to speed up both the decline of inflation and the recovery of the economy I announced the New Economic Policy on August Temporary controls were imposed on prices rents and wages. Taxes were reduced. A little later we moved to stimulate the economy further by boosting Government expenditures in thefirsthalf of mainly by bringing forward expenditures that would have been made later The policies that began in contributed to the economic progress so visible in But Government policies alone did not do the job Credit goes largely to a strong private economy and to the private citizens who cooperated in raising productivity maintaining industrial peace and conforming to the standards of the control system. The Government helped to create conditions in which private people could adapt to a growing economy that was far less defense-oriented and much less inflationary. But it was the individual American who made the adaptations The immediate economic goals for the domestic economy in are clear. Output and incomes should expand. Both the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation should be reduced further and realistic confidence must be created that neither need rise again The prospects for achieving these goals in are bright if we behave with reasonable prudence and foresight. By all signs a vigorous economic expansion is underway and will continue during the year This will raise output and employment and reduce unemployment. The problem as far as can now be foreseen will be to prevent this expansion from becoming an inflationary boom That is why I put restraining Federal expenditures at the top of the list of economic policies for Nothing is easier or more pleasant at least for a bureaucracy than to spend money. But beyond some point which our budget plans already reach everything that the Government gives out with one hand it must take back with the other in higher taxes or more inflation or both. Spending proposals roust be looked at in this way by asking whether they are worth either of these costs. Much Government spending fails this test I am proposing a budget with expenditures of $ billion in the currentfiscalyear an increase of $ billion from last year. I am proposing a $ billion increase for next year to $ billion. Although those are large totals and large increases they reflect a sense of responsibility and discipline. I urgently seek the cooperation of the country and the Congress in staying within my budget proposals Only by holding the line on Federal spending will we be able to reduce the inflation rate further in Productivity should still be rising strongly. Inflationary expectations have been subdued. Workers have been experiencing large gains in their real incomes and so the pressure to catch up will be less than it was earlier. Anti-inflationary forces are at work but it will be necessary to keep our healthy expansion from becoming an overheated boom The system of wage and price controls in effect during helped bring about a combination of less inflation and more production. But it is not the best system for After intensive consultation with all parts of the American society we have concluded that controls should be substantially modified. There are several problem areas food construction and medical care costs where special efforts at restraint are needed in some cases more intense than last year In the economy at large there is need to establish more firmly a pattern of behavior consistent with reasonable price stability. At the same time our own experience and the experience of other countries demonstrate that as controls continue unless they are suitably modified red tape multiplies inequities increase interferences with production and productivity become more severe and the possibility is enhanced that prices will explode when controls are lifted. Therefore we are modifying the control system in several ways We are setting forth standards of reasonable price and wage behavior to which we ask business and labor to conform. Private economic units will be able to determine by themselves whether price or wage increases are within the standards or not. They will not require advance approval from the Government. However the Government will maintain the legal authority the practical capacity and the will to intervene where necessary to stop action that is unreasonably inconsistent with the standards I am asking Congress to extend the Economic Stabilization Act for year to April to continue the authority. There should be no doubt about the fact that the authority will be used where needed An essential part of our anti-inflation program must be an increase of food supplies to restrain increases of food prices and bring about reductions where possible. The combination of natural occurrences holding down food production in the United States and abroad with rising consumers ' incomes at home caused a sharp increase in food prices last year. These same forces will be at work in the early part of this year. But we have taken steps to increase food supplies. Quotas which previously limited the import of meat have been suspended. Restrictions on the acreage planted to major field crops have been relaxed. An increased amount of dried milk is being allowed into the country. Subsidies on agricultural exports have been eliminated. Grazing of cattle is being permitted on acreage diverted from crop production. We have established new machinery in the Federal Government to assure that high priority is given to holding down food prices Restraint in budget policy the new system of cooperative price and wage controls and special efforts to increase food supplies coupled with the productivity and vigor of the private economy should make another year in which inflation and unemployment decline and output rises. But what is at stake in the policies of is more than economic performance in What is at stake is whether we can make the prelude to a sustained period of growth and stability in a free economy Since the Government and the economy have been largely absorbed in the negative task of correcting the destabilizing consequences of the financing of the Vietnam war. That period is almost over. Now we can stop putting out fires and turn to building a better economic order We must develop more reliable and responsible attitudes and methods for dealing with the Federal budget so that it is not perpetually on the margin of an inflationary explosion. We must prepare for the end of wage and price controls and be willing to show the same courage in taking them off as was shown in imposing them. We must weed out the restrictive effects of the large number of other economic controls exercised by the Federal Government most of them having their origins decades ago and many of them interfering with productivity and production. And we must strengthen the forces of competition in a vigorous free-enterprise economy Nowhere is the need to make a year of economic reform more apparent than in our international relations. Our actions of August put the world on the path of negotiation for improvement of the international economy. Last year we made proposals for the reform of the international financial system and these proposals are now the subject of discussion by high-level officials of the member countries of the International Monetary Fund. This year we expect to enter negotiations on the subject of trade We want the American people to be able to buy those foreign goods and services that are better cheaper or more interesting than our own That raises the American standard of living. We want our people to be able to invest abroad when that is the most profitable thing to do But we also want the American people to be able to pay for these purchases and investments in the way that is best for us. That means first that we must be able to pay by selling abroad the things that we produce best and selling them on the best terms that we can freely obtain Second it means that we must be able to pay in a way that is sustainable so that we are not confronted with the need for sudden and possibly painful adjustments Existing arrangements are not favorable to us in either respect. We have been buying from abroad in rapidly increasing amounts and that has helped the American people. But our exports with which we seek to pay for these imports have been subject to high barriers particularly in the case of our agricultural products. We have not been able to sell enough to pay for our overseas expenditures and so we have had to pay by incurring more and more short-term debts abroad. This is not a situation that can go on indefinitely ; its sudden ending could be disruptive Therefore we want to bring about those reforms that will permit us to earn our way Our proposals have been and will be put forth in the U.S. national interest. But this is not contrary to the interest of other countries. International competition is shifting from the military and political arenas to the economic. This is a great advantage because in economic competition every participant can win there need be no losers. The effort of each nation to produce and sell what it can do most efficiently will benefit others. This is the fundamental belief underlying our proposals for reform and the fundamental reason for thinking that a satisfactory agreement will be reached * * * * * The general prediction is that will be another very good year for the American economy. I believe that it can be a great year. It can be a year in which we reduce unemployment and inflation further and enter into a sustained period of strong growth full employment and price stability. But will be a great year only if we manage our fiscal affairs prudently and do not exceed the increases in Federal expenditures that I have proposed. This is the practical lesson of the experience from to when loose fiscal policy turned a healthy expansion into a feverish boom followed by a recession. I am determined to live by this lesson. And I urgently appeal to the Congress to join me in doing so January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully S HERBERT STEIN Chairman EZRA SOLOMON MARINA V.N. WHITMAN CONTENTS Page CHAPTER T H E RECORD Demand and Output Business Fixed Investment Housing Consumer Spending The Labor Market The Labor Force Employment Gains in Unemployment Prices and Costs Compensation Productivity and Costs Nonfinancial Corporations Farm Prices and Rural Incomes Fiscal Policy in Federal Expenditures Federal Receipts The Request for a Spending Ceiling State and Local Governments Financial Policy and Financial Markets Monetary Policy Interest Rates Fourth Quarter Developments CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT The Situation in August The Nature of the Program Prices and Wages During the Controls Period The Costs of Controls Where We Stand CHAPTER OUTLOOK AND POLICY Guides to Overall Economic Policy Fiscal and Monetary Policy Price and Wage Restraints in Phase III The Outlook for O Page CHAPTER T H E ECONOMIC ROLE OF WOMEN Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women Participation in the Labor Force The Historical Pattern The Working Woman Today Unemployment The Widening in the Reported Male-Female Unemployment Differential Education and the Occupational Distribution Earnings Direct Discrimination Versus Role Differentiation Special Problems The Female-Headed Household The Income Tax Child Care Government Action CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SYSTEM IN TRANSITION The U.S. Balance of Payments in The Goods-and-Services Account in The Capital Account in Foreign Exchange Market Developments in Reforming the International Economic System The International Monetary System The International Trading System Other Aspects of International Economic Cooperation.. APPENDIXES : A. Supplements to Chapters in the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Changes in Gross National Product in Current and Constant Dollars to Annual Vacancy Rates for Rental and Homeowner Housing Personal Outlays Taxes and Saving as Percent of Personal Income Changes in the Working-Age Population Armed Forces and Labor Force to Change in the Number of Employees on Nonfarm Payrolls IV to IV Page Selected Unemployment Rates IV-1972 IV Changes in Gross National Product Price Deflators II to IV Changes in Hourly Compensation Private Nonfarm Sector Changes in Unit Labor Costs Productivity and Compensation Per Man-Hour in Recessions and Expansions Private Nonfarm Economy Changes in Prices Costs and Profits Per Unit of Output for Nonfinancial Corporations III to III Changes in Gross Product and Profits Before Taxes of Nonfinancial Corporations Quarters After Trough and Ratio of Changes Distribution of Gross Product Originating in Nonfinancial Corporations Profits Before Adjustment Adjusted Profits and Interest as Shares of Gross Product of Nonfinancial Corporations Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Changes in Price Measures to Changes in Wage Measures to First-Year Wage Rate Changes in Collective Bargaining Agreements Covering Workers or More and Changes in Consumer Prices in the United States and OECD Countries Selected Periods to The Economic Preludes to Two Major Collective Bargaining Rounds and Government Expenditures as a Percent of Full-Employment GNP Selected Calendar Years Women in the Labor Force Selected Years Labor Force Participation Rates of Women by Marital Status and Age and Unemployment Rates by Sex and Age Selected Years Distribution of Unemployment of Adult Men and Women by Reason for Unemployment and Unemployment of Adult Men and Women by Duration and Reason Women as a Percent of Persons in Several Professional and Managerial Occupations Occupational Distribution of Employed Persons by Education and Sex Ratio of Total Money Earnings of Civilian Women Workers to Earnings of Civilian Men Workers Selected Years Page U.S. Balance-of-Payments Transactions Percent Deviations of Major Foreign Currencies from Central Rates December 1971-December Changes in Official Reserves for Selected Countries and Changes in U.S. Liabilities to Foreign Official Reserve Holders Classification of Firms and Workers in Economic Stabilization Program Women in Experienced Civilian Labor Force and Charts Changes in GNP Real GNP and Price Deflator Recovery Comparisons of Real GNP and Civilian Employment Civilian Labor Force Participation Rates Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices ( Private Nonfarm Sector ) Shares of Profits and Interest in Gross Product of Nonfinancial Corporations Interest Rates Changes in Prices Changes in Compensation in the Private Nonfarm Economy. Labor Force Participation Over a Working Life of Cohorts of Women Born in Selected Time Intervals Annual Income by Age for Male and Female High School and College Graduates Movement of European Community Exchange Rates Organization of the Economic Stabilization Program in Illustration for Individual Country of Reserve Indicator System CHAPTER The Record Q H WITNESSED the first full-year results of the innovative set of X.ZJ I * economic programs initiated in August to speed the recovery of the economy to reduce the rate of inflation and to reverse the deteriorating trend in the Nation 's external position. There was a rapid acceleration in the rate of growth in real output and a slowdown in the rate of inflation ( Chart ) Civilian employment rose sharply and the number of persons unemployed declined. Both real wages and corporate profits increased. Some progress was made on the international front but it was greatly overshadowed by developments in the domestic economy Last year 's economic performance brought with it significant changes in public attitudes about inflation and in expectations about the course of the economy. Although hopes were high in early that the shift in policy would bring favorable results uncertainties persisted regarding both the strength of the economic expansion and the effectiveness of price and wage controls. These doubts began to abate gradually as evidence grew that rates of wage and price inflation were indeed declining compared to the period prior to August Workers ' cooperation in the wage control system was fostered by the realization that real wages were increasing. Strike activity fell and relative to total time worked was at its lowest point in almost years. Although increases in food prices were troublesome during most of consumers could see a slower rise in the overall cost of living Finally although selling prices were constrained so were costs and business was able to enjoy some rise in profit margins in a setting of rapidly rising volume. These developments were all parts of a process that was one of the major objectives of the price-wage control system the unwinding of inflationary expectations Nor was the change in attitudes confined to inflation alone. The rise in production and employment that became particularly evident by midyear created a growing mood of confidence among businessmen and consumers and this in turn helped to bolster private investment and personal consumption expenditures The fact that considerable progress was made during did not mean that final goals had been reached. The unemployment rate in December although down by nearly percentage point from a year earlier was still higher than desirable. At the same time the rate of inflation at the end Chart Changes in GNP Real GNP and Price Deflator PERCENT CHANGE FROM PRECEDING YEAR REAL GNP SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE of although lower than it had been before the controls was still higher than the ambitious target set by the Administration. The balance of payments still showed a considerable deficit and although work on international monetary reform was underway it had only begun. Nonetheless by the end of there was a strong sense of optimism about the progress that had been achieved and the ability to find answers to some of the problems that remained DEMAND AND OUTPUT Last year 's expansion in demand and its division between real output and prices exceeded most expectations held at the start of The $ billion increase in gross national product ( GNP ) from to was close to the figure projected by the Council but the 6.5-percent rise in real GNP was higher than projected while the 3.0-percent rise in prices was a little lower. Real growth was the largest and the price rise as measured by the GNP deflator the smallest since All major sectors of demand except for net exports contributed to the rise in overall GNP ( Table ) The very large increase in gross private domestic investment the step-up in Federal purchases in the first half of the year and the large increase in consumer spending were the principal stimulating forces in the economy. The continued buoyancy of housing demand and the strength of consumption in the face of overwithholding of personal income taxes were noteworthy developments in The policy measures initiated in August changed both the character and the pace of the recovery that began at the end of In its first full year it was weaker than in comparable periods of past cyclical upswings Indeed that was one of the main reasons for the shift in policy. After the pronounced acceleration that occurred during the current expansion compares very favorably with previous upswings when changes are taken from the preceding peak to the eighth quarter after the trough ( Chart ) BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Business fixed investment showed considerable strength in much more than the Council of Economic Advisers and most forecasters had anticipated at the start of the year. The comprehensive measure included in the national income accounts ( NIA ) nonresidential fixed investment rose percent. The real increase of percent was confined to equipment since on this basis nonresidential construction was unchanged. Investment was bolstered by the general incentives provided by the liberalized depreciation regulations the job development credit and the excise tax cuts on motor vehicles. The strong upsurge in the economy in the rise in profits and cash flow and the ready availability of funds at lower interest rates than in also benefited investment. However last year 's buoyant economy and favorable financial setting had their main impact on decisions and T A B L E Changes in gross national product in current and constant dollars to Component to to to to CURRENT DOLLARS Percent change : Total GNP.. -'.6 Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Gross private domestic investment.. Fixed investment Business fixed investment. Residential structures Government purchases Federal purchases State and local purchases Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services. CONSTANT ( ) DOLLARS Percent change : Total GNP Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Gross private domestic investment.. Fixed investment Business fixed investment.. Residential structures Government purchases Federal purchases State and local purchases Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services. Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis commitments to invest. Because of the lag between the investment decision and actual investment a large portion of this impact will manifest itself in rising outlays in At the start of the year the main reason for expecting that the rise in investment in would be moderate was the relatively low rate of capacity utilization especially in manufacturing. In this sector investment did not increase very much. After a 6-percent drop in the preceding year dollar outlays were up only percent in or about as much as the rise in capital goods prices. The recent behavior of manufacturing investment has been more or less typical of past business cycles. In the early 's for example manufacturing investment did not strengthen to any significant degree until the third year of the recovery Most of the increase in investment outlays in was concentrated in the nonmanufacturing sector where increases by electric and gas utilities communications firms and the airlines were especially large. In many of the nonmanufacturing industries investment tends to be rather independent Chart Recovery Comparisons of Real GNP and Civilian Employment PERCENT OF PRECEDING PEAK REAL GNP TROUGH IUO CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT _ ^ x ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ \ _ ^ t ^ ' ^ TROUGH QUARTERS AFTER TROUGH NOTE : PEAK AND TROUGH QUARTERS AS DESIGNATED BY THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH ARE : PEAKS IV I I I I I I I AND IV ; TROUGHS IV III I I I AND 1V SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) of the short-run cyclical behavior of the economy. Also investment by farmers was up very sharply as a result of rising farm income and business purchases of items affected by the excise tax cut such as trucks rose substantially Investment plans and forward commitments were much stronger than actual investment spending during This showed up in many ways In November new orders received by producers of capital goods were percent above the year-earlier figure and construction contracts for commercial and industrial buildings were up by percent. In manufacturing the 19-percent rise in new appropriations for future spending and the 23percent rise in the total value of new investment projects started in the first quarters of were far greater than the small increase in actual outlays from to HOUSING Almost million private housing units were started last year a rise of approximately one-sixth over the total. Shipments of mobile homes also rose considerably. The housing performance exceeded the Council 's projection of million units which itself was at the high end of the range of housing forecasts for Total outlays for residential construction rose by more than one-fourth to nearly $ billion The rise in starts reflected exceptionally strong demand for housing and favorable conditions for an increase in mortgage credit. In the single-family housing market sales were at a peak vacancy rates were low and pressures on home prices were strong. The demand for apartment units was also high although vacancy rates in rental units edged up for the second year in a row Last year 's rise in housing starts occurred in spite of a decrease in starts under federally assisted home programs. Some private housing units were started in under federally subsidized programs or ^ percent of the total. This compares with units or percent of total starts in and units or percent of total starts in Conditions in mortgage markets were extremely favorable for home construction and purchasing in but the primary driving force was a strong underlying demand for shelter. Part of this strength was a legacy of earlier years. The level of new housing construction was relatively low in the 's particularly in the second half of the decade when credit conditions were generally unfavorable for housing. Once credit conditions began to improve as they did in much of the unsatisfied backlog of demand reasserted itself. At the same time the pace of new household formation has been rising rapidly. New household formation totaled about million in and million in as compared to an average of million in the preceding years. Despite the fact that starts rose to new records in the last years housing vacancies are still low in relation to those of the past years ( Table ) TABLE Annual vacancy rates for rental and homeowner housing Vacancy rate ( percent ) Year Total Homeowner Rental I96L * i Excludes dilapidated units > Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau-of the Census ( except as noted ) CONSUMER SPENDING Consumer spending increased by over $ billion- in The nominal increase of 8J4 percent and the real increase of percent were among the largest recorded in the past years. The general improvement in the economy rising employment and income and the slowdown in both inflation and inflationary expectations all affected the consumer 's ability and willingness to spend. Consumers made extensive use of credit to finance their purchases particularly of durable goods The boom in residential housing brought with it the largest gains in spending on furniture and appliances since The lower level of automobile prices in as a result of the excise tax cut was partly responsible for dealers ' sales of million new cars. Almost all of the 7-percent rise over was accounted for by domestic-type cars Underlying last year 's buoyant consumer demand was a rise in personal income of percent well above average for the preceding decade. In and when the economy was sluggish rising transfer payments accounted for a significant share of the income increase. In contrast most of the rise in income reflected larger earned income. But the outstanding feature of consumer behavior in was the strength in consumer spending despite the overwithholding of personal income taxes that began at the start of the year. Because of overwithholding the percent rise in disposable ( after-tax ) income was roughly percentage point less than the rise otherwise associated with an 81/2 -percent rise in personal incomes. Apparently in consumers largely ignored the temporary effects of overwithholding. In any case most of the rise in the proportion of personal income going to higher taxes was compensated for by a reduction in the proportion of income devoted to saving. As Table shows the ratio of personal outlays to income was little changed from The table also shows that the share of income devoted to personal outlays last year continued relatively low compared to the 's TABLE Personal outlays taxes and saving as percent of personal income [ Percent ] Year Personal taxes Personal saving Personal outlays average Personal income i Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis THE LABOR MARKET Two forces dominated the labor market in First there was a large expansion in opportunities for civilian employment. According to the household survey civilian employment increased by more than half a million jobs in each quarter of the year and for as a whole there were million more people at work than in This was the largest year-to-year percentage change since At the same time the civilian labor force expanded sharply and not until the middle of the year were the large employment gains accompanied by noticeable reductions in unemployment THE LABOR FORCE The year witnessed a large influx into the civilian labor force which expanded by million relative to ( Table ) One factor contributing to this increase was a reduction in the size of the Armed Forces which fell by about and enlarged the pool of persons available for civilian work. Returning veterans have a very high propensity to join the civilian labor force participation rates for recent veterans averaged more than percent over the past few years so that a shift in the size of the Armed Forces by itself will change the overall civilian participation rate However in when the size of the Armed Forces also fell by the civilian participation rate dipped. The difference between the years lies in the increased labor force participation of other groups notably women and teenagers TABLE Changes in the working-age population Armed Forces and labor Jorce to Change ( millions of persons years and over ) Group to average to average to average to to Noninstitutional population Total labor force Armed Forces Civilian labor force Both sexes years Men years Men years Men years and over Women years Women years.. Women years and over. i ! i Data for have been adjusted for comparability with data for Decrease of less than Increase of less than Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Chart shows trends in the participation rates of the major age and sex groups in the civilian labor force. For a number of groups participation rates which had leveled off or declined in rose in as the recovery strengthened. The tendency for women in the 20-24-year age bracket to enter the labor force had grown steadily throughout the 's and into as more young wives chose either to delay the start of a family in favor of working or to continue working even after starting a family ; the participation rate for this group leveled off in but resumed its longer-run growth in A similar pattern was evident for women in the 25-54-year age bracket. Participation rates of teenagers which had risen sharply in the last half of the 's and dipped in but rose again in The participation rates for young men in the 20-24-year age group have been particularly affected by changes in the size of the Armed Forces Civilian labor force participation for this group had been declining since the mid-1960 's as more and more young men were absorbed into the Armed Forces and others continued their schooling through the college level. The participation rates declined through and after remaining about level through rose in Finally participation rates of men in the prime working-age group ( ) and of all persons or older fell again in The spread of private pension plans the liberalization of both private and public pension plans and the improvement in disability benefits are important reasons for the decreasing trend in participation rates of these groups EMPLOYMENT GAINS IN From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of real output rose percent creating exceptionally strong demands for labor Chart Civilian Labor Force Participation Rates RATE ( PERCENT ) ! / M E N YEARS ALL CIVILIANS / ' ^ 1/M \ / \ WOMEN YEARS I i I I I I I BOTH SEXES YEARS AND OVER I i I960 l i I l i / CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN GROUP SPECIFIED SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I i I I I N Employment expanded sharply according to both of the major employment measures the household survey and the payroll survey. According to the latter survey million more persons were at work in nonagricultural establishments in the fourth quarter of than in the corresponding quarter a year earlier ( Table ) The goods-producing sector whose employment declined in the first year of the recovery made a strong advance in The sharpest turnaround was in durable goods manufacturing where employment expanded in each of the past quarters following years of contraction. These strong gains notwithstanding manufacturing employment in the fourth quarter of was still percent below its level at the business cycle peak in the fourth quarter of largely because of the reduced level of defenserelated manufacturing. In the private sector manufacturing and mining were the only industry divisions for which employment was below levels prevailing in the fourth quarter of Employment in the service-producing industries which had continued to rise during the recession and in but at less than the trend rate of increase moved up strongly in State and local governments added almost employees to their payrolls. Although the major part of this gain is attributable to the increased demand for local government services the rise was augmented by employment financed by the Federal Public Employment Program. The only service category for which employment fell over the 4-quarter period was the Federal Government ; here the decline that began in continued TABLE Change in the number of employees on nonf arm payrolls 1969IV to 1972IV [ Seasonally adjusted ] Change ( thousands of persons ) Industry group Total Goods producing industries.. Mining Construction Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods.. Service producing industries. Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal Government State and local government... IV to IV o Preliminary Note. Changes are based on quarterly averages Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics IV to to II II to III III to IV i IV to IV IV to IV The underlying strength in the labor market is confirmed by recent trends in the labor turnover data. In manufacturing the rate of new hires ( the number of new workers hired per employees ) had drifted down from in the first quarter of to in the first quarter of Since that low point the pace of new hires has increased steadily reaching an average of in October and November of The quit rate in manufacturing has also increased recently indicating that many workers are finding better job prospects. Correspondingly layoffs have decreased sharply from an average of per workers in to half that rate in October and November the lowest rates since the Korean war. A further indication of the expansion of employment opportunities is the recent upturn in job vacancies in manufacturing. The number of unfilled jobs in manufacturing while still low in relation to has increased by nearly percent since the end of The increases in payroll employment were accompanied by gains in hours worked. Average weekly hours of production workers in manufacturing rose from in the fourth quarter of to in the fourth quarter of the highest level since late For the entire nonfarm sector where the average workweek has followed a pronounced downward long-term trend average weekly hours lengthened slightly in UNEMPLOYMENT Although unemployment responded relatively slowly to the large output and employment gains of there were unmistakable signs of progress In the fourth quarter the number of unemployed adjusted for seasonality averaged million persons down from the 5.0-million average of and the first half of The overall unemployment rate which had hovered around percent throughout began moving down in and by December had reached percent Partly because of the upsurge in durable goods output the improvement in the unemployment picture over the past quarters was more marked for adult males than for adult females ( Table ) The unemployment rate for married men fell to percent in the fourth quarter and to percent by December. Although the latter was above the very low rates of the late 's it was less than in any other period since early The unemployment rate for household heads also declined in but not so markedly as the rate for married men. Unemployment among teenagers reached an alltime high in the first quarter of but has since receded somewhat The unemployment rate for nonwhite workers declined over but not so rapidly as did the rate for whites. However the changes in the overall rates by race obscure widely divergent changes in unemployment for the different age and sex groups. There were sizable employment gains for nonwhite adult males whose unemployment rate declined from percent in the fourth quarter of to percent a year later. This decline was much larger both absolutely and relatively than the decrease from percent to percent experienced by white adult males. The widening in the gap between white and nonwhite unemployment rates on an overall basis was apparently attributable to differences in the behavior of unemployment among teenagers TABLE Selected unemployment rates IV-1972 IV [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted1 ] Selected groups of workers IV IV II All workers ? Sex and age : Both sexes yearsa Men years and over2 years years and over Women years and over2 years years and over Occupation : White-collar workers Blue-collar workers Service workers Race : White Negro and other races Other categories : Household heads Married men Full-time workers Part-time workers State insured workers Reason for unemployment * : Lost last job Left last job Reentered labor force Never worked before IV III Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified unless otherwise indicated Reflects revisions for See Note Appendix Tables C-24-26 Insured unemployment under State programs as percent of average covered employment * Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Last year witnessed a decisive improvement in the labor market status of recent veterans. The unemployment rate for Vietnam-era veterans in the 20-29-year-old age group which had averaged percent in declined to percent in the final quarter of the year. Moreover the unemployment rate decline for veterans was faster than for nonveterans in the age group so that by yearend the veteran unemployment rate was actually below the nonveteran rate after remaining persistently above it for the past several years. A number of forces explain these developments They reflect the general improvement in economic conditions as well as specific Government policies directed toward aiding the labor market adjustments of veterans. The stabilization of the size of the Armed Forces during the course of the year also helped since it reduced the flow of discharged veterans from per month at the start of the year to about toward yearend. Moreover the average age of the Vietnam-era veteran has been rising and there is a strong inverse relationship between age and unemployment for veterans and nonveterans alike http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/73 O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis There was also considerable improvement in the distribution of unemployment along geographic lines. This is most readily apparent in the Labor Department 's monthly classification of the unemployment situation in labor market areas. From the end of to the end of the number of areas with " low " unemployment ( less than percent ) almost trebled from to areas. Areas with " moderate " unemployment ( from to percent ) increased from to On the other hand there was a sharp reduction from to in the number of areas classified in the " substantial " unemployment categories i.e. percent or more PRICES AND COSTS In the period since the August policies were instituted there has been a dramatic deceleration in the rate of inflation. This is discussed in detail in Chapter ; here we focus mainly on price measures applicable to the GNP. For example the implicit price deflator for GNP which measures the change in prices of all goods and services included in the gross national product rose at a rate of percent per year in the years ending in the second quarter of the last full quarter before the policy shift. Over the next quarters the annual rate of increase was down to percent The GNP deflator is the only measure of price that is consistent with real GNP ; the product of the two equals GNP in current dollars. However changes in the deflator reflect shifts in the composition of real GNP as well as changes in individual prices. Changes in the composition of GNP in had a downward effect on the rate of inflation as measured by the general GNP deflator. This compositional effect is eliminated by the Commerce Department through the construction of an index of GNP prices with fixed base period weights the general type of construction used for the consumer price index ( CPI ) and wholesale price index ( WPI ) On the basis of a GNP price index that uses fixed weights the rate of price increase experienced over the past quarters is percent rather than percent. Even so this represents a marked improvement relative to the period prior to August ( Table ) For some analytical purposes it is useful to focus on the private sector which excludes Government workers and their pay raises. For the private sector of the economy the fixed-weight deflator shows an inflation rate of just over percent since the second quarter of as against an average increase of percent over the preceding years Although the rate of inflation slowed last year in most broad sectors of the economy farm prices were one important exception. The sharp rise in farm prices had a significant effect on the overall rate of inflation. If attention is confined to private nonfarm business as shown in the last column of Table the deceleration of the price rise is clearly more pronounced than it is for the GNP deflator as a whole or even the private deflator. In the private nonfarm sector inflation declined from a rate of percent in the period to percent over the past year and a half TABLE Changes in gross national product price deflators II to IV [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] GNP Private nonfarm business GNP Private GNP Period Implicit deflator II II II II II to III III to IV IV to to II II to III III to IV to to to to II II II IV i weights Implicit deflator weights Implicit deflator Preliminary Stiurce : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis COMPENSATION PRODUCTIVITY AND COSTS The slowing of price inflation in the private nonfarm economy reflects a marked deceleration in the rise in unit costs. For labor costs this was a result of two factors : a slower rise in hourly compensation and an acceleration of the rise in output per man-hour ( Chart ) Compensation Although fiscal and monetary policies moved the economy away from the conditions of excess demand that persisted into hourly compensation continued to rise at rates of 7j ^ percent or more per annum in early ( Table ) These large increases occurred not only in the face of generally slack labor market conditions but in spite of two associated factors that tend to reduce the rise in average hourly compensation during such periods During an economic slowdown increases in average hourly compensation ( which includes premium payments for overtime hours ) are normally dampened because the proportion of overtime hours usually falls. A second factor is the changed composition of employment. Some of the relatively highly paid industries like durable goods manufacturing are those most affected by an economic slowdown and this restrains the average increase in hourly compensation for the economy as a whole Since the second quarter of just before the start of the stabilization program the rise in hourly compensation for all persons in the private nonfarm sector has slowed to an annual rate of about percent. In terms of quarter-to-quarter changes the 90-day wage-price freeze restrained the increase in the fourth quarter of The sharp step-up in the first quarter Chart Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices Private Nonfarm Sector PERCENT CHANGE FROM PRECEDING YEAR COMPENSATION PER MAN-HOUR OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR V////1 NOTE : DATA RELATE TO ALL PERSONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR of when hourly compensation rose at about a 9-percent rate reflected the bulge after the end of the freeze and the increase in social security taxes. This was followed by a very small increase of percent during the second quarter. The apparent step-up during the final quarters of may be more a reflection of the timing of wage increases which has undoubtedly been affected by the controls program than of an underlying acceleration of wage inflation. Over the last quarters of hourly compensation rose at an average annual rate of percent which would seem to be a fair representation of post-bulge experience TABLE Changes in hourly compensation private nonfarm sector [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Period Percent change from previous quarter Period Percent change from previous quarter : II Ill IV : II III IV : III IV II III IV i III IV : III IV Preliminary Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Productivity Changes in productivity ( which is usually measured in terms of real output per hour of work ) show cyclical movements around an upward trend Longer-term growth in productivity reflects such basic developments as the rising educational attainment and skill levels of the work force as well as changes in the quantity and quality of the tools equipment and organization with which they work. The short-run variability in productivity is highly influenced by changes in the industry mix of output and in production rates. Some of the work force in each unit such as skilled maintenance personnel represent relatively fixed overhead inputs in the sense that they must be kept on even when the level of production declines. Also if the period of slack production is expected to be brief employers may refrain from laying off workers. While these adjustments hold down increases in output per man-hour of paid labor during periods of slack they also help to explain why increased output can be had with a substantially less than proportionate rise in labor inputs during the subsequent recovery phase The behavior of productivity during the recovery from the t970 recession falls neatly into two separate phases each of which is different from earlier experiences at comparable stages of expansion. The basis for this disparity appears to be related to the different pattern of ouput growth in this expansion as compared to earlier ones Reflecting the slow growth in real output the rise in productivity during the first quarters of was clearly below the experience in previous recoveries ( Table ) Indeed the rise was even weaker than the measures in Table show. This is so because productivity in the final quarter of was depressed by the lengthy strike at General Motors Ifj as seems reasonable a more representative value of output per man-hour during the trough quarter was the average of the final quarter of and the first quarter of when there was a very substantial amount of makeup production from the strike then the growth of productivity over the first quarters of was closer to percent than to the percent shown in the table. The lower figure is about half the average growth rate of productivity in the preceding four recoveries With the acceleration in the rise of real output since late productivity has grown very strongly. Starting in late and throughout productivity growth has been much more pronounced than that experienced during corresponding phases of previous recoveries Unit Labor Costs Because compensation per man-hour and output per man-hour during the recent slowdown and current recovery have behaved differently from past cyclical experience unit labor costs have also traced an unusual pattern of change ( Table ) In past recoveries labor costs per unit of output began T A B L E Changes in unit labor costs productivity and compensation per man-hour in recessions and expansions private nonfarm economy [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Peak and trough quarters * Peak to trough Trough to third quarter after trough Third to eighth quarter after trough Compensation per man-hour : IV IV I I III I I IV IV Productivity a : IV IV I I I II I I IV IV Unit labor costs : IV IV I I III II IV IV * Peak and trough quarters are those designated as cyclical turning points by the National Bureau of Economic Research Preliminary Output per man-hour Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ( except as noted ) to decline around the trough quarter. In contrast during the early stages of the recovery from the recession the rise in unit labor costs although down from earlier rates remained high. However because of the acceleration in productivity growth since the third quarter of and the slowdown in compensation increases unit labor costs have increased little. During the comparable phase of previous expansions unit labor costs have usually risen substantially relative to their behavior during the early recovery phase NONFINANCIAL CORPORATIONS A comprehensive set of figures on output prices and costs is available for the important nonfinancial corporate sector. These data provide a convenient accounting framework for a detailed discussion of prices costs and profits In general the behavior of costs and prices in the corporate sector is not very different from that of the broader private nonfarm sector just reviewed From the third quarter of to the third quarter of the rate of inflation for nonfinancial corporations slowed to percent from the rate of approximately percent experienced in the preceding years ( Table ) Over the same period the rise in unit labor costs which had already started to abate the year before fell to an annual rate of less than percent a joint reflection of both a stepping up in the rise in productivity to percent per Changes in prices costs and profits per unit of output for nonfinancial corporations III to III TABLE III to III III to III III to III III to III _ Employee compensation Other costs Item I to I Dollar change per unit of output : Price Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes Net interest Profits Percent change per unit of output : Price Employee compensation.. Compensation per man-hour Output per man-hour _ Other costs Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes i Net interest Profits Percent change in output Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis and Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics annum and a slowdown in the rise of hourly compensation to percent per annum. The rise in hourly compensation in was the smallest yearto-year rise experienced since and the rise in productivity the highest since All other unit costs combined which include capital consumption charges indirect taxes and interest were essentially unchanged from the third quarter of to the corresponding quarter of Lower interest costs and indirect business taxes per unit of output offset an increase in capital consumption costs per unit. Since the percentage increases in aggregate dollar costs of each of these categories over the past year were about the same as in the preceding year the improved behavior in costs per unit was essentially a reflection of the acceleration of the rise in output. Had the liberalized depreciation regulations not been in effect capital consumption costs per unit would have been virtually unchanged during the year instead of rising percent. Profits before taxes would have been correspondingly higher It is also interesting to note that the recent decline in interest costs per unit of output followed a modest increase in the preceding year and dramatic increases in and when interest rates were at their peaks Profits per unit of output rose percent ( before tax and including the inventory valuation adjustment ) over the past year. The most recent rise followed a 5.8-percent increase the year before and a net decrease of nearly percent over the preceding years. The peak for profits per unit of output was reached in the fourth quarter of ; almost years later they were still some percent lower Rising profit margins and increased physical volume raised total beforetax profits of nonfinancial corporations by percent from to Even so the rise in corporate profits in the most recent expansion has not been large compared to experience in previous recoveries. As Table shows the rise in profits relative to the rise in corporate output ( for the nonfinancial corporate sector ) has been smaller over the first quarters TABLE Changes in gross product and profits before taxes of nonfinancial corporations quarters after trough and ratio of changes Change quarters after trough ( billions of dollars ) Trough * Gross product 1V III ____ II 19701V Profits Change in profits as percent of change In gross product Quarters designated as trough by the National Bureau of Economic Research Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( except as noted ) of the present recovery than during corresponding periods of earlier recoveries in all but one instance. Furthermore the rise in profits in the present expansion is itself biased upward because profits in the fourth quarter of ( the trough from which the expansion is measured ) were depressed by the General Motors strike Profit Shares Because profits rose more and employee compensation rose a bit less than the 10-percent overall rise in the gross product of nonfinancial corporations the share of profits rose from percent in to percent in while the share of employee compensation fell from to percent ( Table ) A similar shift which is typical during cyclical upturns occurred between and However in the profit share of TABLE Distribution of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations [ Percent1 ] All other costs Period Total Compensation of employees Total Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes Profits a Net interest * : II III. IV II III Quarterly percents based on seasonally adjusted data Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment * Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis corporate output was at its postwar low and the compensation share at its postwar high. The relative shift that has occurred over the past years in favor of profits still leaves the profit share lower and the employee compensation share higher than in any postwar year before Long-range comparisons of the profits share including those just cited suffer from the fact that over the years depreciation laws and regulations have undergone many changes that affect the calculation of profits. This shortcoming can be overcome through the use of uniform methods of calculating depreciation over time so that the resultant estimates of profits are not affected by changes in depreciation practices The Commerce Department has made such calculations and the results are shown in the second column of Table The adjustment raises the profits share for most of the periods ( it is lowered for the period ) but in terms of changes over long periods the picture shown by the unadjusted numbers ( column of Table ) is not altered in any significant way. Comparisons should properly be made only between periods in comparable stages of the business cycle ; but even if one focuses on a year like when economic activity was high and unemployment was very low it is clear that the profits share has declined in comparison with earlier periods ( Chart ) A final adjustment should take account of interest which is part of the total return on capital and which has grown in importance over the postWorld War II period as corporations have placed greater reliance on debt as opposed to equity financing and as interest rates have risen more rapidly than the price of corporate output. The share of interest plus adjusted profits in gross corporate output has also declined over the long run but that decline has been milder than for adjusted profits alone TABLE Profits before adjustment adjusted profits and interest as shares of gross product of nonfinancial corporations [ Percent ] Period Profits before adjustment Adjusted profits i Interest Adjusted profits plus interest average. average. average. average. Ml.O Based on uniform method of calculating depreciation : historical cost valuation of assets double declining balance * and service lives equal to percent of those shown in Treasury Bulletin F Preliminary Estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Note. All profits are before taxes and include inventory valuation adjustment Profits in this table exclude those on residential properties owned by nonfinancial corporations and therefore differ from those shown in Table Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( except as noted ) Chart Shares of Profits and Interest in Gross Product of Nonfinancial Corporations PERCENT OF GROSS PRODUCT ADJUSTED PROFITS PROFITS BEFORE ADJUSTMENT Z \ " X A \ \ /f \ \ \ ^ v PLUS INTEREST \ / ' / S l i K -<y \ ADJUSTED PROFITS- ! / --X \ \ V/ \ v X ^ v Q i i i i i i I i i T J / S E E TABLE FOR DEFINITION NOTE : A L L PROFITS ARE BEFORE TAXES AND INCLUDE INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE FARM PRICES AND RURAL INCOMES Rising domestic and export demand and reduced supplies as a result of lower net farm production brought sharply higher prices and incomes to rural families in Prices received by farmers rose percent from December to December International events had a significant effect on prices. Reduced food production in three major countries Russia China and India expanded the demand for food grains from U.S. farms. The expansion in demand brought a quick response in prices of farm commodities as is typical of products with a relatively inelastic demand and a very inelastic short-run production. Because the United States was the only major food-exporting nation with large carryover supplies of wheat and other grains this country was in a very favorable position to expand its exports of farm commodities in The volume of farm exports increased nearly percent and exports of food commodities advanced percent Changes in domestic economic conditions also improved farm incomes last year. As nonfarm employment and income rose demand for income elastic food items strengthened causing a strain on the available supply of beef pork and certain dairy products. The result was rising farm and retail prices. Even the removal of restraints on meat imports and the resulting increase in imports of lean meat left domestic meat prices at alltime record levels. Only in the autumn did red meat prices show some moderation mainly because of expanded marketings of beef animals and diversion of purchases to other meats for the holiday periods While demand was expanding in overall net farm output including food and nonfood commodities remained quite static. Indeed domestic production of food commodities actually dropped percent below the previous year according to preliminary estimates. Unseasonable weather and storms hit several parts of the country at critical times and cut back fruit and vegetable production sharply. Pork output reached a low phase in the production cycle and beef production rose less than anticipated partly because favorable prices caused more stock to be retained for expansion of herds While family income in the nonfarm sector was also rising substantially the agricultural gains were so large that farm families improved their relative position. Net farm income reached $ billion for the year up $ billion or percent from and well above the previous all-time high of $ billion earned in With only half as many families on farms today as there were years ago income per family is much higher Along with the sharp improvement in farm income in rural families also benefited from the expansion of the general economy. For a large proportion of farm families the increase in employment and the rise in nonfarm wages were more important than the change in farm prices since over half of all farm families earn the greater part of their income from nonfarm sources. Most of these farm operations are small grossing less than $ a year from farm sales. In fact over percent of the annual income among this group is earned off the farm and income improvements from farm prices or Government farm programs thus directly affect only about percent of their income. This situation is not limited however to only the smallest farms. Even the operators of the largest farms those classified as having sales over $ earn about one-fifth of their total income from off-farm sources FISCAL POLICY IN Fiscal policy was deliberately expansionary in The stimulus came from rising expenditures and from the effect of tax reductions instituted in and On a national income accounts basis full-employment revenues in calendar exceeded full-employment expenditures by $ billion. The corresponding figure for calendar was a full-employment deficit of $ billion a swing of some $ billion. These estimates understate the size of the swing and of the stimulus provided by fiscal policy because receipts include about $ billion in overwithheld per sonal income taxes. As discussed below consumer behavior is probably less sensitive to the temporary cash effects of overwithholding than it is to a more permanent change in income. If Federal receipts from overwithholding are entirely excluded the estimated full-employment deficit in is $ billion a swing of $ billion from the position in On net balance the stimulus from budget policy in was somewhere between $ billion and $ billion and probably closer to the higher end of this range The policy shift set forth in August assigned little importance to increased Government spending as such. On the contrary the program envisaged some cutbacks in Federal employment and a postponement of a Government pay raise. It sought instead to stimulate private spending through tax incentives for investment repeal of the excise tax on motor vehicles and an acceleration of the scheduled date for personal income tax reductions As originally proposed in its two-tier form the job development tax credit was expected to have a large and immediate impact on capital goods demand and output. The excise tax cut was expected to stimulate demand for and production of motor vehicles. These tax measures along with the anticipated change in public sentiment resulting from the policy shift strengthened the sluggish recovery that was underway. Industrial production rose after August and the rate of growth in real GNP accelerated in the fourth quarter However the unemployment rate which had risen to percent around the beginning of stayed at that level with only minor variation until the end of the year. Consequently in presenting its plans for fiscal the Administration indicated that it would take additional steps to stimulate the economy by raising the level of expenditures during the remaining half of fiscal At the same time the Administration emphasized its intention to restrain the growth in expenditures starting in fiscal The Administration 's position was that the total stimulus provided would be sufficient to accelerate the recovery but that further stimulus might threaten the anti-inflation program FEDERAL EXPENDITURES According to the budget data presented in January total expenditures ( NIA basis ) were projected to rise by $ billion or percent from calendar to calendar a sharp advance by historical standards Actual expenditures rose by percent ( Table ) Included in this projected rise was an increase of $ billion in Federal purchases which embraced a scheduled $ billion pay increase for military and civilian personnel and a step-up in real purchases. The latter was an extension of a turnaround that had begun in the second half of following the prolonged and steep decline in defense purchases associated with the process of disengagement in Vietnam. Actual purchases fell a bit short basically in the second half In addition to the planned increase in purchases the budget called for a rise of one-sixth in other types of outlays. This rise included $ billion for revenue sharing and provision for a 5-percent increase and some liberaliza tion of social security benefits at an estimated annual cost of $ ^ billion starting in the third quarter of Because revenue sharing legislation was delayed the actual transfer of grant funds was later scheduled to take place in two instalments payable in December and in January In addition Congress altered the Administration 's social security proposal by providing a 20-percent increase starting in the fourth quarter of at an estimated annual cost of $ billion TABLE Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income accounts basis calendar years ( Billions of dollars ] Receipts and expenditures categories January budget projection i Federal Government receipts Actual * Other Transfer payments _ Grants-in-aid to State and local governments _ Net interest paid. Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Purchases of goods and services Defense Federal Government expenditures. Personal tax and nontax payments Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Surplus or deficit ( ) on income and product accounts January projected percent changes applied to revised actual data Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis and Office of Management and Budget FEDERAL RECEIPTS Budget changes on the revenue side in last January 's budget presentation reflected the tax proposals of August as extended and modified by the Congress as well as proposals made before August In addition the Administration proposed that the social security taxable earnings base be raised from $ to $ to take effect at the start of This increase was subsequently amended and deferred to by congressional action taken in October Planned tax reductions affecting revenues in included some features already mentioned : the job development tax credit the repeal of the excise tax on motor vehicles and an advance in the effective date of the rise ( to $ ) in personal exemptions. Other revenue reductions included a retroactive rise in personal exemptions from $ to $ applicable to incomes an increase in the minimum standard deduction to $ per return and a 1-year speedup in the effective date of a scheduled rise in the standard deduction from to percent. Revenue-increasing features included a rise from earlier legislation in the taxable social security wage base from $ to $ the proposed further rise to $ and the elimination of certain features of the revised depreciation regulations The estimated net effect of the proposed tax changes in themselves was to reduce calendar year revenues by about $ billion relative to in NIA terms. Although on this basis tax increases and tax reductions for individuals appeared to be approximately offsetting on balance these proposed changes provided some net fiscal stimulus in calendar Under the NIA procedures that are used to seasonally adjust contributions for social insurance increases in receipts from a rise in the taxable earnings base begin at the full annual rate in the first quarter even though the required additional taxes are ordinarily not paid until the second half of the year With these proposed tax changes providing a partial offset to the rise in revenues expected from the rise in economic activity and incomes Federal receipts were expected to show a fairly steady increase during calendar and to total $ 215/ billion. In fact receipts turned out to be some $ 12/ billion higher than anticipated. Part of this difference reflected a faster rise in tax accruals than had been foreseen for but the greater portion derived from the fact that personal income tax receipts were considerably in excess of projections because of the overwithholding that began early in The origin of overwithholding goes back to when families with more than one source of wage and salary income had withholdings that fell short of their liabilities. The withholding tax table for was particularly designed to correct the experience for such families and was generally meant to allow all taxpayers to bring their withheld taxes closer to their liabilities. However under these schedules single individuals and families with only one source of wage or salary income had to claim additional exemptions if they were to avoid overwithholding. For the most part singleincome families did not take advantage of the option to adjust their withheld taxes downward. Withholdings have consequently been running considerably in excess of liabilities and will result in substantial refunds in How the effect of overwithholding should be treated for purposes of analysis depends on a prior view of how it affects consumer spending According to one view known as the permanent-income hypothesis consumer spending is governed largely by consumers ' views of their permanent or longer-run incomes ; temporary aberrations in income do not alter spending significantly. Consequently overwithholding and the subsequent associated refunds should not have a large effect on the pattern of consumer spending In this view which has some support on the basis of consumer behavior in most of the effect of overwithholding and of the subsequent refunds should be excluded from the calculation of the full-employment surplus or deficit for example for purposes of analysis. According to another view most consumers govern their spending according to the income immediately available to them regardless of whether the income is permanent or temporary. Clearly a definitive answer must await an examination of how consumers behave in after they receive refunds on last year 's overwithholding THE REQUEST FOR A SPENDING CEILING The increase in outlays in especially in the first half of the year served the purpose of stimulating the economy : by midyear the expansion as expected had developed a strong momentum of its own. For the period after mid-1972 the emphasis of budget policy has been on restraining the growth in expenditures. In June the Administration requested Congress to impose a statutory ceiling of $ billion on unified budget outlays for fiscal an amount equal to the original spending total proposed last January The shift of revenue sharing payments to late calendar year and early and the large increase in social security benefits late in had a relatively small effect on the level of spending budgeted for calendar However both changes raised the level of expenditures for fiscal significantly above the amount originally proposed Anticipation of these developments heightened concern about not only the level and growth of Federal spending but the potential danger to the anti-inflationary program and the orderliness of the economic expansion In September the Administration repeated its request for a statutory ceiling on fiscal outlays this time at the $ billion level. Although both the House and Senate voted favorably on the ceiling in bills of different form final congressional approval was not obtained STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS State and local government purchases rose by percent from to a rise somewhat below that projected by the Council at the start of the year. The shortfall was partly due to the delay in revenue sharing ; but this factor should not be overstressed because the relation between Federal grants and State and local spending is neither direct nor immediate. Initially at least increased Federal grants appear as increases in State and local surpluses The $ billion revenue sharing bill originally scheduled for the first quarter of was passed in October. The first payment for was made retroactively in December when a half-year 's instalment of $ billion ( recorded in the national income accounts at an annual rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter ) was mailed out to States and localities The remaining half-year instalment was mailed in January In April the payments are scheduled to revert to an annual rate of $ billion payable quarterly The beginning of revenue sharing in the fourth quarter has increased the level of Federal grants and the likelihood that State and local governments will continue to run large surpluses for a time in NIA terms. With the level of Federal grants now increased by the advent of revenue sharing and with the growing importance of State and local government spending the behavior of the revenues and expenditures of State and local governments assumes much greater importance in the assessment of the effects of Federal fiscal policy FINANCIAL POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS Although the financial requirements of last year 's expansion were considerable they were generally accommodated in a satisfactory fashion. The large demand for funds was accompanied by remarkably mild increases in short-term interest rates. Long-term rates on balance actually declined. The money supply expanded by percent over the year ( December to December ) clearly less than the expansion of percent in nominal GNP. Housing and mortgage markets enjoyed a record year with a reduced need for Federal assistance MONETARY POLICY Federal Reserve goals in were " sustainable real economic growth and increased employment abatement of inflationary pressures and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country 's balance of payments. " Throughout the year Federal Reserve efforts were directed toward establishing financial market conditions conducive to these goals Monetary expansion in the fourth quarter of had been unusually slow : the seasonally adjusted annual rate of growth ( measured from the final month of the third quarter to the final month of the fourth quarter ) was percent. The rate was low historically and below the Federal Reserve 's target rate. As a result of this shortfall and the requirements of the ongoing economic expansion the Federal Reserve moved to increase the rate of monetary growth in the first quarter of To help achieve this objective the System acted to ease credit market conditions. At the same time in the execution of policy it gave increased emphasis to the growth in bank reserves by means of a new reserve concept : reserves available to support private nonbank deposits ( RPD 's ) The adoption of this additional target for daily operations was taken partly because of the difficulty the System had experienced in in controlling the monetary growth rate by influencing the Federal funds rate. While the monetary growth rate remained the intermediate target for policy day-to-day operations were carried out in terms of an RPD guide range as well as money market conditions In the first quarter of the rate of growth in the narrowly defined money stock rose to percent per annum. Since this was a somewhat faster rate than the Federal Reserve had expected operating policy sought to restrain monetary growth and to allow market interest rates to rise This posture was maintained through the summer and early autumn ; the O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/- Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis target for the rise in RPD 's was gradually reduced from a range of to percent for March-April to a to 7-percent range for July-August In the third quarter the continuation of strong economic expansion increased the quantity of money demanded and pressed the cost of credit upward. Since excessive monetary accommodation would have had serious implications for future inflation the Federal Reserve sought only " moderate " growth in the monetary aggregates. For the third quarter RPD 's rose at a 10.3-percent rate while the monetary growth rate increased to percent from percent in the second. Short-term market interest rates rose gradually as indicated by the increase in the Federal funds rate from an average of percent in June to percent in September Late in the third quarter and early in the fourth a policy of somewhat more restraint was adopted but the conduct of monetary policy was complicated in the fourth quarter by changes in Federal Reserve Regulations D and J. These changes restructured reserve requirements according to bank size and speeded the payment of checks. Both shifts radically altered the volume of reserves which banks desired and accumulated and monetary policy necessarily proceeded cautiously to allow the banking system to adjust to the new regulations without influencing monetary aggregates or financial markets. Short rates rose further during the quarter with the rate for Federal funds increasing to percent in December. Nevertheless the rate of monetary growth accelerated One of the advantages of the shift in policy emphasis to an RPD target is that this procedure improves control over the monetary growth rate and protects the economy against fluctuations that might take place if only an interest rate target is used. Although other considerations also affected the formulation of policy in the adoption of the new procedures appears to have had a stabilizing effect on monetary growth. While the money stock grew by percent from December to December up from percent in and percent in its behavior was smoother during than in the preceding years. For example the quarterly growth rate ranged from to percent in as compared to a range of to percent in Although the monetary growth rate over the course of was lower than the corresponding rise in real GNP it was still the second highest of the post-World War II period. As is usually the case assets which are close substitutes for money grew even faster than the money stock during Regular time deposits at banks rose by percent during the year while accounts of nonbank thrift institutions increased by percent. Large negotiable bank certificates of deposits rose by percent for the year. As in the rates paid by thrift institutions on deposits were higher relative to open market rates than was the case in and and this was a factor contributing to heavy deposit inflows INTEREST RATES A notable financial development in was the relatively stable behavior of interest rates. Long-term interest rates followed a generally downward course for the year and short-term rates rose moderately even though many observers had anticipated that both rates would increase sharply in response to the credit requirements of a strong economic expansion ( Chart ) The unusually wide spread between short- and long-term rates that prevailed at the beginning of narrowed in the course of the year but remained historically large at yearend Short-term market interest rates declined in January and February and followed a generally upward path for the remainder of the year the rise being interrupted by temporary declines in May and August. Commercial banks ' prime rates which are generally closely related to market rates also rose over the year. The upward pressure on short-term rates reflected the underlying growth of the economy as a whole and the increasing demands made on credit markets to support the expansion. The increase in shortterm rates was considerably milder however than increases experienced at the same stage of past economic upturns Long-term market rates declined on balance over They rose through April but thereafter fluctuated below April peaks on a generally downward trend. The declining trend of long-term rates at the same time that shortterm rates rose was an interesting feature of While short and long rates can move in opposite directions ( if for example there is a sharp change in expectations about levels of future interest rates ) historically short and long rates have tended to move in the same direction. Several forces produced this divergence in First at least two factors probably led investors to be less desirous of holding funds in highly liquid forms : increasing certainty about the strength of the economic expansion in and less uncertainty about the effects of controls on wages and prices Second foreign central banks slowed the pace at which they bought shortterm Treasury securities with the dollars accumulated through their balanceof-payments surpluses. This reduction resulted from both a slowing of the dollar outflow from the United States and a shift in preferences of foreign official institutions toward obligations with longer maturities especially after it became clear that the flow of dollars back into the United States following the Smithsonian Agreement in December was smaller than had been expected earlier Third the downward revision of expectations of future inflation seems to have extended to longer horizons in causing estimates of long rates to be lowered. ( See Chapter ) In addition the levels of real interest rates expected in the future may have been reduced as it became evident that the rise in actual rates in was much milder than had been widely anticipated Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER ANNUM SHORT-TERM FEDERAL FUNDS PRIME BANK RATE 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New Issues ) \ ii i I n ii il il LONG-TERM NEW HOME MORTGAGES ( FHLBB ) CORPORATE Aaa BONDS HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS U.S. GOVERNMENT BONDS I i i i l l i l i l i i i i i I I i l I I I I n I I I i l l I I I I SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION Mortgage Interest Rates Mortgage interest rates which had followed a downward trend in late continued to decline in early They reached their lows for the year in April and moved up slightly thereafter even though other long rates continued to edge down. The increases in mortgage rates have been small : from April to November the contract rate on conventional mortgages for new homes rose from to percent still below the 7.68-percent level of October and well below the rates that prevailed for all of Assistance to Mortgage Markets The mortgage and housing markets in enjoyed a prosperous year with considerably less support from Federal agencies than in previous years There was less upward pressure on all interest rates than in past years Partly as a consequence of this there was a strong inflow of funds to financial intermediaries particularly savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks. As in these institutions which lend the bulk of their funds on residential mortgages added to their mortgage holdings on a larger scale than in previous years The program of the Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) for reducing discounts on federally insured mortgage loans the " tandem plan " was largely dormant during the year because the decline in market rates lowered those discounts to support levels. However GNMA continued to develop and expand its 3-year-old mortgage-backed securities program which is designed to attract new funds for housing finance by increasing the ability of residential borrowers to compete in the general capital market. The issuance of GNMA securities increased to $ billion in as compared to $ billion in The Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) was also a steady purchaser of FHA- and VA-insured mortgages over the year although on a smaller scale than in and For FNMA 's net acquisition of mortgages was $ billion compared with $ and $ billion in and respectively. The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation purchased $ billion in conventional and insured mortgages as against $ billion in The Federal Home Loan Bank Board also took a number of steps toward strengthening the ability of savings and loan associations to compete for funds as a means of increasing the flow of funds into the mortgage market These steps included : ( ) An increase from $ to $ in the maximum loan limit on 95-percent conventional loans of Federal associations ( ) an increase from to percent in the fraction of total loans that Federal associations can hold in the form of mobile home loans and ( ) approval of the issuance of subordinated debt instruments of years or longer maturity by savings and loan associations as a new source of funds It also proposed regulations for variable rate mortgages for federally chartered associations FOURTH QUARTER DEVELOPMENTS The year ended with considerable forward momentum in economic activity. According to preliminary fourth quarter data GNP rose by $ billion or at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 11J/2 percent. The rise in real terms was 85/2 percent and the price rise as measured by the GNP deflator % percent. Judging from monthly indicators such as industrial production the course of output was strongly upward through the quarter All major components except for Federal purchases of goods and services contributed to the large fourth-quarter rise in demand. Consumer spending was exceptionally strong rising by $ ^ billion. Underlying the strength of consumer demand was a sharp rise in payrolls which reflected rising employment and a longer workweek notably in the manufacturing sector. In addition the increase in earned income was supplemented by the enlarged payments of social security benefits that had begun in October Total retail sales in December were 115/2 percent above the level of December Fixed investment also rose substantially in the final quarter and it appeared that businessmen were stepping up their rate of inventory accumulation in order to accommodate the increased volume of sales Civilian employment rose by during the quarter to a total of million in December about percent above the level of a year earlier. The unemployment rate declined to percent in December compared to a rate of percent in December All major age and sex groups were affected by the decline in unemployment but the reduction was especially marked for adult males in the prime working-age bracket Price performance was mixed. From September to December the CPI rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent or percent excluding food. The WPI showed an extraordinary increase ( percent annual rate ) because of sharp rises in farm and food prices ; in contrast the rise in wholesale industrial prices was only percent. The pronounced increases in farm and food prices which posed a serious threat to the entire stabilization program led to new policy initiatives at the start of CHAPTER Inflation Control Under the Economic Stabilization Act Public Law the Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of requires that the Economic Report of the President include a section " describing the actions taken under this title during the preceding year and giving his assessment of the progress attained in achieving the purposes of this title. " This chapter and the supplement included in Appendix A of this Report are intended to fulfill that requirement There is however no intent to represent the description of the control regulations contained herein as legally binding interpretations T HE UNITED STATES has had general price and wage controls before during both World War II and the Korean war. But marked the first full year in American history that comprehensive wage and price controls were in effect when the economy was not dominated by war or its immediate aftermath. Judged by any expectations one could derive from history either in the United States or abroad the system was successful. Nevertheless by the end of the year it was plain that although continuing controls could make a further contribution to economic stabilization the system would have to be modified. As the year ended the Administration was developing a revision of the system that would make its operation more effective and at the same time lay the groundwork for its termination THE SITUATION IN AUGUST To understand what is meant by the " success " of the controls one must go back to the conditions which existed in the summer of By then the rate of inflation had declined from its peak and output and employment were expanding. Neither the decline in the inflation rate nor the expansion of the economy had been as marked as people had hoped for or as the Administration had forecast. A more rapid expansion and a further slowdown of inflation in the months ahead were high on the list of the Nation 's goals The true probabilities for the future behavior of the economy as distinguished from what people thought might happen were not known. However there were several reasons why the rate of inflation might still continue to decline after August First prices and wages would be responding with a lag to the slowdown in the economy that had occurred earlier. Second the prospective recovery of the economy even according to an optimistic view of its pace would still leave the economy in a situation of excess capacity rather than excess demand throughout Third more rapid recovery would accelerate the rise of productivity and hold down the rise of unit costs On the other hand there were reasons why the inflation rate which had been declining since might not only stop falling but might accelerate For one thing the decline might already have ended. The Economic Report of summarized the evidence of the price indexes at mid-1971 : ( ) Most of the indexes show a peak rate of increase at some time in ; ( ) most of the indexes show a trough at some time in ; ( ) in the second quarter of the last full quarter before the freeze we find that the rate of increase is above the trough in all instances but below the peak in all but one instance wholesale industrial prices That of course is a serious exception. Although it does not negate the improvement shown in the other indexes the exception was important enough and the other improvements small enough to leave uncertainty about the future decline of inflation. * By August the recovery of the economy was in its ninth month At that point in earlier recoveries the rate of inflation had begun to accelerate rather than continue to decelerate. This might have happened again after August : inflationary expectations and the effort of some workers to catch up with the cost of living and with the wage increases of other workers had not been eliminated during the period of economic slowdown Such price-raising forces might have been suppressed only to break out again when the pressure of deficient demand was relaxed. Indeed as workers and businessmen became more aware of the continued expansion especially expansion produced by Government action their belief that rapid inflation was inevitable would be reinforced and might even tend to generate the feared result Although the feared acceleration of inflation was associated with the prospect of economic expansion it should be clear that the price rises then envisaged for the period ahead would not be the direct result of excess demand. The price and wage increases would not be equilibrating in the sense that they would be necessary to raise output into balance with demand and attract workers. Firms would have been willing to produce more at existing prices and workers would have been willing to supply their labor at existing wages if they could not raise them. But both groups preferred " ^ Revision of seasonal factors since the above was written has slightly altered the wholesale industrial price pattern so that it is now consistent with the other indexes raising wages and prices because others had been doing so and because with expansion underway they anticipated that their production costs or living costs would be rising and that the market would absorb their products or labor at higher prices or wages. How probable this more pessimistic scenario was could not be known but it was not a negligible possibility Moreover even if the more pessimistic outcome was actually unlikely there was widespread fear of it and this fact was itself important. Anxiety about inflation among consumers was believed to be holding back a revival of consumer spending. Long-term interest rates had been rising in the spring and summer of ; this may have been a sign of renewed inflationary expectations. An opinion common in the financial community was that stimulative actions by the Government would intensify the fear of inflation cause a more rapid increase of interest rates and finally hurt rather than help the economic expansion. Also the idea that the American inflation was endless and uncontrollable was undermining confidence in the U.S. dollar and aggravating the balance-of-payments problem. These fears inhibited the Government from taking steps to expand the economy In this situation then the purposes of the controls were threefold : To reduce the risk that the rate of inflation would rise again and to increase the probability of further decline ; To reduce the fear that the rate of inflation would rise or not decline further ; and thus To strengthen forces for expansion in the private economy and free the Government to follow a more expansive policy The controls were to be used to help achieve these goals subject to the conditions that they : Should not interfere with the expansion of the economy. For example they should not discourage private investment Should not impair the rise of productivity by reducing incentives to hold down costs or by precipitating strikes Should be fair in the sense that they should not adversely affect some groups or individuals and favor others Should not impose heavy administrative costs either on the Government or on private citizens Should not create or perpetuate a situation in which termination of the controls would be highly disruptive The controls were part of a larger program which had the twin objectives of economic expansion and inflation reduction. The broader program included a fiscal and monetary policy which would initially be strongly expansive but would become less so as the economy reached higher levels and as the danger of excess demand became greater. One of the major concerns of the Administration when it instituted controls was that the country would come to rely on the controls and feel relieved of the necessity to exercise restraint in Federal spending when restraint became appropriate This concern was related to the belief that controls would not in fact be able to hold down prices and wages when there was a strong excess of demand and that the effort to do so would result in shortages and distortion of production Another program element which became more significant as the year progressed was the attempt to use the policies of Government to hold prices down in situations of shortage by promoting expansion of supply. The food sector provided the leading instance of this approach The controls program was intended to be temporary. This was true not only of the freeze but also of Phase II and its modifications as they developed during Some believe that the United States faces a permanent problem of serious inflation beyond the capacity of prudent fiscal and monetary policy to control. In contrast the Administration expected that if the total package of policies were well managed it would be possible to enter a period of reasonable price stability without controls. In any case the control system of was not designed to last forever. If a means of dealing with a more prolonged problem were needed it would have to be created especially for that purpose In the following pages of this chapter after a very brief description of the program we review how far its objectives were achieved by the end of and what is much more difficult to what extent they were in fact achieved by the program itself THE NATURE OF THE PROGRAM The supplement to this chapter included in Appendix A contains a description of the controls program. Further details may be found in the Quarterly Reports of the Cost of Living Council and in the regulations issued by the Council the Pay Board and the Price Commission. Here we summarize only the most salient points Goals. The goal of policy was to get the rate of inflation as measured by the consumer price index ( CPI ) down to percent by the end of The upper end of the range was considered to be not far below what might have been optimistically expected without controls ; but at the same time it would represent significant progress from the earlier rate of inflation The goal was set in the expectation that food prices would not rise significantly more than other prices Pay standard. To achieve this goal the Pay Board ( initially consisting of five members each from labor management and the general public ) set a basic standard of ^ percent for permissible pay increases. This figure was related to the inflation goal through a " normal " or trend productivity increase of percent which would yield a l/i -percent increase in unit labor costs. A number of exceptions some formulated by the Board and some imposed by Congress in the Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of permitted increases beyond / percent. But the standards only set maximum limits ; they did not set a floor Price standard. The Price Commission specified that prices could increase above their August level no more than would be proportional to the increase of costs over the same period subject to the further proviso that if prices were raised a firm 's profit margin in relation to sales could not exceed the average rate of the best of the fiscal years preceding August Again a number of exceptions were made generally further limiting permissible price increases Term limit pricing ( TLP ) Agreements were worked out individually by the Price Commission with many of the largest companies specifying the maximum amount by which they could raise their average prices during the coming year. Thus the companies were relieved of the necessity to obtain advance approval for individual price increases and the Price Commission was relieved of a considerable administrative burden The agreement usually specified a maximum amount by which any individual price could be raised. For example the agreement might provide that a company 's average price could not rise more than percent and that no single price could rise more than percent. The TLP did not relax the profit-margin limit for the firm Firm-by-firm control. Price and wage control was exercised on a firmby-firm basis and on the basis of collective bargaining units. The control agency did not set ceiling prices at which specified commodities could be sold by any seller. It did not set ceiling wage rates for particular individuals or occupations. Instead it laid down rules by which the individual company could determine its ceiling prices and these might differ from the ceiling price at which a different company sold the same commodities. Similarly the rules limited the average wage increase for the workers covered by a single company or bargaining unit and these increases might permit different pay for the same occupation in different firms. Such a system kept the administrative burden on the Government small and was probably the only feasible way to make a rapid transition from the freeze to the more flexible controls of Phase II. On the other hand the firm-by-firm approach may have raised the costs of compliance for the private sector The variations that the system allowed in different firms ' prices for the same product might have been a source of inefficiency and inequity in a situation of excess demand but under the conditions prevailing in most industries during competition tended to bring about uniform prices despite differences in ceilings Exemptions. The most important exemption from the controls system applied to farm products defined to include timber and unprocessed fishery products also. The reason for the exemption was that pricing of these products took place in extremely competitive markets and adjusted quickly to changing market conditions ; repressing price increases by controls would therefore cause shortages and require rationing. Interest rates were not subject to mandatory controls for the same reason although voluntary restraint was sought in raising administered interest rates ( mortgage rates con sumers ' credit rates and the banks ' prime lending rate ) Imports and exports were also exempt. The Economic Stabilization Act exempted wages of low-income workers from control and the subsequent definition of this class excluded about percent of all private nonfarm workers. After the Phase II system had been in operation for some months firms collective bargaining units and landlords below certain size limits were exempted from control. This removed from control the largest proportion of all economic units in the country permitting administrative resources to be concentrated on the remaining units which still accounted for most of the economic activity and which by their competition restrained price increases in the uncontrolled sector Administration and reporting. For checking compliance with the price standards firms were divided by size into three tiers. The largest Tier I firms were required to notify the Price Commission and obtain approval in advance of price increases unless they had a prior term limit pricing agreement. Tier II firms submitted quarterly reports as did the Tier I firms ; but the Tier II firms were not required to submit advance notification of increases. Tier III firms were not required to submit reports but were expected to maintain records which would permit auditing of compliance. Somewhat comparable procedures were established for monitoring pay increases PRICES AND WAGES DURING THE CONTROLS PERIOD According to the indexes which provide comprehensive measures of the movement of prices in the United States the rate of inflation has declined significantly during the controls period ( Table and Chart ) Price behavior has been dominated by two facts : The rate of increase of prices other than farm prices declined markedly compared with the precontrol period ; and the rate of increase of farm prices increased markedly compared with the precontrol period. The decline in the rate of inflation obviously is therefore smaller in indexes which accord a heavy weight to farm and food prices than it is in more comprehensive indexes like the consumer price index the gross national product ( GNP ) deflator the private output deflator and the personal consumption expenditure deflator. Only the wholesale price index ( WPI ) fails to show this slowdown in the rate of inflation. However the WPI reflects the prices of only about half the output produced or purchased in the United States and it gives considerably more weight to farm products than is present in family budgets or in the national economy The broad price indexes clearly show the sharp decline of the inflation rate during the freeze the rise during the bulge after the freeze and a decline thereafter to a rate below that of early The sole exception is farm products TABLE Changes in price measures to [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Freeze Pre-freeze Bulge Post-bulge Price measure Dec. to Dec. Dec. to Dec. Dec. to Aug. Aug. to Nov. Nov. to Feb. Feb.1972 to Dec. Consumer price index : All items Food All items less food Commodities less food Services ^ Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities IV to IV IV to IV IV to II II to IV IV to to IV Fixed weight GNP price deflators : Total GNP.. Gross private product Personal consumption expenditures. Implicit GNP price deflators : Total GNP.. Total U.S. purchases * Private business GNP : Nonfarm Farm Based on unadjusted indexes as these prices have little seasonal movement Preliminary Increase in pay of Federal Government employees accounted for about \ \ i percentage points of the total increase * Total GNP less net exports of goods and services Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis and Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Since most nonfarm prices were subject to controls and farm prices were not it is theoretically possible that the controls generated pressures which increased farm prices. This possibility is significant because food prices are an important part of consumer budgets. However there is no evidence to indicate that the increase of farm prices was stimulated by the control of prices in other sectors There is on the contrary considerable evidence which points to domestic supply conditions and an increase in foreign demand as the main contributors to the rise in farm prices and these two factors would have had much the same effect even in the absence of a controls system. The supply of food for domestic consumption not only failed to rise but actually declined on a per capita basis for two reasons. First domestic food production declined because of unfavorable natural conditions including the earlier corn blight and bad weather in ; hence despite a rise in imports and a reduction in carryover stocks the supply available for domestic use and exports fell Second food exports increased significantly because of bad growing weather Chart Changes in Prices PERCENT CHANGE FROM QUARTERS EARLIERJ/ GNP PRICE DEFLATOR ^ / CONSUMER P I E RC INDEX \ V /Y A * * -> ^ ' * * A / /. A 40nm< ? # -V * i i # % \ \ ^ ^ / ^ rA \ PRIVATE GNP % PRICE DEFLATOR ^ / \ // \ y / V % ^ WHOLESALE PRICE INDEX _ I I I i i i i / AJ A \ / CONSUMER PRICE INDEX LESS FOOD ^ " " " " " ^ k PRIVATE NONFARM BUSINESS GNP PRICE DEFLATOR ^ ~ ~ / " % \ \ t i y \ / \ V / \ A % i I i \ i SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR " WHOLESALE INDUSTRIAL PRICE INDEX / CHANGES BASED ON FIXED WEIGHT INDEXES i \ * \ / V V / / ~ ^ i V " V * i i i i abroad. These exports were facilitated by U.S. arrangements to permit the financing of grain exports to the U.S.S.R An additional factor which retarded the decline of some of the indexes was the behavior of import prices. Because of the devaluation of the U.S dollar and rapid inflation abroad the dollar prices of imports rose more rapidly than U.S. prices. As a result indexes which reflect prices of U.S purchases such as the CPI and the personal consumption expenditure deflator rose more rapidly than indexes which reflect the prices of U.S. output such as the GNP deflator and the private output deflator. This difference in behavior is reflected in the comparison near the bottom of Table of the price deflator for GNP and the price deflator for total U.S. purchases ( GNP plus imports minus exports ) Statistics on wage increases also showed a marked deceleration during the controls period. Here too there is an initial sharp decline associated with the freeze followed by a brief upsurge in the months after the freeze and then a settling back to a rate below the level prior to the freeze. Several measures of wage change are shown in Table and Chart Chart Changes in Compensation in the Private Nonfarm Economy PERCENT CHANGE FROM QUARTERS EARLIER- ! / COMPENSATION PER MAN-HOUR ALL EMPLOYEES AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS PRODUCTION WORKERS. ? / >1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1/ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 2/ ADJUSTED FOR OVERTIME ( IN MANUFACTURING ONLY ) AND FOR INTERINDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT SHIFTS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR T TABLE Changes in wage measures to [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Pre-freeze Freeze Bulge Post-bulge Aug. to Nov. Nov. to Feb. Feb.1972 to Dec.19721 Wage measure Aug. to Aug. Average hourly earnings private nonfarm economy _ _ II to II Aug. to Aug. II to II II to IV IV to to IV1 Average hourly compensation all employees : Total private economy Nonfarm Average hourly earnings private nonfarm economy Preliminary Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and interindustry employment shifts Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Additional evidence of the decline of the inflation rate is provided by the substantial reduction in the size of negotiated increases in collective bargaining agreements covering or more workers ; the typical wage increase negotiated for the first year of a contract had been percent for the first months of and percent during all of In contrast this first-year increase declined to percent for all of Phase II and to an even more moderate percent during the last quarters of For manufacturing alone the first-year increase was percent in percent during the first months of and percent during Phase II Construction first-year wage increases which had averaged percent in the quarters prior to the establishment of the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee in early slowed to percent during the first year of the CISC 's operation and to percent during the last quarters of Did Controls Reduce the Inflation Rate ? The fact that the rate of increase of both prices and wages declined during the controls period does not prove that the controls themselves reduced the rate of inflation. There are naturally two views on this subject : one is that they were effective and the other is that they were not Those who say the controls were not effective rely primarily on the observation that the rate of inflation was declining before the controls began and that no sharp discontinuity in the decline of the rate of inflation can be dated from the beginning of the controls. Although a sharp cut in the inflation rate accompanied the freeze and a bulge followed the relaxation of the freeze these can be regarded as only briefly displacing in time the trend of prices that would otherwise have occurred The difficulty with this argument lies in the absence of any assurance that the decline in the inflation rate which had occurred before the freeze would have continued without it. The controls were imposed largely because there was no such assurance. Some of the reasons for the fear that the inflation rate would not continue to decline have been given earlier in this chapter The facts are that some price and wage increases were below the permitted amounts and that there have been few if any cases of shortages at ceiling prices. But the first of these points is not inconsistent with the controls having held down the average rate of inflation by holding down a significant number of price and wage increases. And the second point is consistent with the underlying rationale of the controls which is that the price and wage increases to be restrained were not increases necessary to avert shortages The case for the effectiveness of controls rests in part on econometric study of the relation between the rate of inflation and other variables such as unemployment prior inflation rates and growth of demand The relations derived from past experience are used to project what the inflation rate would have been in the absence of controls. Since as has turned out in several studies the projected inflation rate was larger than the rate actually experienced in the conclusion is that the controls reduced the inflation rate and by the amount of the difference. Although these studies ask the right question What would the inflation rate have been without the controls ? the poor record of this technique in predicting the rate of inflation prior to controls does not inspire confidence in their answer and evidence from this source must be regarded as inconclusive One interesting set of facts bearing on the effectiveness of the controls system is the distribution by size of wage adjustments in collective bargaining agreements. The data are shown in Table The reduction from and to in the percentage of workers receiving increases of percent or more is striking and it may reflect the curtailment of big increases by the controls. In when there were no controls and the average increases were about the same as in the percentage of very large increases was also much less than in and Still the distribution is more compressed than that of at least in manufacturing : the proportion of very large adjustments was below the level. The group of industries negotiating increases in was different from that in however and this may help explain the difference in the distribution We believe it is probable that the controls did reduce the rate of inflation but the magnitude of the reduction is uncertain. There are a number of individual cases in which the controls seem to have restrained price and wage increases and it is hard to find cases in which the controls have stimulated increases. The slowdown of wage increases and of the private GNP deflator is more pronounced during the controls period than before it. But O TABLE First-year wage rate changes in collective bargaining agreements covering workers or more and Percent of workers affected Type of wage-rate action i All industries All wage actions Manufacturing No wage increase. Increase in wages. Under percent and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. arid under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent. percent and over Not specified Mean adjustment ( percent ) Median adjustment ( percent ) Number of workers ( thousands ) Percent of estimated average hourly earnings excluding overtime Preliminary Less than percent Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics one can not be sure that the controls had an effect on the rate of inflation Still less can the size of the effect be gauged However this uncertainty does not imply an equal uncertainty about the value of the controls. As we said at the outset the controls were intended to deal with the risk that inflation would again accelerate. To reduce that risk substantially as we believe the controls did was a very significant contribution but one that would not necessarily show up in a reduction of the inflation rate below what would most probably have occurred without the controls Reducing Inflationary Expectations The goal of policy in and as we have pointed out was not only to reduce the probable rate of inflation but also to reduce the general fear of continued or rising inflation and thus to increase confidence in the achievement of price stability. A change in the perception of the U.S. inflation prdblem has taken place. The controls have made a substantial contribution to this There are no completely satisfactory measurements of people 's expectations and fears about inflation. But everyone who has examined his own thinking and the thinking of other people in and can see that a change has occurred since the controls were imposed and these changes are reflected in available public attitude surveys. For example the proportion of people surveyed in a poll who said they thought there was a current danger of inflation declined from about percent just before the freeze to about percent in December The proportion who said they feared inflation at that time more than a year earlier fell from percent to about percent. Any other outcome would be strange. For a great many people the idea that inflation could be reduced by fiscal and monetary restraint is unreal and abstract. Disbelief on this score was reinforced by the disappointing contrast between the many forecasts that inflation would decline markedly in and and the actuality. On the other hand nothing seems more obvious than that the imposition of controls should curb inflation. Moreover the controls had a symbolic value as evidence of the Government 's determination to take whatever steps might be necessary to check inflation Concern about inflation did not of course disappear. From time to time in it was even fairly acute. Nevertheless one has only to recall the tone in which the problem was usually discussed in the summer of to see how far we have come One of the most striking changes has been in the attitude of the international economic community toward the American inflation ; before August it was the major concern of foreign observers and investors. By the end of the American anti-inflation policy had become the marvel of the rest of the world ( Table ) Largely because of this change the rest of the world is willing to hold increasing amounts of dollars TABLE Changes in consumer prices in the United States and OECD countries selected periods to [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent change Country United States average to average From previous year From previous half-year first half second half first half second to third quarter Other OECD countries : Canada Japan France Germany Italy... United Kingdom All other OECD countries L private consumption weights and exchange rates used. Includes Austria Belgium Denmark Finland Greece Iceland Ireland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey and Yugoslavia Sources : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development One objective indicator of inflationary expectations is the behavior of interest rates particularly those on long-term obligations. When increased inflation is generally expected in the economy lenders demand higher interest rates to compensate them for the depreciation of the real values of their loans. Borrowers are willing to pay higher rates because their resources are expected to appreciate in nominal terms. Interest rates therefore tend to rise and. fall in direct relation to changes in inflationary expectations. The expected rate of inflation is however by no means the only factor determining the behavior of interest rates nor is it easy to distinguish its effect from the effects of other factors operating at the same time The behavior of interest rates after August strongly suggests that inflationary expectations receded abruptly as a result of the imposition of the Economic Stabilization Program. On August the yield on seasoned year Treasury securities fell basis points from August levels and the Moody 's Aaa long-term bond yield fell basis points. By the end of August these yields had fallen and basis points respectively from the levels on August The declines in these yields were very sudden. Because they took place so quickly they can not be explained by any fundamental force except expectations. Hence a strong presumption exists that people believed the effects of the freeze would not be completely reversed and that they expected the inflation rate to follow a lower course after August than before While long-term interest rates rose early in they generally followed a downward path after April although scattered increases occurred particularly in September. The declines took place in a period in which the economy was expanding rapidly at a pace seldom equaled and short-term rates were rising. Both of these forces are normally associated with increases in long-term rates as credit demands increase and expectations of future short-term rates are revised upward ; only twice in the past years had long-term rates declined over such a long period in such circumstances The fact that long-term interest rates declined on balance during even in the face of strong economic expansion suggests that long-term inflationary expectations which influence such rates were also revised. While short-term expectations appear to have been quickly revised in after the imposition of controls investors in long-term securities took longer to become convinced that inflation would remain on a lower path for a considerable period to come The Fairness of Controls In the development and management of the controls system a great effort has been devoted to achieving fairness both in justice to those directly affected and because belief that the system is fair is necessary to ensure the voluntary support without which the system could not function. According to the concept of fairness underlying the controls the system itself should not substantially alter the distribution of income that would have occurred in an expanding noninflationary economy without controls Fairness in the controls system can be understood in small or large terms : through the impact that controls exert on particular individuals and busi nesses or the effect on such large classes as wage earners and stockholders In particular instances there was undoubtedly some arbitrariness. The regulations were inevitably broad and general ; case-by-case handling of inequities was slow. As the year passed feeling grew that individual treatment by the system had not always been equitable Public discussion and complaint about the fairness of the system have related chiefly to the larger aggregates however especially to the relation between wages and profits. In these terms it is hard to see that the controls system has changed the distribution of income. If there has been any change compared to what would have happened in a strong expansion without controls it seems to have been favorable to wages. Employees ' compensation rose from percent of the national income in the second quarter of to percent in the third quarter of despite the normal tendency of the labor share to decline when output expands rapidly. Related to gross national product the employee compensation percentages are and respectively. As is shown in Table Chapter employees ' share of the gross product of nonfinancial corporations declined insignificantly ( from percent to percent ) over the same period. Also shown in Chapter ( Table ) the rise in profits relative to the rise in GNP has been much smaller in the current recovery than in earlier business recoveries ; a related fact is the modest increase in corporate dividends which have risen much less than employee compensation It seems quite clear that the share of labor in the national income has not suffered at the expense of profits during the controls period. Yet it is also true that real hourly labor compensation ( compensation adjusted for the cost of living ) in the private nonfarm sector has not risen as fast as output per hour in the private nonfarm sector. It is a well-known proposition of economics that if real compensation per hour does not rise as fast as productivity labor 's share declines. However this proposition holds only if the prices used to deflate hourly money compensation and convert it into real compensation are the prices of the workers ' products. In the present case prices in the private nonfarm sector rose much less than the consumer price index because of the large influence of farm prices and import prices on the latter index. Therefore real hourly compensation in terms of the things workers produced rose much more than real compensation in terms of the CPI market basket ( and it is the former which is relevant for the proposition about shares ) From the second quarter of to the fourth quarter of the purchasing power of the compensation for an hour of work in the private nonfarm sector rose at an annual rate of percent in terms of the items included in the CPI but at percent in terms of the goods produced in the private nonfarm sector In a larger sense workers gained much more from the controls program than can be shown by calculations of their proportionate share in the national income. The confidence engendered by the program was an important ingredient in the economic expansion which greatly increased employment hours of work and productivity and thus the real incomes of workers Real weekly earnings of private nonfarm production workers ( adjusted for the CPI ) rose at an annual rate of percent from August to December compared to percent in prior to the freeze and to an average of percent per year from to Total employment including the Armed Forces ( which declined ) rose by million from the second quarter of through the fourth quarter of and the total real compensation of employees rose at an annual rate of percent THE COSTS OF CONTROLS The actual or potential benefits of price and wage controls in reducing both the inflation rate and the fear of inflation must be balanced against their actual and potential costs. Several kinds of costs may be involved ; almost all are difficult or impossible to measure. An impressionistic review suggests that these costs were probably not large in relative to the role that the system played in the national economy but that they were growing as the year progressed Administrative costs. The controls program was designed to be carried out with a staff of less than people. The annual rate of expenditure of the Cost of Living Council the Pay Board the Price Commission and related agencies was about $ million. The cost of administering the program however even within the Federal Government amounted to more than this. The program was a demand on the time of the President and of the heads of many Government departments and agencies. This cost is to be measured in diversion from attention to other problems The administrative costs outside the Government were undoubtedly much larger than those borne by the Government. Many more man-hours were required to prepare applications and reports than to review them and to maintain records than to check them. There is no calculation of what this cost amounted to in dollars but it was probably substantial By the end of it appeared that the administrative costs would increase substantially if the program continued without modification. In a continuing program companies and workers would insist on more equitable procedures that they did not demand when the system was considered to be short-lived and they would have more recourse to the courts to get their full rights Industrial disputes. Previous experience both in the United States and elsewhere suggested the danger that wage and price controls might lead to exceptionally bitter industrial disputes and loss of time due to strikes. The disinflationary process would in any case require a slowdown in the rate of wage increases and thus carried with it the possibility of long strikes. This possibility might be aggravated if the Government entered the picture by setting standards for maximum pay increases. In such a situation wage disputes could become tests of policy and power between Government and labor each party being unwilling to compromise and local cases threatening to explode into nationwide stoppages Despite the danger turned out to be a year of unusual industrial peace. Time lost through strikes as a proportion of time worked was at its lowest level in nearly years. This outcome was a consequence of the public 's strong support for the program and the cooperative attitude among workers and the leaders of organized labor Effects on productivity. Price control systems tend in greater or less degree to be cost-plus systems which reduce the incentive to hold down costs and may even create an incentive in the other direction. The basic price standard in the controls program had this feature. Prices were generally permitted to be raised in proportion to costs so that an increase of costs also permitted an increase of profits. This effect was at least limited by the requirement adopted in May that firms use an historical industrywide productivity factor in calculating costs rather than their own actual or estimated productivity. However firms would again be in the cost-plus situation if they reached their profit-margin limit because an increase of costs would then permit an increase in profits Productivity rose sharply in The cyclical conditions for such a rise were highly favorable. Any adverse effect that the controls system may have had on productivity is not visible in the statistics although this does not mean such effect was absent or negligible. Nevertheless even anecdotal evidence of antiproductivity effects is rare. There were probably several reasons for this. Relatively few firms were up to their profit-margin standard in Even those which were at the profit ^ margin limit felt restraint on cost-raising tendencies because of competition from firms that were not Moreover the expected short life of the controls made businesses especially wary of falling into managerial practices that would be harmful when controls ended. All of these reasons suggested dangers as the controls continued particularly in an economy operating closer to its potential Effects on investment. The price control system posed certain threats to the vigorous expansion of business investment. Profits were restrained by the cost pass-through rules as well as by the profit-margin standard. Furthermore in the calculation of costs to justify price increases no allowance was made for the cost of nonborrowed capital. As a consequence an increase in equity capital per unit of output would reduce the rate of return on equity even though it permitted saving of other costs Despite these inhibiting factors business investment rose substantially in and reports of business intentions suggest another substantial increase in Since investment is undertaken in expectation of a future stream of profits the heavy investment of suggests that business viewed controls as likely to be of relatively brief duration. The restraint on dividend payments which increased the internal funds of corporations may also have helped to sustain investment growth Distortions and interferences with production and distribution. There are a number of classic ways in which long-maintained and rigid price controls in the face of excess demand distort the pattern of production and distribution. Low-margin goods disappear from the shelves black markets and informal rationing appear the quality of goods and services is degraded and innovations are discouraged. Very little of this distorting effect showed up during There were stories whose significance was difficult to measure of a shift toward high-profit lines in the lumber industry of favoritism in the allocation of lumber to dealers and even of lumber production held back to await the end of controls. Relative prices under the controls induced production of more gasoline and less fuel oil than would have occurred in free markets. The ceilings on service fees charged by hospitals may have led to the provision of an unnecessarily large amount of services However these cases were exceptional. They were kept from becoming more common by the flexibility of the controls system and by an even more important factor the prevalence of unused production capacity during WHERE WE STAND By the end of the rate of inflation had been clearly reduced from its level when the freeze took effect. Moreover what had happened was not merely a suppression of price increases that would burst out if controls were removed. Although some such increases might occur a more durable change had taken place in the conditions underlying wage and price increases. Expectations of rapid inflation had diminished and not only because of controls. Confidence in the Administration 's determination to pursue a noninflationary fiscal and monetary policy had been strengthened An economic background for wage decisions had been established which was much more conducive to moderation than had prevailed earlier. Although workers had on the average been getting large wage increases in money terms in and they felt very little real improvement because of the rapid inflation. Consequently there was a strong push recognized by employers as well as workers for even larger wage increases. In contrast at the end of workers had been receiving the same or smaller hourly wage increases but the increase in their buying power during the year had been much larger. This contrast is shown in Table which compares the conditions of with the conditions of that is year before many of the collective bargaining agreements to be negotiated in were last negotiated Developments during the controls period have thus improved the position of workers in the aggregate ; they should also have particular relevance for employees in those sectors where bargaining activity in will be concentrated. In recent years before the introduction of controls wages in the major industries affected by collective bargaining agreements showed a persistent tendency to fall behind the rest of the economy during the term TABLE The economic preludes to two major collective bargaining rounds and [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Backdrop to the Backdrop to the negotiations : negotiations : Series Consumer price index Earnings in current dollars : Hourly * Gross weekly Spendable weekly6. Earnings in constant dollars : Hourly * Gross weekly Spendable weekly i December to December August to December For production or nonsupervisory workers on private nonfarm payrolls * Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and interindustry employment shifts Gross weekly earnings after taxes ,for a worker with three dependents. In annualizing the rates of change the effect of the change in tax rates at the beginning of is taken into account separately Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics of a multiyear agreement and then to catch up through larger increases when new agreements were negotiated. As the accelerating and high inflation rate has receded however a fundamental change has occurred in the manner in which inflation and long-term contracts have affected the relative position of unionized workers in the wage structure. Workers covered by many important contracts expiring in the near future appear either to have maintained or to have improved their relative position in the wage structure Thus the economic performance of and gave rise to several factors favorable to price stability in At the same time this performance did not achieve a final liquidation of the extraordinary inflation problem left behind by the demand surge. The rise of prices as measured by the consumer price index was above the interim target rate set by the Administration and above the rate that would be considered permanently satisfactory Apprehension about the future inflation rate although much diminished remained. Sensitivity to the vestiges of recent inflationary experience was heightened by the prospect and need for continued expansion and by the large number of workers who would be involved in new wage settlements in A case could therefore be made for continuing the anti-inflationary influence of controls in But the experience of also suggested a number of dangers to be avoided. Although the costs of controls in retarding and distorting economic activity had apparently thus far not been great these costs seemed to be rising. They could be much more significant in as the program aged and as the economy came closer to its potential. The number of instances of excess demand would multiply and the relative price ceilings established by the system would become more potent sources of distortions. More and more companies would hit their profit-margin ceilings with adverse consequences for cost control and for investment incentives. More insistence on formal and equitable procedures would arise litigation would multiply and administrative costs public and private would increase greatly. Less tolerance of the inevitable delays and red tape of the system would be forthcoming These dangers and difficulties did not mean that continuation of controls was impossible or undesirable. They did mean that even temporary continuation would require modification of the program. They reinforced the idea that controls should not be a permanent part of the American economic system. And they emphasized the need for maintaining general noninflationary economic conditions which would permit the controls to continue for a while and then to disappear. These considerations were all prominent in the development of the policy for which is discussed in Chapter CHAPTER Outlook and Policy PRINCIPAL QUESTION on the economic outlook for is * not whether but how fast output and employment will expand. For policy there are two issues. The first is to find and implement the set of policy actions which will maximize the likelihood that the economy will move to its full potential level of output and employment. The second is to do so in ways that will serve both to eliminate the vestiges of the post-1965 inflation and to place the economy squarely on a sustainable path of subsequent noninflationary growth This is an ambitious set of policy goals but there is a good prospect of achieving them or at least approaching them closely. The year ahead is the first in a long time in which there is reasonable hope of closing in on full prosperity without serious inflation and without war For this to become a reality rather than just a hope will require full cooperation from business and labor. It will also require coordinated policy actions by the Administration the Congress and the Federal Reserve System. The economy will be approaching the zone of its potential by the end of the year. Such an economy requires a disciplined balancing of conflicting short-run interests in order to ensure that the common prosperity which benefits all interests can be sustained without interruption The central need is to balance the speed of expansion against its durability but in the context of this problem has many other dimensions : The allocation of output between uses dictated by the Government and those dictated by the private sector ; the balancing of the need for allowing free operation of market mechanisms for determining individual prices and wages against the continuing need for restraint on the average level of prices ; the division of emphasis between minimizing unemployment in the short run and minimizing it more permanently GUIDES T O OVERALL ECONOMIC POLICY The basic mandate for policy set forth in the Employment Act is to achieve " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The question of the precise meaning of those goals was left unresolved when the Act was passed in and has remained open ever since In the early 's a judgment was put forward that maximum employ- ment for that time would be achieved when percent of the labor force was employed which meant percent unemployed. Paralleling this estimate was a calculation of " maximum output/ usually called potential GNP which was conceptually the output that would be realized if the economy were operating at full employment. Estimates of potential GNP at constant prices were actually derived by assuming that the potential level of output was equal to the level of actual output in mid-1955 and that it would increase at a trend rate based on underlying changes in population the proportion of the population that would be in the labor force hours of work and productivity. The trend rate was adjusted from time to time to reflect changes in the underlying variables. The benchmark period mid-1955 was selected because it appeared to reflect most of the characteristics associated with noninflationary full employment including an unemployment rate close to percent ( the actual rate of unemployment for the second and third quarters of was * percent ) These estimates of maximum employment and potential output were not considered to be either immediate or permanent guides to policy. In fact policy in the early 's recognized that too fast a push to maximum employment or potential output could be dangerous. At the same time the percent employment rate or percent unemployment rate was considered to be an " interim " goal which might be changed later as a result of improvements in labor markets or other developments These judgments applied to conditions expected in the early 's. In retrospect the standard they suggested seems to have been in the correct zone : Steady noninflationary expansion did raise the rate of employment to 95/ percent and the ratio of actual to potential output to percent by mid-1965 and both rates might have risen somewhat further or could have at least been sustained without generating inflation had the normal course of events not been disrupted by the subsequent rapid rise in defense spending and the associated budget deficits The standards are a less reliable guide to policy for the 's than they were for the 's. Large and unpredicted changes have taken place in the nature composition and behavior of the labor force employment and unemployment as well as in the length of the workweek. Also the economy itself has been through the worst and most prolonged period of price and wage inflation since World War II. These changes have important implications for the guidance of policy Given that our knowledge of the interrelation between the levels of output employment and prices at " maximum employment " is incomplete it would be preferable to think of each objective not in terms of a single value but as a range of values. Furthermore the behavior of the economy in the near future will be determined not only by whether it is operating below or above some numerical potential output or below or above some target rate of employment but also by the speed and manner with which it approaches the range of its potential levels. Against the background of recent inflation- ary history it is necessary to give the economy reasonable assurance that policy will not repeat the fiscal errors which ignited the inflation in the first place. Too fast a dash for a numerical target of potential would rekindle inflationary expectations and behavior that might make the potential itself unattainable and would make it unsustainable if attained whereas a more gradual approach which allows for the sensitivity of wages and prices to expectations would make the potential not only attainable but sustainable The Government can neither precisely predict what maximum employment or maximum production will be nor can it precisely control the level of actual employment or production. What the outcomes should be and will be depends upon private behavior upon the amount of work and production that people want to do on realistically achievable terms as well as upon public policy. The contribution of public policy is to create conditions in which people can reach their desired employment and production goals through feasible behavior in the market. One aspect of this contribution is that the total demand for output in money terms should be sufficient so that people who want to work can find work without an unrealistically large departure from accustomed and expected patterns of wage behavior Specifically in the current situation we believe these guides mean that the money value of output should rise at a rate which with reasonably expectable price and wage behavior would reduce the rate of unemployment to the neighborhood of / percent by the end of The rise of money gross national product ( GNP ) would be about percent from the end of to the end of This does not imply that in present circumstances * /2 percent is necessarily the floor to the unemployment rate. It does imply a belief that a more rapid expansion of the economy within would endanger the further reduction of the inflation rate that is desirable and would do so despite the continuing price and wage controls program. However if as a result of cooperation with the controls system or for other reasons prices and wages rise less rapidly than is assumed here the increase in money GNP suggested for the year would permit output and employment to rise more and unemployment to fall further Policy beyond will have to be adaptable to developments during the year. However in the absence of evidence to the contrary a sustained period of uninterrupted expansion would provide the optimal background for maximizing both employment and price stability. To this end the appropriate policy goal in the ensuing period would seem to be a steady increase of money demand ( money GNP ) at a rate consonant with the potential growth rate of the economy and reasonable price stability. Again this would not imply that the unemployment rate of / percent assumed to have been reached by the end of will not decline further. If with 4J/2 percent unemployment there is the pressure of an excess supply of labor the average rate of wage and price increase would be lower and the rise in employment relative to the labor force would be higher leading to a further reduction of the unemployment rate A further reduction of the unemployment rate in and beyond to even lower levels would be assisted by labor market policies including manpower programs which effectively reduce the relatively high level of frictional and structural unemployment that has typically been experienced in the United States It is worth repeating that the policy goal is a condition in which persons who want work and seek it realistically on reasonable terms can find employment. The Government must make two kinds of contribution to the achievement of this goal. First it must maintain reasonable stability in the overall rate of economic growth so that the efforts of individuals to find work are not frustrated by erratic changes in the conditions on which work is available. Second it must seek to eliminate obstacles that prevent willing workers and willing employers from getting together insofar as these obstacles can be overcome without excessive cost. When the condition that persons who want work can find it through serious search is met the rate of unemployment as we measure it will not be zero. What it would be we do not know Undoubtedly the number would change from time to time. But it is the condition which is important not the statistic FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICY The path of the economy suggested above calls for slowing down the rise of money GNP which was about percent during to about percent during and to a steady rate less than that thereafter. This desired shift to a slower rate of increase of money GNP would be assisted by a shift of the budget from a position in which the unified budget would be in deficit at full employment to a position in which it would be in balance at full employment. In fact the strength of the private demand forces in the economy described below argues that this shift in the budget position is essential to avoid an inflationary pace of expansion. The desired subsequent steadiness of the rate of increase of money GNP would be assisted by keeping the budget in a position of balance at full employment unless there later appears clear and strong evidence that developments in the private sector call for greater fiscal stimulus or restraint. Constancy in the relation between fullemployment receipts and expenditures provides approximate constancy in the Federal contribution to economic expansion. The constancy of the contribution is only approximate because the impact of the budget on the economy depends on its composition and total size as well as on the size of the deficit or surplus. However constancy of the balance at full employment is the best single guide to a budget policy that neither pushes the economy above its desired growth rate nor holds the economy below it. In any case the rule that expenditures should not exceed the revenues that would be collected at full employment is essential to bring home the requirement that Government should not spend money for things it is unwilling to ask citizens to pay for. The circumstances of are appropriate for getting on to that track A gradual slowing down of the expansion of money GNP to a steady rate consistent with the long-run potential growth rate of the economy and reasonable price stability is also an appropriate goal for monetary policy This is likely to require a slower increase of the supply of money and credit than was proper when the main objective was to encourage a quickened economic expansion in an environment of substantial unused resources There is as far as we are aware little explicit disagreement with the proposition that the budget should be brought into a position of full-employment balance for fiscal year The threat to the achievement of fullemployment balance is not that the country or the Congress will decide against it but that congressional procedures will be incapable of carrying out a policy to do it. Congress under present practice makes hundreds of separate decisions affecting expenditures but does not decide at any point in the process what total expenditures should be. Lacking the discipline that would be imposed by recognition of a limit to total spending Congress tends regularly to authorize and appropriate too much money constantly straining the ability of the Executive to keep spending under control If the budget is not to be a perpetual menace to economic stability better congressional procedures will have to be created for making a deliberate decision about total spending. That is why the President has urged the Congress to establish a rigid ceiling on fiscal year expenditures before it passes any other spending legislation this year. The President has also urged the Congress to act on its own initiative to reform its expenditure-deciding process. In fact the problem is now more recognized in Congress than it has been for many years and there have been encouraging moves there to deal with it We also need to consider whether the future conduct of fiscal policy could be improved if Congress were to develop expeditious procedures for temporary limited changes in the level of particular taxes. Such changes could take the form of a temporary 1-year positive or negative surcharge rate on personal and corporate income taxes or additionally a temporary 1-year shift in the rate of the investment tax credit. Both suggestions have been advanced with some regularity over the past two decades and while they raise many difficult questions it is also generally agreed that we can not be complacent about our existing instruments for the conduct of fiscal policy Basic changes in the structure and level of tax rates do and should require extended discussion. At the same time experience has shown that the proper conduct of macroeconomic policy may sometimes call for a prompt and effective shift in the overall balance between the flow of Federal receipts and expenditures. Temporary and prompt changes in tax rates which do not alter the basic structure of taxes may provide an efficient way of accomplishing such required shifts Government Expenditures The shift to full-employment budget balance by can be accomplished either by raising tax rates or by restraining the rate at which expenditures rise. The Administration has a clear preference for the latter The conceptual basis for arriving at public expenditure decisions is fairly straightforward. In general public expenditure is justified when both of two conditions are met : If a desired result can be achieved at less cost by public rather than private spending and if the expenditure yields benefits which ( adjusted for their timing ) are greater than their costs measured by the value and timing of the alternatives that have to be foregone in order to finance the outlays required In practice there are formidable difficulties in arriving at sound public spending decisions. For many expenditures reliable estimates of benefits and costs are not available. Many decisions have spending consequences that stretch years beyond the point at which the decision itself is made ; over this period circumstances priorities costs and benefits may and do change The proper management of public spending therefore requires the continuous reevaluation of prior decisions from which current spending flows as well as the careful evaluation of new decisions. Furthermore it is instructive to gain perspective by referring to a rough guide such as the fraction of total output which flows through the government sector The United States has now been through a period of substantial growth of government expenditures both absolutely and relative to the size of the economy. In making a comparison with the size of the economy it is useful to abstract from fluctuations in the level of actual output around its path of potential growth. To this end the data shown in Table relate the level of government spending and its major components to the level of potential GNP. Separate figures are shown for the Federal Government ( including grants to the State and local level ) the State and local sector ( excluding Federal grants ) and for all levels of government combined Excluding defense spending the ratio of government expenditures Federal and State and local to potential GNP rose from percent in to percent in Defense spending fluctuated relative to GNP but was much lower at the end than at the beginning of the period During these years potential GNP measured in nominal dollars nearly tripled The share of the Federal portion in total government civilian spending also rose rapidly between and In Federal civilian spending was percent of potential GNP compared to percent for State and local spending. Over the 16-year period the Federal share rose twice as fast as the State and local share. By Federal civilian spending was percent of potential GNP as against percent for the State and local sector TABLE Government expenditures as a percent of full-employment GNP selected calendar yeats [ Percent ] Type of expenditure Total government Education health and welfare2 Natural resources3 Commerce transportation .and housing General government and net interest Defense relatedl Civilian Total Federal Government * Total Defense related Civilian Education health and welfare Old-age and disability Other Other civilian State and local government * Total civilian Education health and welfare2 Other civilian Consists of national defense space research and technology and international affairs and finance. Negligible amounts of State and local expenditures for these functions are included in Federal expenditures Consists of education health labor and welfare and veterans benefits and services Consists of agriculture and agricultural resources and natural resources * Federal expenditures include and State and local expenditures exclude Federal grants * See footnote Note. Expenditures are on a national income accounts basis Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce For all levels of government the largest increases were recorded in spending for education health and welfare purposes. Total spending for such purposes rose from percent of potential GNP to percent and Federal spending rose from percent of potential GNP in ( about $ billion ) to percent in ( about $ billion ) A large part of the rise was in spending connected with social security programs for the aged and disabled although other forms of spending for education health and welfare functions also rose rapidly The rise in the share of Federal civilian spending in the United States has accelerated since the mid-1960 's along with the large increase in the number and scope of social programs. Many of these were introduced without any firm estimate of how effective they would be in solving the problems to which they were addressed or how much they would cost in the long run. At the same time there has emerged the need for new social programs especially in the field of pollution abatement The continued existence of large social problems alongside a greatly expanded volume of government expenditures designed to correct these problems is not a strong argument for devoting a still-larger share of the O national output to similar government programs. On the contrary it is an argument for close scrutiny of these programs to discover whether they can be justified by their results. Such a scrutiny carried out by the Administration has led to decisions to cut back many programs even though total Federal spending after the cuts will still be rising by about $ billion a year. Making these cutbacks in less effective programs will provide budget room for consideration of more effective programs later as the growth of the economy expands the Federal revenue PRICE AND WAGE RESTRAINTS IN PHASE III The purpose of budget and monetary policy is to help the economy achieve sustainable expansion along the growth path of potential output. One necessary condition for achieving this objective is the avoidance of policy errors which risk the re-emergence of generalized demand-pull inflation. A second condition is that the risk of inflation related to cost-push and expectational factors should also be minimized. Inflationary expectations and behavior left over from the country 's experience since even though reduced in from previous heights have not been completely eliminated. The selfinterest of both business and labor calls for restraint and hence can be expected to lead to an even more durable winding-down of inflationary patterns than the economy has already achieved. However the reciprocal abatement of the rate of wage and price increases is a delicate and complex process that can be upset through unrestrained behavior by particular sectors of the pricewage spectrum. To avoid the risk of such disruption it is necessary to maintain a system of direct wage and price restraints in Although temporary continuation of controls in is necessary the condition of the economy and of the controls system have pointed to the need for substantial changes in the program. Two things are critical. One is to restrain and if possible reverse the rapid rise of food prices. The second is to moderate the degree of detailed supervision and mandatory enforcement in the system in order to preserve the self-restraint which has been the essence of the progam In food prices rose much more rapidly than other prices. The reasons for this and the steps taken to curb the food price increase are described in Chapter and its supplement. By the end of adverse weather conditions had further reduced the food supply in prospect for Moreover it began to appear that these uncontrollable adversities were superimposed on an agricultural policy which although less restrictive than it had been still leaned too far in the direction of limiting output and stocks relative to the rising domestic and foreign demand. This was especially true for meat where the programs adopted in the early 's had made a major change in the way farmers could use their cropland. Whereas previous programs had placed limits on actual acres of crops produced and allowed other areas of land to be used for livestock grazing or production of minor crops the new programs utilized a new concept. They restricted the production of major crops by paying farmers to idle a portion of the acres previously used in crop production. In return for the payment the idle acres had to be planted to soil-conserving crops and could no longer be used for livestock grazing or other crop production during the most productive part of the year. This change had the effect of slowing the rate of growth of meat production after With strong growth in demand for meat in prices rose rapidly Arresting the rapid rise in food prices is a key element in the stabilization program both because of the direct importance of food in family budgets and because of the possible link between food prices and moderation of wage increases. Accordingly the revision of the Phase II program included major steps to restrain food price increases in addition to what had been done in During January the Administration took a number of strong measures which will have an important impact on food supplies and food prices although with some lag. These include : Suspension for of mandatory acreage set-aside requirements under the wheat program Disposal of Government-owned stocks of grains except for minimum reserves to be completed promptly Termination of Government loans effective May on farmerowned stocks of grains from crops of or earlier years Suspension of all remaining export subsidies for foods applying to chickens flour and lard Permission for acreage diverted from crop production under Government programs to be used for grazing animals under arrangements to be agreed upon with the Department of Agriculture To help assure that the agricultural policies of Government are consistent with the anti-inflation objective administrative actions of the Department of Agriculture affecting food supplies and prices will hereafter be subject to review by the Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) The CLC Committee on Food has been set up to discharge this function as well as to review or initiate other policies and proposals that may affect food prices This can lead to a progressive reorientation of agricultural policy to the needs of the 's As in Phase II mandatory controls will be continued on food processing and distribution. Large food processors will be required to comply with previous regulations including prenotification and approval of cost-justified price increases. The limitations on retailers ' margins established under the Phase II system will remain in force except for mii.or administrative changes Pay units in the food processing and retailing industries will remain under mandatory pay control Concern with the food price problem in led the Cost of Living Council to ask the National Commission on Productivity to undertake a study on ways to improve productivity and reduce costs in food production and distribution. The study which has now been transmitted to the CLC for its consideration contains numerous suggestions for both Government and private action. A Food Industry Advisory Committee drawn from the private economy has been established to advise the CLC on matters relating to food costs and prices. One of its main functions will be to assist in carrying out recommendations for raising productivity arising from the recently completed study Three other sectors of the economy in addition to food will receive special attention under Phase III ( a ) Medical care. Mandatory control of prices and wages remains in force in the health industry. The Cost of Living Council Committee on Health will review Government activities significantly influencing healthcare expenses. A Health Industry Advisory Committee composed of private citizens will advise the CLC in this area ( b ) Construction costs. The Construction Industry Stabilization Committee will continue to operate as under Phase II to restrain wage increases in that industry. Construction prices are subject to reduction if scheduled wage increases are reduced ( c ) Interest and dividends. The Committee on Interest and Dividends will continue its efforts to obtain voluntary cooperation in holding down dividend payments and interest rates Outside of these particular areas the main effort of Phase III is to bring about private action on wages and prices consistent with the goal of slowing down the inflation rate without imposing unnecessary burdens on the economy. These burdens described in Chapter as they related to Phase II included administrative costs for the Government and the private sector interferences with productivity and production obstructions to the normal conduct of business and collective bargaining weakening of incentives to investment and a feeling of inequity on the part of some. Although surprisingly small during these burdens were becoming more serious and there was every reason to believe that they would become still more serious as the control system continued and as the economy moved closer to its potential These costs or burdens of the system were not essential for its basic objective. The objective was not to force prices and wages to conform in every particular case to precisely defined standards laid down by the Government nor to obtain advance approval for every private action. The objective was a certain average degree of restraint. But prior to August private decisions had been made for a long time in a highly inflationary atmosphere With that background spontaneous wage and price decisions in could have come out a long way from the requirements of price stability even given a general desire to cooperate in the fight against inflation. Thus the ability of the Government to monitor private behavior and enforce reasonable compliance with the requirement of price stability had to be developed and demonstrated. Therefore the situation of Phase II required prenotification precise standards and omnipresent enforcement. The conditions at the opening of permitted and if the system was to survive and succeed required a relaxation of these forms of the system. This is the basic philosophy of Phase III The President has established a goal of getting the rate of inflation down to ^ percent or less by the end of The Cost of Living Council has set forth standards of price and wage behavior which are consistent with the achievement of this goal. These standards are essentially the standards of Phase II with some modifications on the price side which are noted below. The CLC has authority to change these standards. In considering modification of the pay standards the CLC will have the advice of a LaborManagement Advisory Committee composed of leading private citizens Compliance with these standards is expected to be initially and generally voluntary. The program will be self-administering in the sense that private parties can calculate the application of the standards in their own cases. The experience under Phase II and the regulations and definitions developed under it were invaluable in making this possible. Businesses and collective bargaining units will not be required to notify the Government in advance of price or wage increases. The largest economic units will be required to submit quarterly reports to the Cost of Living Council which will permit the CLC to assess their behavior relative to the requirements of the antiinflation goal. Moderate-sized economic units will be required to maintain records for the same purpose. The parts of the economy not required to submit reports or maintain records will be surveyed from statistical and other information and are expected to follow the same standards When the Cost of Living Council believes that there have been or are about to be price or wage increases that are not reasonably consistent with the objectives of the program it can take action to stop them. Among other things it can if it considers it appropriate issue an order under the authority of the Economic Stabilization Act setting a ceiling on specific prices or wages. This order might be temporary pending a hearing. While the order is in effect transgressing it will be a violation of the Act and subject to its penalties. In determining whether price or wage increases are not reasonably consistent with the objectives of the program the CLC will be guided by the standards it has issued The Price Commission and the Pay Board will no longer operate in Phase III but many of their functions will be performed by Price and Pay Divisions of the Cost of Living Council. Rent control which had already been cut down to cover about percent of rental units is terminated in Phase III because it leads to costly evasions enforcement is difficult and housing market condi- tions have significantly improved. The total number of personnel assigned to the program will be reduced from about to about Relieved of the necessity to process a large flow of advance notifications and to administer rent control this staff will be adequate to maintain an effective option for the Government to intervene to assure achievement of the anti-inflation goal The President has asked for a 1-year extension of the Economic Stabilization Act which would otherwise expire on April One significant change ha<s been made in the standard for prices. As in Phase II prices may be increased only to reflect cost increases. These costbased price increases are then subject to one of two further limits. First the average increase in a firm 's prices may not exceed percent in a year ; if this standard is observed the firm 's profit margin will not be limited. Second if a firm 's average price increase exceeds percent that firm may not exceed its base period profit margin. Thus a firm is given the opportunity to exceed its base period profit margin if it does so by increasing productivity without raising prices by more than percent. The base period for calculation of the allowable profit margin is slightly altered by permitting the inclusion of fiscal years ending after August The essence of Phase III is that the Government retains the enforcement ability and authority necessary to the Nation 's anti-inflation objective while leaving the private sector the maximum possible freedom to pursue productivity efficiency and collective bargaining THE OUTLOOK FOR The U.S. economy will expand substantially in All major components of demand will rise strongly except for residential construction and Federal purchases. Aggregate demand for goods and services will rise by about percent from an estimated level of $ billion to about $ billion in * The real increase is projected at % percent with an implied increase in the GNP price deflator of percent. This projection of GNP prices is compatible with the objective that the rate of inflation as measured by the consumer price index be reduced to ^ percent or less by the end of Civilian employment is expected to rise more rapidly than the civilian labor force reducing the unemployment rate to the neighborhood of / percent by the end of the year The course of the U.S. economy at least through the first half of will be dominated by expansive forces already in place at yearend Business investment has developed a strong forward momentum stimulated by both the fact and the expectation of expanding orders sales and profits The ability and willingness of consumers to increase their purchases has been augmented by the large increase in social security benefits in the fourth * Given the path of money GNP in an increase of percent between the average level in and the average level in is consistent with an increase of percent from the end of to the end of quarter of and their incomes will be augmented again early in by Federal pay increases. The financial position of the State and local government sector stronger than it has been in many years will be strengthened further by both current revenue sharing payments and retroactive payments for Given these expansive forces the probability is that the economy will maintain a very high rate of real growth over the first half of After midyear the economy will be significantly closer to the zone of full potential output and it is both probable and desirable that the rate of expansion will and should abate toward its sustainable long-run path The outlook for the major components of expenditure on GNP in is discussed in the following sections Business Fixed Investment The Council expects the rise in business fixed investment to continue on its strong upward course and to increase by percent from to about the same as the rise from to The last time two successive annual increases of this magnitude occurred was in the mid-1960 's. A substantial part of the earlier increase took place before the rapid buildup of the war in Vietnam. The foundation for the large increase expected in has already been laid. The rapid expansion in has generated increased requirements for capacity expansion and has also provided business with a substantial part of the funds required for capital goods purchases : In addition to rising profits the actual and potential availability of funds has been augmented by liberalized depreciation provisions the investment tax credit and the restraint on dividend increases as well as by favorable financial conditions in the markets for debt and equity capital. This year 's strong economy will sustain investment plans that have already been made and indeed will probably lead to their upward revision Several indications of forward investment commitments were noted in Chapter Additional evidence can be found in the strong buildup in unfilled order backlogs held by producers of capital goods which were percent larger in November than a year earlier. Recent months have also seen a pronounced step-up in construction contract awards for factory building which had been lagging for several years According to the most recent Commerce Department survey taken in November and December and published in January businessmen were projecting a rise of percent in their plant and equipment expenditures from to The survey also projected a rise of 13/ percent for manufacturing companies. These results correspond fairly closely with a similar survey conducted by McGraw-Hill in late October. The manufacturing increases extended to almost all major industries and were especially large in the durable goods sector. Investment by nonmanufacturing business is expected to continue its steady upward trend for a projected rise of % percent with larger than average increases in spending by public utilities and mining The Council 's forecast for an overall rise of percent is basically consistent with the rise projected in the anticipations survey for One reason for a slightly higher forecast is that investment demand is expected to be strong in certain sectors not covered by the plant and equipment survey notably investment in agriculture and among professional businesses. A second reason is that over the postwar period anticipations have tended to underestimate actual results during periods of strong expansion It is interesting to note that experience in was an exception to the general rule : Business spent less on new plant and equipment in than was projected early in the year by both the Commerce and McGraw-Hill surveys. It is highly unlikely that the shortfall was due to disappointments in demand ; indeed capital appropriations new orders and contract awards all increased as progressed. A possible explanation for the shortfall which occurred is that construction and equipment costs did not rise as fast as originally expected especially for older projects that had been planned several years previously and had been reactivated after postponement during the recession Inventory Investment The change in business inventories is expected to total $ ^ billion in an increase of about $ billion over last year 's level of inventory accumulation. Considering the strength of the rise in output and sales in inventory accumulation was relatively low. However stocks relative to sales at the beginning of were still a little high by historical experience. In addition most sectors experienced few problems with delivery delays and under such conditions a major shift in inventory policy was not likely. The combination of last year 's strong upsurge in sales and the moderate rise in stocks has reduced the ratio of stocks to sales for manufacturing and trade firms combined to its lowest level since One structural element that will help add to inventory investment this year is the increased demand stemming from some of the capital-intensive manufacturing industries for heavy equipment with long production lead times Residential Construction Residential construction expenditures are expected to rise only slightly from to and to decline somewhat in real terms. Housing starts are expected to edge down gradually throughout averaging million units as compared to million in In general the decrease in new starts will reflect cutbacks in some areas where overbuilding has occurred some reduction in the backlog of demand as this is satisfied by the very large volume of completions expected in and somewhat less favorable conditions in mortgage markets than prevailed last year. The number of new nonfarm housing units public as well as private to be started under HUD- subsidized programs is expected to exceed the level somewhat even though new commitments under these programs are being discontinued The reduction in total starts is not expected to be severe because the underlying demand for housing buttressed by strong formation of new households and replacement demand continues to be very high. Furthermore while some rise in interest rates may occur as a result of the strong upsurge in business activity there is little possibility of the stringent financial conditions that led to shortages of mortgage funds in and Government Purchases Government purchases are expected to show mixed trends. State and local purchases are projected to rise by percent or by somewhat more than last year 's percent rise due in part to the effects of revenue sharing. Many States and localities have indicated that spending increases related to revenue sharing receipts will take the form of capital projects in which case the full impact of the new program on the economy will be deferred by the longer lags involved in planning and executing such expenditures. There will also be tax cuts from existing levels or the avoidance of tax increases that might otherwise have taken place in the absence of revenue sharing and also some debt reduction. All of this may stimulate the economy but not in the form of higher government purchases Federal purchases of goods and services are scheduled to show little change from to which means a decrease in real terms. The year begins with a Federal pay raise for both military and civilian workers that is expected to add $ billion a year to Federal payrolls although part of this rise is expected to be offset by subsequent reductions in personnel Net Exports Imports of goods and services are likely to exceed exports again in but the difference is expected to be narrower by about $ 2j/s> billion than was the case in The improving trend in the balance of trade that began in mid-197 should continue through the coming year. Because the growth of U.S. output from yearend to yearend will be slower than it was in the preceding 4-quarter period the demand for imports should rise less rapidly than during At the same time economic growth in major industrial countries abroad is expected to be more rapid during than during and on this account the growth rate of demand for U.S. exports should show an improvement. Furthermore the slower rise in U.S. costs and prices relative to those experienced by our trading partners should increase the relative demand for U.S. products both at home and abroad. Finally the positive long-run effect of the December currency realignment which was offset by its perverse short-run effects on the nominal dollar value of our trade balance last year can be expected to show up more clearly in However the positive effects outlined above will be reduced by a continuing rise in net fuel imports Consumer Spending Consumer spending is expected to rise approximately ^ percent in exceeding last year 's large rise of ^ percent. However the course of consumer demand within is not likely to be as rapid as it was within This difference between year-to-year and within-the-year movements reflects the fact that unlike the year starts off from a high base For example retail sales in December after seasonal adjustment were 4J/2 percent above the monthly average for all of ; the corresponding figure a year ago was J/2 percent above the average Personal income is expected to show another large gain from to with an expected rise close to that of last year. A large rise in employment and payrolls will be supplemented by the increase in social security benefits that became effective in the final quarter of as well as by new benefits that become effective in Personal income is computed after subtracting personal contributions for social insurance. This year increased social security tax rates and a higher taxable earnings base will reduce personal income by about $ billion. Although the national income accounts record the entire amount of the tax rise beginning in the first quarter it is important to note that the portion due to an increase in the wage base ( $ billion at an annual rate ) does not in actual practice become effective until later in the calendar year Disposable income is expected to show an extremely large rise of percent this year exceeding the rise in personal income mainly because of the refunds of the overwithholding of personal income taxes. These refunds are expected to give a strong boost to cash income in the first half of the year followed by a corresponding slowdown in the growth of spendable income after midyear. Some impact on consumption is expected from these refunds but the greater part is assumed to affect personal saving as seems to have been the case in Because of the heavy infusions of income in the first half of the saving rate in that period is likely to be very high but it should decrease as the year progresses Labor force and unemployment The unemployment rate is expected to decline to the neighborhood of / percent by the end of This projection is essentially based on the forecast that real GNP in will be about % percent higher than it averaged in The principal uncertainty involved in translating the projection of output into a projection of the unemployment rate is the growth of the total labor force ( which includes the Armed Forces ) over the course of the year In the mid-sixties it was widely assumed that the trend rate of growth of the labor force would rise to about ^ percent per annum and remain there through In fact the growth of the total labor force turned out to be much higher ; over the last half of the 's it was close to * percent per annum. As a result the total labor force is now far larger than the level projected in The extraordinary expansion in participation rates ended in In in spite of a strong expansion in employment opportunities the growth of the total labor force was close to its long-term rate of % percent The uncertainty for and beyond is whether labor force growth will remain at this level. There are reasons to believe that it will and that the extraordinary increases between and represent a one-time phenomenon caused principally by the following factors : The strong demand for labor due to the Vietnam mobilization and buildup increased labor force participation rates. In particular it drew large numbers of women and teenagers into the labor force because so many men were either in the Armed Forces or remained in college The fertility rate fell rapidly causing fewer women to be out of the labor force looking after young families Because women generally have a lower median age at marriage than men there was a temporary excess of women when the first cohorts of the postwar baby boom reached marriageable age in the mid-1960 's. Like the fall in the fertility rate the " marriage squeeze " induced an abnormal increase in the labor force The introduction of 7-day and late night openings by many sectors of retail trade led to large increases in the availability of part-time work These factors do not seem to be still operating on balance to accelerate participation rates further and it is therefore likely that labor force growth will now remain at its long-run trend rate of % percent. If it does and the size of the Armed Forces remains close to present levels the 4J4 percent unemployment level forecast should be achieved * # * * * # * As always there are uncertainties. The projection of a percent rise in money GNP between and is within the high side of the fairly narrow range being forecast by the majority of economic models and economists. The probability that GNP in will differ from its forecast value by more than percent is extremely small The apparent consensus on money GNP for is due in part to the fact that many of the common foreshadowing data used are themselves stated in terms of expected dollar flows. There is less agreement about how the nominal increase will be divided between real growth and changes in the price level because we have fewer insights on either of these components than we have for the total itself. The Council 's projection of a percent change in GNP prices is at the low end of the range now expected by private forecasters. It is based on three assumptions about the future : That the limit on federal expenditures proposed by the President for fiscal and fiscal will be met ; that the rate of rise in food prices will be less than in ; that there will be a high degree of compliance with Phase III standards enforced as necessary by the Economic Stabilization Program. None of these is certain but the probability is high that all will be realized Notwithstanding the uncertainties the economy in appears to be moving along a general path which gives it a better chance of reaching sustainable full employment than it has had in all but one or two years of the postwar period CHAPTER The Economic Role of Women O NE OF THE MOST important changes in the American economy in this century has been the increase in the proportion of women who work outside the home. This increase is the most striking aspect of the expansion of the role of women in the economy The addition of millions of women to the labor force has contributed substantially to the increase of total output. This is most obvious if we focus attention on the output that is measured and included in the gross national product ( GNP ) But even if we subtract from the contribution of working women to the GNP the value of the work they would have done at home there has been an addition to total output. Most of the benefits of this additional output accrue to the women who produce it and to their families There are however also direct benefits to the society at large including the taxes paid on the women 's earnings Concern is sometimes expressed that the increase in women in the labor force will reduce the employment opportunities for men and raise their unemployment. There is no reason to think that would happen and there is no sign that it has happened. The work to be done is not a fixed total As more women enter employment and earn incomes they or their families buy more goods and services which men and women are employed to produce. A sudden surge of entrants into the labor force might cause difficulties of adjustment and consequently unemployment but the entry of women into the labor force has not been of that character Women work outside the home for the same reasons as men. The basic reason is to get the income that can be earned by working. Whether for either men or women work is done out of necessity or by choice is a question of definition. If working out of necessity means working in order to sustain biologically necessary conditions of life probably a small proportion of all the hours of work done in the United States by men or women is necessary. If working out of necessity means working in order to obtain a standard of living which is felt by the worker to be desirable probably almost all of the work done by both men and women is necessary The Employment Act of sets forth a goal of " maximum employment. " We understand that to mean employment of those who want to work without regard to whether their employment is by some definition necessary. This goal applies equally to men and to women. The Act also sets forth a goal of " maximum production. " We understand the meaning of that goal which is relevant to the present context to be that people should be able to work in the employments in which they will be most productive. That also applies equally to men and women Although the goals apply equally to men and women some of the obstacles to their achievement apply especially to women. Women have gained much more access to market employment than they used to have but they have not gained full equality within the market in the choice of jobs opportunities for advancement and other matters related to employment and compensation. To some extent the cause of this discrepancy is direct discrimination. But it is also the result of more subtle and complex factors originating in cultural patterns that have grown up in most societies through the centuries. In either case because the possibilities open to women are restricted they are not always free to contribute a full measure of earnings to their families to develop their talents fully or to help achieve the national goal of " maximum production. " ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF WOMEN Recognizing the urgency of these problems and the importance of leadership to change the attitudes which underlie them the President announced in September the formation of the Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women. The committee will meet periodically with the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers providing a forum for the interchange of information ideas and points of view. This interchange will increase the Council 's own expertise on the economics of women. Because the function of the Council of Economic Advisers is to advise the President on a wide variety of economic issues its association with the committee will ensure that the interests of women will be represented in economic policy decisions With these goals in mind in January the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers asked men and women representing diverse areas of expertise to serve on the committee. They include officials from the Federal Government agencies whose activities are important to the progress of women representatives from business finance education and other private institutions and specialists on the economic problems of women from sociology psychology economics and the law. Among the topics that the committee will explore are job training and counseling in the schools special problems of minority women problems related to child care women 's performance at work the extent of job discrimination women 's access to credit and legislative action on taxes and social security that may have a different effect on women than on men Another more fundamental issue affecting women in the economy underlies many of the others. The roles played by women and men have been sharply differentiated. It is obvious that only women are capable of childbearing. But along with this biologically determined role women have by tradition come to assume primary responsibility for child care and home management while men have primary responsibility for the family 's financial support. Until very recently this division of labor within the family has had such general acceptance as to impose limitations on women 's work outside the home. The way in which the economic role of women evolves thus hinges on the most fundamental societal patterns and the extent to which social action can and should influence further change in these patterns will be one of the most difficult and important questions the committee must consider By way of an introduction to the problem this chapter looks at jobrelated aspects of the economic role of women. The committee will of course deal with a much broader range of topics PARTICIPATION IN THE LABOR FORCE In about percent of all women were in the work force ( Table ) In the succeeding decades this percentage hardly increased reaching about percent by With World War II however the movement rapidly accelerated and by the percentage of women years and older in the work force had risen to Single women and women widowed divorced or separated have always had higher labor force participation rates than married women living with their husbands. By the participation of women in the two former groups had already reached levels close to those of today. Thus the upward trend in labor force participation since World War II has been due almost entirely to the TABLE Women in the labor force selected years Women in labor force ( thousands ) Year Women in labor force as percent of Total labor force All women of working age Note. Data for to are from decennial censuses and refer to a single date ; beginning data are annual averages For to data include women years of age and over ; beginning data include women years of age and over Labor force data for to refer to gainfully employed workers Data for reflect adjustments to Census benchmarks Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census and Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics changed behavior of married women ( Table ) The first to respond were the more mature married women beyond the usual childbearing years. More recently there has also been a sharp upturn in the labor force participation of younger married women The record for men has tended to run in the opposite direction. A secular reduction in time spent in paid work over most men 's lifetimes has taken place : A man spends more years at school and enters the labor force later than formerly ; he retires earlier works fewer hours a week and has longer vacations. Of course these changes have also affected women but for them the increase in years worked has far outweighed the other work-reducing factors In one very important respect however the working life patterns of men and women have not merged. The typical man can expect to be in the labor force continuously for an unbroken block of some years between leaving school and retirement. Of men in the year age group percent were in the labor force in For most women this continuity in participation is the exception rather than the rule TABLE Labor force participation rates of women by marital status and age and [ Percent i ] Age Marital status and year Total Under years years years years years years and over Single : Married husband present : Widowed divorced or separated : i Labor force as percent of noninstitutional population in group specified s Not available Note. Data relate to March of each year Data for and are for women years of age and over ; data for are for women years of age and over Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics THE HISTORICAL PATTERN What are the causal factors that induced women to enter the labor force ? One might have expected that the strong increases in husbands ' real incomes which occurred during the period would have provided an incentive to women not to enter the labor force. This seeming puzzle is resolved however when one considers that by entering the labor force women did not leave a life of leisure for work but rather changed from one kind of work work at .home to another kind of work work in the market. The incentive for women to make this dramatic occupational change came from several developments which made paid work outside the home the increasingly more profitable alternative Rapidly rising earnings and expanded job opportunities for women gave a strong impetus to the change. The expansion of job opportunities for women was undoubtedly influenced by the expansion of the service sector of the economy where employment increased by percent from to compared to the increase of percent in the goodsproducing industrial sector over the same period. Women have always been more heavily represented in services than in industry since the service sector offers more white-collar employment and provides more opportunities for part-time work an especially important feature for women with small children. On the other hand the increasing supply of women workers perhaps itself contributed to the rapid expansion in the service sector The increase in women 's educational attainments has also helped to raise the amount they can earn by working. Education may make women more productive in the home that is more efficient housekeepers consumers and mothers but education appears to increase still more their productivity in work outside the home. Women with more education earn more and they are more likely than less educated women to seek work in the market Because life expectancy has increased considerably over the century ( and more for women than for men ) and because most women complete their childbearing at a younger age women can look forward with more certainty to a longer uninterrupted span of years in the labor force. This lengthening of a woman 's expected working life is significant because it increases her return on her investment in training and education : the greater the number of years in which to collect the return the greater is the return These increases in the income a woman could potentially earn meant essentially that time spent producing goods and services at home was coming at a higher and higher cost in terms of the income foregone by not working in the market. It made sense then to buy available capital equipment ( such as washing machines ) which would substitute for some of the housewife 's time and free her to go to work. And changes in technology which lowered the cost and increased the array of time-saving devices facilitated the substitution The most difficult home responsibility to find a good substitute for is child care ; and although the labor force participation of women with children under years has increased from percent in to percent in child-rearing is probably the major factor causing some women to interrupt and others to curtail their careers The long-term decline in the average number of children in the family has undoubtedly had a strong influence on the proportion of women entering the labor force. Advances in birth control techniques permit parents not only to reduce the number of births but also to control their timing to O suit a mother 's working career. Declines in infant and child mortality may also have encouraged a reduction in births by increasing the parents ' expectation that all their children would survive to adulthood. On the other hand reductions in family size may themselves be influenced by the desire of women to work Childbearing has a very noticeable effect on the patterns of women 's labor force participation by age. Based on census data Chart traces the lifetime changes in labor force participation by groups of women born at different times the earliest group consisting of women born between and The chart therefore simulates the actual work history of particular cohorts of women followed longitudinally. According to this chart the various forces in the economy that have induced women to work have generally had a more powerful effect on women beyond the childbearing ages Chart Labor Force Participation Over a Working Life of Cohorts of Women Born in Selected Time Intervals PARTICIPATION RATE ( PERCENT ) * BORN BORN BORN / BORN BORN _ s ^ T V / BORN A YEARS OF AGE " ,N " T O T A L LABOR FORCE AS PERCENT OF TOTAL NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN GROUP SPECIFIED NOTE : FOR WOMEN BORN BETWEEN AND THE FIRST AGE PLOTTED IS YEARS. COHORTS REACH EACH AGE INTERVAL ACCORDING TO THE MIDPOINT OF THEIR BIRTH YEARS. THUS THE COHORT BORN REACHED AGES IN AND AGES IN ; THE COHORT BORN REACHED AGES IN AND AGES IN SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE than on younger groups. Those increases in labor force participation that have occurred for groups of women reaching the childbearing ages of years have been closely associated with declining fertility rates. Thus labor force participation for the group reaching years increased substantially from to and again between and while there was a decline between and in the participation of those reaching this age group the baby boom mothers. Whether the young women now in their twenties have simply postponed having children and will later drop out of the labor force or whether many will continue to work choosing to have small families or remain childless is of course a question of great interest THE WORKING WOMAN TODAY Although the decisions of individual women to work outside the home are undoubtedly based on many different factors there are some economic factors which seem to be of overriding importance. The necessity to support oneself or others is one obvious reason and not surprisingly adult single women and women who have been separated from husbands or widowed are highly likely to work The increase in earnings opportunities which proved to be such a powerful factor influencing the secular growth of women 's participation in the labor force is a similarly powerful factor influencing the pattern of women 's participation at any given time. Thus education and other training which affect the amount a woman can earn are strongly related to women 's work patterns. The importance of education is such that whether a woman is single married or separated the more education she has the more likely she is to work. One striking exception to this pattern is that among mothers of children under years old there is scarcely any relation between education and labor force participation. Thus the rearing of children of preschool age causes all women regardless of education to curtail their work outside the home. However the drop in participation during this childrearing period is most pronounced for highly educated women who in other circumstances have much higher participation rates Although for most women the childbearing period has been reduced childbearing still means an interruption of outside work. A longitudinal survey of the lifelong work experience of women indicates that among all women who were years old in only percent had worked at least months out of every year since leaving school. Among married women with children the proportion was still lower dropping to percent. By contrast percent of childless married women in the same group had worked at least months out of every year. Information on job tenure collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics illustrates much the same phenomenon. As of January continuous employment in their current job came to years ( the median ) for women and years for men. Job tenure increases with age for both men and women. At ages and over the median was years for men and years for women. Since women tend to change jobs less frequently than men their shorter time spent on any given job is the result of a higher propensity to leave the labor force at least temporarily. In a survey of women who had dropped out of the labor force in or and had not yet reentered was undertaken by the Labor Department in an effort to find out why they had left. Pregnancy was most frequently cited as the primary reason by percent of the to 24-year-olds and percent of the to 34-year-olds Among married women husband 's income does not have a very pronounced effect on work patterns. The median annual income of husbands with working wives was $ in compared to $ for husbands of wives not in the labor force. Only when husbands ' incomes reach the $ and over category does wives ' participation decline to any noticeable extent. However many other things vary with husbands ' incomes such as wives ' education and age as well as family size. These other factors are sufficiently important to obscure the simple relation between husband 's income and a wife 's tendency to work. It should be noted however that during a time of hardship such as when a husband experiences a prolonged spell of unemployment wives who usually do not work may be compelled to work Thus the labor force participation of women with unemployed husbands is generally above that of women with employed husbands Although the probability that a black woman will work seems to vary with education and presence of children in much the same way as it does for all women there is one very striking difference : the labor force participation of black women is higher. Particularly pronounced differences are observed when the comparison of labor force participation is confined to married women living with their husbands. In March about percent of black wives were in the labor force compared to percent of white wives. One important reason why this difference prevails may be that the earnings of black wives are closer to their husbands ' than is the case among white married couples. In black married women who worked year-round full-time earned percent as much as black married men who worked year-round full-time. Among whites the percentage was only percent. Behind these relationships is the fact that black men earn considerably less than white men while black women 's earnings are much closer to white women 's earnings UNEMPLOYMENT Women have generally experienced more unemployment than men and this differential has been more pronounced in recent years ( Table ) However the source of women 's unemployment differs from that of men 's and this makes a comparison of unemployment differences more complex than might appear T A B L E Unemployment rates by sex and age selected years [ Percent Sex and age All workers Men... years years years years and over. Women. years years years years and over. * Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Some of the difference arises from the way people are classified in our unemployment statistics. A person with a job is not classified as unemployed even though he or she may be searching for another job. However work at home is not counted as a job. Thus a woman who may in a real sense be clearly employed in the home while she searches for a job will be counted as unemployed unlike the man who searches while on his job Most adult men are continuously in the labor force and therefore become unemployed because they have either quit or lost their jobs ( Table ) For women the picture is different : labor force participation is frequently interrupted sometimes for several years but sometimes just for several weeks during the year. Thus although percent of the women years old were in the labor force at one time or another during only percent were in the labor force for weeks during the year. This high rate of labor force turnover generates unemployment and it is not surprising to find that in both the tight labor market of and the looser labor market of a considerable portion of unemployed women were T A B L E Distribution of unemployment of adult men and women by reason for and unemployment [ Percent ] Women years and over Men years and over Reason for unemployment Unemployment rate ^ Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Reentrants New entrants Job losers Job leavers Separated from a j o b Total unemployment Labor force entrants, labor force entrants ( Table ) People entering or reentering the labor force tend however to be unemployed for relatively short periods and this is one of the reasons why the duration of unemployment is in general shorter for women than for men ( Table ) Table Unemployment of adult men and women by duration and reason Percent of total unemployment Sex age and reason Total unemployment ( thousands ) Men years and over Unemployment of less than weeks Unemployment of weeks and over Women years and over Lost last job Left last job Reentered labor force Never worked before Lost last job Left last job Reentered labor force Never worked before Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics In order to know what significance to attach to the observation that the greater unemployment of women appears to be related to their greater labor force turnover it is of course necessary to know more about the causes of the turnover. Some have stressed that excessive labor force turnover indicates a poor job market. According to this view women drop out of the labor market because lack of opportunities has discouraged them from continuing the search. Evidence for this point of view is cited from Labor Department surveys which indicate that some of those women out of the labor force are there because they do not believe they could find work. In women or percent of those out of the labor force were reported in this category Another school of thought however stresses that the labor force turnover of women and the unemployment it generates is largely induced by factors external to the current labor market such as the uneven pressures of home responsibilities. Several kinds of evidence support this point of view. Unemployment among women appears to be related to the nature of home responsibilities. For example in the unemployment rate for married women with children under years was percent compared to the rate of percent for married women with no children under years. Moreover on numerous surveys women cite pregnancy home responsibilities or husband 's relocation as primary reasons for leaving the job or the labor force It would of course be interesting to know more about the unemployment experience of women who do remain continuously in the labor force. Some evidence from the Labor Department 's longitudinal survey indicates that women who were in the labor force in both and had considerably lower unemployment in than those who were in the labor force in but not in The unemployment rate in for the group who were also in the labor force years previously was percent compared to the rate of percent for the women who were in the labor force only in However this was still above the rate of percent for men years old and over in as measured by the household survey Although movement in and out of the labor force is probably the most important factor leading to higher unemployment for women compared to men two other factors seem to be important. Women with less time on a job and in whom the employer had made negligible training investments are more vulnerable to layoffs. Finally one additional factor which doubtless contributes to unemployment of married women is the difficulty in maximizing employment opportunities for both the husband and the wife A wife seldom is free to migrate to wherever her own prospects are best It is important to emphasize because the point is often misunderstood that to explain the unemployment of women is not to excuse it or belittle it or to place blame on the women who are unemployed. The unemployment of women who seek work is costly to themselves their families and the Nation. Our goal should be to reduce this unemployment wherever that can be done by means which are not themselves more costly. Some unemployment entails more loss for the workers involved and to the economy as a whole than other ; some is more amenable to correction by the persons directly affected than other unemployment. But these distinctions do not run along sex lines THE WIDENING IN THE REPORTED MALE-FEMALE UNEMPLOYMENT DIFFERENTIAL During the 's the differential in reported unemployment between women and men widened. Two factors may help to explain the change The first has to do with changes in the unemployment survey questionnaire introduced in Persons are classified as unemployed if they have not worked during the survey week were available to work during the survey week and had made specific efforts to find a job such as looking in the " want-ads " section of the newspaper or going to an employment agency. Prior to the period of jobseeking efforts was not specified and it is believed that many respondents interpreted the question narrowly to mean that one had to have looked for a job in the week just prior to the survey. In the unemployment question was changed by specifying weeks preceding the survey as the point of reference. Data from samples taken on both the old and new basis are available for In that year the unemployment rate for women aged years or older was percentage points higher on the new basis than on the old. This increase in the rate for women as a result of the change in the questionnaire has been interpreted as reflecting the likelihood that the jobseeking activities of women are more intermittent As a result of lengthening the reference period to weeks persons who had briefly looked for work but who were not actively seeking work by the time of the survey week would be added to the unemployed under the new definition Although the reported unemployment of some men may also have been increased as a result of the effective lengthening of the unemployment reference period other changes in the questionnaire in which were evidently unimportant for women seemed to reduce the reported unemployment of men. Indeed these changes were of sufficient importance that the net effect was to lower the unemployment rate for men years old and over by percentage points. The unemployment rate for men was evidently lowered for two reasons : By a reclassification from unemployed to employed of persons absent from work because of a vacation or a labor dispute but at the same time looking for work ; and by the fact that persons stating that they had given up the search for work were no longer counted as unemployed The samples indicate that as a result of the changes in the unemployment questionnaire which increased the rate for women and lowered the rate for men the reported male-female unemployment differential comparing men and women years old and over increased from percentage points to percentage points. We can not of course be sure that effects of the same precise magnitude have persisted ever since the new definitions were substituted in However the definitional change has undoubtedly contributed to a wider unemployment differential since the late 19605s Another factor contributing to the widening of the unemployment differential may be the rapid increase in the labor force participation of women during the 's since its effect was to increase the proportion of women entering or reentering the labor force with an accompanying increase in unemployment EDUCATION AND THE OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION Some of the hesitancy of women to enter or to stay in the labor force is undoubtedly the result of societally determined factors that restrict the possibilities open to them. The low representation of women in positions of responsibility is striking. Despite gradual gains progress has not been sufficient to alter the picture significantly ( Table ) Exactly how much of this situation has been imposed on women because of prejudice and how much of it derives from a voluntary adjustment to a life divided between home responsibilities and work remains obscure. The existence of discriminatory TABLE Women as a percent of persons in several professional and managerial occupations [ Percent ] Occupational group Clergymen College presidents professors and instructors * Dentists Editors and reporters Engineers Lawyers and judges Managers manufacturing industries Physicians ( ) ( ) ( ) i Data for and probably include some teachers in schools below collegiate rank. The Office of Education estimates the figure closer to percent > Less than one tenth of percent Note. Data are from the decennial censuses. Data for and include persons years of age and over ; data for to include persons years of age and over Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census barriers may discourage women from seeking the training or adopting the life style it would take to achieve a responsible and highly demanding job On the other hand women who expect to marry and have children and who also put their role at home first are subject to considerable uncertainty about their future attachment to the labor force. In the latter case incentives to train extensively for a career would be few ; and once such women started working the restrictions imposed by home responsibilities could limit their ability to take a job requiring long hours or the intensive commitment that most high-status positions demand. At the same time changes in the accepted social roles of men and women would alter current patterns if they changed women 's expectations about their future in the labor force For whatever reasons from school onward the career orientation of women differs strikingly from that of men. Most women do not have as strong a vocational emphasis in their schooling ; and for those who do the preparation is usually for a stereotyped " female " occupation Although the probability of graduating from high school has been somewhat greater for women than for men it is less probable that a woman will complete college and still less that she will enter graduate school. The representation of women consequently declines as they move upward through the stages of education beyond high school. In percent of all high school graduates were women and percent of first-year college students were women. During women earned percent of the bachelor 's degrees granted percent of the master 's degrees and percent of the doctorates Even more striking are the differences in the courses taken. At both the undergraduate and advanced levels women are heavily represented in English languages and fine arts the more general cultural fields. They are poorly represented in disciplines having a strong vocational emphasis and promising a high pecuniary return. In percent of the baccalaureates in business and percent of the master 's in business went to women In the biological sciences women had a larger share taking about percent of the bachelor 's and master 's degrees and percent of the doctorates But only percent of the M.D. 's and percent of the law degrees went to women. Most of these percentages low as they are represent large gains from the preceding year The situation is quite different in the so-called women 's occupations. In women received percent of the B.A. 's and percent of the M.A. 's given in education. In library science which is even more firmly dominated by women they received percent of all degrees in And in nursing percent of all the degrees went to women It is not surprising then to find that women do not have anything like the same occupational distribution as men. Even within an educational level significant differences remain in the distribution across broad occupational categories ( Table ) Although percent of women college graduates in were in the professions mostly as teachers only percent compared to percent for men were classified as managers. At high school levels the proportion of women working as skilled craftsmen is minuscule although a substantial proportion of women are blue-collar workers in the lower paying operative categories The supplement to this chapter appearing in Appendix A summarizes in detail women 's representation in occupations more narrowly defined. Although women are found in all occupations the extent of occupational segregation by sex is large. In broad outline this situation does not appear to have undergone any dramatic change between and although there are several examples of large increases in the proportion of women in less typically " female " occupations ( for example busdrivers bartenders and compositors and typesetters ) TABLE Occupational distribution of employed persons by education and sex [ Percent ! College graduates High school Occupational groups Men Total employed Professional .technical and kindred workers Managers and proprietors _ Salesworkers Clerical and kindred workers Craftsmen Operatives Nonfarm laborers Farm laborers and foremen Farmers and farm managers Service workers excluding private household Private household service workers Women Less than one tenth of percent Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census years years Men Men Women Women ) ( Casual observation of individual occupations can not of course provide a comprehensive indication of whether the occupational distributions of men and women involving numerous occupations have moved closer together or further apart. To help answer this question an index was constructed and calculated for and which reflects the difference ( for occupations ) between the occupational distributions of men and women The index displays a small move toward occupational similarity between and ( See the supplement to this chapter included in Appendix A for a more detailed description of the index. ) Another question of interest is whether the changes in the occupational distributions of men and women were in the direction of higher economic status and if so how far they went. Some insight into this question is obtained by calculating an index which reflects what earnings would have been in and if earnings were the same in all years and only the occupational distributions changed. Median earnings for yearround full-time workers in each of broad occupational categories were used as the constant weights to calculate such an index. The results indicated that the occupational distributions of both men and women shifted in the direction of higher-earnings occupations from to and from to However in the earlier period men moved ahead in this respect faster than women while in the second period the changes were similar for both EARNINGS In annual median earnings for women years old and over were $ or percent of the median earnings of men. But women work fewer hours per week and fewer weeks per year. If the comparison is restricted to year-round full-time workers women 's earnings are percent of men 's that is $ compared to $ An additional adjustment for differences in the average full-time workweek full-time hours for men were about percent higher than for women brings the female-male ratio to percent in Differentials of this order of magnitude appear to have persisted since ( Table ) Indeed a slight increase in the differential seems to have occurred from to Part of the source of the increasing differential was the relatively low rate of growth in the earnings of female clerical workers and female operatives who in accounted for percent and percent respectively of all women workers. On the other hand the rate of growth of earnings of women in the professions was high ( a 5.1-percent annual compound rate between and ) relative to all workers ; more recently it was even high relative to male professionals TABLE Ratio of total money earnings of civilian women workers to earnings of civilian men workers selected years \ ctual ratios Occupational group Adjusted ratios i Total * Professional workers and technical Teachers primary and secondary schools Managers officials and proprietors Clerical workers Sales workers. Craftsmen and foreman Operatives Service workers excluding private household workers Adjusted for differences in average full-time hours worked since full-time hours for women are typically less than full-time hours for men Total includes occupational groups not shown separately Not available * Base too small to be statistically significant Note. Data relate to civilian workers who are employed full-time year-round. Data for include salaried workers only while data for later years include both salaried and self-employed workers Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics and Council of Economic Advisers A large differential is also evident when the comparison is restricted to men and women of the same age and education. As Chart indicates the incomes of women do not increase with age in anything like the same way men 's do. Thus the differential widens with age through much of the working life One important factor influencing the differential is experience. The lack of continuity in women 's attachment to the labor force means that they will not have accumulated as much experience as men at a given age. The relatively steeper rise of men 's income with age has been attributed to their greater accumulation of experience of " human capital " acquired on the job Since very few women have participated in the labor force to the same degree as men it is difficult to set up direct comparisons between the earnings of men and women with the same lifetime pattern of work. Using data from the Labor Department 's longitudinal study of women referred to above one study was able to compare the earnings of women working different amounts of time throughout their lives with the earnings of men most of whom are presumed to work continuously after leaving school. The figures for men were taken from census data. The women 's lifetime work experience was measured as the percentage of years each had worked since leaving school. However a work year was crudely defined as one in which the women had worked at least months. Thus no adjustment could be made for whether the years worked had been truly full-time commitments with respect to both hours worked per week and weeks worked per year Chart Annual Income by Age for Male and Female High School and College Graduates DOLLARS y ( RATIO SCALE ) MEN COLLEGE YEARS AND OVER WOMEN COLLEGE YEARS AND OVER \ WOMEN HIGH SCHOOL YEARS _L _L AND OVER YEARS OF AGE J / M E D I A N INCOME OF FULL-TIME YEAR-ROUND WORKERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Among the women years old in the survey the gain from continuous work was apparently very large. If we look only at those women who had worked year-round full-time in the median wage and salary income for the group who had worked each year since leaving school was $ ; for those who had worked less than percent of the years since leaving school ( almost half the group ) the median income was $ The median wage and salary income of men in the same age group who had worked full-time year-round in was $ The men are presumed to have worked continuously since leaving school. Thus the women who had worked less than half of the years since leaving school earned only percent as much as men while the small group of women who had worked each year earned percent as much as men. Interestingly single women who had worked each year since leaving school earned slightly more than single men More sophisticated comparisons adjusting for additional differences in training continuity at work and education can be made. One recent study found that the earnings differential was reduced to below percent after taking account of such differences The importance of lifetime accumulated experience in influencing women 's earnings suggests one possible explanation for the small decline in the ratio of women 's to men 's earnings between and Since the labor force participation of women has been rising rapidly an increasing proportion of new entrants and of those with few accumulated years in the labor force could have resulted in a decline in the average experience level of all women. This drop would in turn temporarily push down the average level of earnings for all women. Unfortunately the data are not available to compare the ratio over a period of time between the earnings of women having a given number of years ' experience and the earnings of men DIRECT DISCRIMINATION VERSUS ROLE DIFFERENTIATION A differential perhaps on the order of percent between the earnings of men and women remains after adjusting for factors such as education work experience during the year and even lifelong work experience. How much of this differential is due to differences in experience or in performance on the job which could not be measured adequately and how much to discrimination ? The question is difficult to answer in part because there are differences of opinion about what should be classified as discrimination Some studies have succeeded in narrowing the male-female differential well below percent. Indeed Department of Labor surveys have found that the differential almost disappears when men 's and women 's earnings are compared within detailed job classifications and within the same establishment. In the very narrow sense of equal pay for the same job in the same plant there may be little difference between women and men. However in this way the focus of the problem is shifted but not eliminated for then we must explain why women have such a different job structure from men and why they are employed in different types of establishments There is clearly prejudice against women engaging in particular activities. Some patients reject women doctors some clients reject women lawyers some customers reject automobile saleswomen and some workers reject women bosses. Employers also may have formulated discriminatory attitudes about women exaggerating the risk of job instability or client acceptance and therefore excluding women from on-the-job training which would advance their careers In fact even if employers do estimate correctly the average job turnover of women women who are strongly committed to their jobs may suffer from " statistical discrimination " by being treated as though their own behavior resembled the average. The extent to which this type of discrimination occurs depends on how costly it is for employers to distinguish women who will have a strong job commitment from those who will not. Finally because some occupations restrict the number of newcomers they take in and because women move in and out of the labor force more often more women than men tend to fall into the newcomer category and to be thus excluded. For example restrictive entry policies may have kept women out of the skilled crafts On the other hand as discussed above some component of the earnings differential and of the occupational differential stems from differences in role orientation which start with differences in education and continue through marriage where women generally are expected to assume primary responsibility for the home and subordinate their own outside work to their household responsibilities It is not now possible to distinguish in a quantitative way between the discrimination which bars women from jobs solely because of their sex and the role differentiation whereby women either through choice or necessity restrict their careers because of the demands of their homes. Some may label the latter as a pervasive societal discrimination which starts in the cradle ; nonetheless it is useful to draw the distinction One other missing link in our chain of understanding of these problems is the value of the work done at home by women. One study has found that women college graduates tend to reduce their outside work when their children are small more than less educated women and that they also devote more time to the training of their children. Of course this pattern is undoubtedly facilitated by the higher income of their husbands. However this pattern also results in a considerable sacrifice of earnings and one may infer that these women have therefore placed a very high value on the personal attention they can give their children. Without more information it is difficult to evaluate the full extent to which women 's capabilities have actually been underutilized by society SPECIAL PROBLEMS THE FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLD In some million families about percent of all families were headed by women. These women are widowed divorced separated or single and many have responsibilities for the support of children in fatherless families or of other relatives. Close to two-thirds of all female-headed families include children ; the average number of children under years of age in a female-headed family with children was about in about the same as in male-headed families with children As a result of the division of labor within families the average woman who has been married has not had the same labor market experience or vocationally oriented training as her husband. Unless she has a substantial alimony or pension she is likely to face financial difficulties. The median income of female-headed families was $ in less than half the in come of male-headed families ( $ ) When women who head families were full-time year-round workers the family 's median income was $ ; but only percent of women heading families were able to be full-time year-round workers. And the woman who heads a family and works has additional expenses of child care and other home care expenses The problems faced by the woman who heads a household are particuarly acute if the woman is black and percent of women heading households are black. For this group median family income was only $ in Although at higher education levels black women now earn amounts comparable to white women those black women who head families are at a disadvantage compared to white women. The median personal income of white women heading households and working year-round fulltime was $ in compared to $ for black women in the same position As a result of the combination of a large number of dependents and the difficulty of maintaining the dual responsibility of monetary support and home care many female-headed families fall below the low-income level In percent of female-headed families were below the low-income level compared to percent for male-headed families. Among black households with a female head percent were below the low-income level. A large proportion receive public assistance. In percent of the women heading households received public assistance payments It has been suggested though not proved that widespread availability of public assistance has encouraged husbands to desert their wives or wives to leave their husbands in families where the husband earns little more than the amount of welfare benefits his family would be entitled to in his absence. Remarriage may also be discouraged because the low-income mother would then lose her entire public stipend including the child support portion and without some outside child support a man might be reluctant to marry a woman with several children Among the women who are now welfare recipients many are handicapped by lack of education and training and are not in a position to earn an income that would lift them and their families above poverty levels. A program established in the Work Incentive Program now gives many mothers currently on welfare training and placement assistance so that they can improve their ability to support themselves and their dependents THE INCOME TAX Devising a tax system which is equitable and efficient has always posed formidable problems and often the best solution is one involving compromise with one or more of the objectives. The tax treatment of working wives is one of the more difficult problems. The income tax law as such treats men and women equally and indeed its effects on single men and single women are the same. However some of the features of the tax structure which have been considered desirable for other purposes have as a by-product unequal effects on the second earner of a married couple who is usually the wife Only income arising from market transactions is taxed. Indeed there is no practical way to assign a market value to the unpaid work performed at home and then subject it to the tax. As a result the tax system imposes a general bias in the economy favoring unpaid work at home compared to paid work in the market. However the bias and the resulting disincentive toward market work are particularly relevant for the married woman who traditionally has done more work at home An equity problem also arises from this situation. To use a hypothetical example a husband and wife each earning $ would pay the same income tax as a couple where the husband alone works and earns $ although the couple with two earners will have the additional expenses of buying the services which would be produced at home and untaxed if the wife did not work There is the further problem that a married couple may pay more or less income tax than two single persons whose combined income equals the couple 's depending upon how the income is divided between the two individuals. This problem reflects a basic ambivalence about whether the appropriate unit of taxation is the individual or the family Remedies for the situation are not easy to find. One suggestion has been to allow working wives to deduct a given percentage of their earnings from their income for tax purposes. However this would be unfair to single persons who also incur expenses of going to work. A general earned income credit has also been suggested but this creates a bias against investments in capital and in favor of wage income As discussed below the Revenue Act of has given expanded tax relief to working wives with children by allowing more liberalized child care deductions to couples within a given income range. This provision however does not affect couples without children or couples with combined incomes outside the allowable income range CHILD CARE Provision for child care is a cost to working mothers and a major obstacle to the employment of many other mothers who would work outside the home if they could find satisfactory arrangements for taking care of their children. As more mothers have taken jobs outside the home and more weigh the possibility of doing so several major questions about child care have become intense national issues One question is whether the Government should pay for part or all of the cost of child care. This question is usually raised about the Federal Government but it could be equally asked about State or local governments According to one view of the matter parents have chosen to have children which implies a certain allocation of their resources therefore they have no reason to burden other taxpayers to look after the children. Another view of Digitized490-000 O for FRASER the matter is that Government subsidies can be justified and different groups have cited different reasons. The point has been made that the pressures of custom result in a bias against the wife going to work while the husband stays home with the children. A child-care subsidy for working mothers would help remove any harmful effects of this cultural bias. Another reason given is that there is a national interest in the proper care of children who are of course the future nation and that this case justifies Government subsidies. The analogy commonly given is to public education Government has given subsidies to families with children but there has been no consistent philosophy behind them. At the extreme with respect to children in very poor families we have long recognized the need for public assistance in the form of the program of Aid to Families with Dependent Children. This program is not specifically addressed to children with working mothers. In fact until recently it was tilted against helping working mothers. The Federal Government also provides a form of assistance for child care through the income tax. With the Revenue Act of a much more liberal deduction than had ever been provided was instituted specifically for child-care expenses incurred by working wives. Below a combined husband-wife income of $ a working wife can now deduct up to $ a month for child care expenses. The deduction is scaled downwards to zero as combined income goes from $ to $ The two groups not covered are women whose family income is too low to benefit from a tax deduction and women at the other end of the income scale Public discussion of Government support for child care has not clearly distinguished among several possible objectives : ( a ) To reward and assist the care of all small children ; ( b ) To assist the care of small children whose parents might not be otherwise able to care for them ; ( c ) To assist the care of the small children of working mothers ; ( d ) To assist in the care of small children in a particular way through day-care institutions or at home etc Both the amount of Government support that is desirable and the form it should take if it is to be provided depend on the choice made among these objectives Recently publicly supported institutional group care or day care has received considerable attention as one approach to helping the working mother. Some have also stressed day care as a developmental program. It may be noted that a very small proportion of working women have depended on group day care in an institutional center. A Government-sponsored survey of found that among employed mothers of children under only percent depended on school or group care centers. About percent of the women arranged to have their children cared for at home often by a relative. The rest mainly arranged for care in someone else 's home ( percent ) or looked after the child while working ( percent ) Some have attributed the low use of day care to a failure of the market to provide a service that would be utilized if financing were available Others have interpreted it as an indication that the true demand for institutional day care is low. Even among more affluent and knowledgeable working mothers who presumably could afford it dependence on institutional group care is low. A survey of college graduates found that in among those who worked and who had children under years percent used group care which included nursery schools kindergartens and day-care centers. Most ( percent ) arranged for care in their own home Whether institutional day care provides the best use of dollars spent on child care has yet to be established. While this issue has not been resolved it is clear that the problems of mothers who want and need to work require serious attention and a continuing search for new solutions GOVERNMENT ACTION Government has been profoundly concerned with promoting full equality of opportunity for women within both the public and the private sectors Two approaches have been followed. The first involves the use of law and regulations where they are both applicable and compatible with other goals of a democratic society A number of laws have been passed and Executive Orders issued which deal with discrimination by employers. Included are the Equal Pay Act of requiring employers to compensate men and women in the same establishment equally for work of equivalent skill and responsibility and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of which prohibits discrimination in hiring discharging compensation and other aspects of employment. Title VII is administered by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ( EEOC ) The Equal Employment Opportunity Act signed by the President in gave the EEOC enforcement power through the courts in sexdiscrimination cases. In December Order No. under Executive Order was extended to women. This Order requires Federal contractors employing more than workers and holding contracts of $ or more to formulate written affirmative action plans with goals and timetables to ensure equal opportunities. Title IX of the Education Amendments of prohibits discrimination in educational programs or activities on the basis of sex The Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution which was strongly supported by the President passed the Senate on March and has now been ratified by States. The proposed amendment would provide that " equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex " and would authorize the Congress and the States to enforce the amendment by appropriate legislation. The purpose of the proposed amendment would be to provide constitutional protection against laws and official practices that treat men and women differently Ill The other approach of Government to providing equality to women has been through leadership. The Women 's Bureau in the Department of Labor has for years been concerned with the problems of women at work. Recently several new groups each concerned with different areas affecting women have been formed. The formation of the Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women is one such effort. The Citizen 's Advisory Council on the Status of Women is another. The latter is a council of private citizens appointed by the President which surveys the social and political issues of particular interest to women and makes recommendations for legislation or other suitable social action. In an effort to recruit women to top-level jobs in the Government the President in appointed to the White House staff a special assistant for this purpose. As a result many women have been placed in key policy making positions positions never before held by women It is only in the past few years that the problems women face as a group have been given the widespread recognition they deserve. There is much to be learned before we can even ask all the appropriate questions. Many of the problems involve profound issues of family and social organization. By listening to diverse groups and to the discussion of the public it is hoped that Government will be able to find its appropriate role. We believe that the newly formed Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women will contribute to that process CHAPTER The International Economic System in Transition T HE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY of the United States had two major objectives in One was to improve the U.S. balance of payments which had reached a record deficit of nearly $ billion in The other was to make progress on reform of the international economic system affecting monetary trade and investment relationships. The existing system has been unable to cope with shifting patterns of trade and imbalances in international payments which have resulted in repeated international economic and political tensions The groundwork for progress on both fronts had been laid in December of when the world 's major industrialized countries met at the Smithsonian Institution. For the short term the participants agreed on a realignment of exchange rates among the major currencies to relieve the existing disequilibrium in international payments. For the long term they agreed to enter into multilateral negotiations on reform of the international economic system The overall balance-of-payments position of the United States while still far from equilibrium began to improve in The improvement which was all in the capital account was largely the result of a sharp reduction over in speculative outflows of capital. Domestic economic policies which curtailed the rate of inflation the realignment of exchange rates and renewed confidence in international monetary relationships all contributed to this improvement. The trade and current account deficits of the United States however were considerably larger in than in although they levelled off during the year. The year-over-year deterioration in these accounts stemmed primarily from the rapid growth of the U.S. economy and a lag in the economic recovery of some of the other major countries Progress was also made during on the longer-term reform objective Agreement was reached on a format for international monetary negotiations. Discussions on the characteristics of a revised international monetary system are now underway and the United States has set forth a number of proposals. The major industrialized countries have also agreed to initiate multilateral trade negotiations in the fall of Finally these same countries have agreed to explore new forms of cooperation on internal policies which affect trade and investment among nations THE U.S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS IN As this Report goes to press official data for the U.S. balance of payments are available only for the first quarters of These figures shown in Table indicate tKat at annual rates Americans imported $ billion in goods and services during the first months of while foreigners purchased $ billion in U.S. goods and services. On balance therefore Americans obtained $ billion more goods and services abroad than they provided to the rest of the world. In addition U.S. Government grants and other types of unilateral transfers to foreigners exceeded similar transfers to the United States by $ billion and U.S. investments in long-term assets abroad exceeded foreign investments in U.S. long-term assets by $ billion Moreover recorded short-term capital movements nonrecorded transactions and allocations of Special Drawing Rights ( SDR 's ) together resulted in a net outflow of $ billion. Overall therefore American balance-of-payments expenditures exceeded receipts by $ billion. Virtually the whole deficit in the U.S. balance of payments on the official reserve transactions basis was financed by increased dollar holdings of foreign central banks TABLE U.S. balance.of.payments transactions [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts first quarters Type of transaction Payments Balance Receipts Payments Balance Goods Services Military transactions3 Investment income Other GOODS AND SERVICES _'.l Unilateral transfers net CURRENT ACCOUNT Long-term capital US Government6 Direct investment Other private CURRENT ACCOUNT AND LONGTERM CAPITAL Short-term nonliquid capital Short-term liquid capital Errors and unrecorded transactions net Allocations of SDR 's TOTAL Seasonally adjusted annual rates Excludes transfers under military grants s Includes direct investment fees and royalties * Excludes military grants of goods and services * Excludes official reserve transactions and includes transactions in some short-term U.S. Government assets Less than $ billion Equals official reserve transactions balance Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce THE GOODS-AND-SERVICES ACCOUNT IN For the goods-and-services account preliminary estimates are available for the full year These figures differ slightly from those in Table which are annual rates based on data for the first quarters. These preliminary estimates indicate that the United States imported about $ 4j/s> billion more goods and services than it exported. U.S. imports of goods exceeded exports by about $ billion in while exports of services exceeded imports by about $ 25/2 billion. These figures represent a substantial deterioration in the goods-and-services account from the full year On a quarterly basis net imports increased from $ billion in the first quarter of to $ billion in the second quarter and then declined to $ million in the third quarter and remained at about the same level in the fourth. When exports and imports are calculated in volume terms by adjusting for price changes the quarterly decline in net imports begins somewhat sooner ( in the first quarter rather than the second ) and is more marked over the course of the year The figures just cited give early indications that the dollar devaluation reinforced by a lower rate of inflation in the United States than in other major industrialized countries in is beginning to affect U.S exports and imports. The fact remains however that the U.S. trade deficit was much larger in than had been expected after the realignment of exchange rates. Cyclical developments in the United States and abroad were a major reason for this disappointment. Nominal gross national product ( GNP ) in the United States grew by nearly percent in compared to * percent in and percent in Thus while changes in relative prices reduced the attractiveness of foreign goods compared to domestic goods the level of imports continued to increase with the rapid rise in the overall demand for goods in the U.S. economy. At the same time a number of major industrial countries experienced lower than normal rates of growth in which tended to hold down the increase in their demand for U.S. goods Apart from the effects of these cyclical developments the response to any devaluation is generally delayed. First it takes some time before a devaluation is reflected in the relative prices obtained by exporters and paid by importers. In the short run to protect their market shares foreign exporters frequently do not increase their list price in the U.S. market by the full amount of devaluation. Conversely foreign importers frequently do not reduce their list price of U.S. goods in the foreign market by the full amount of the devaluation Second when the change in relative prices does occur its initial impact is likely to be perverse because a devaluation raises the dollar prices of imported goods and services before the volume of exports and imports responds to the changes in relative prices. In time the effect of devaluation on real trade flows is expected to outweigh the change in prices. It is because of this sequence of events that one expects the trade balance of a devaluing country to improve in real or volume terms before it improves in value terms which is what happened in In the case of the United States the trade deficit in was also affected by long-run changes in the demand for basic materials. In particular domestic production of fuels has not kept pace with the growth of the U.S economy and consequently net imports of fuels increased from $ billion in the first months of to $ billion in the first months of Although U.S. exports of agricultural products have also expanded rapidly they have not fully offset this increased demand for fuels. On balance long-term changes in trade patterns have tended to make the elimination of the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit more difficult THE CAPITAL ACCOUNT IN Returning to the balance-of-payments figures in Table the net outflow of capital from the United States fell from $ billion in to an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarters of This sharp reduction was due to several factors First the realignment of exchange rates and the preservation of international monetary cooperation among the major countries reestablished confidence in international monetary relationships. Investors had less incentive to hedge against the risk of a change in exchange rates or the imposition of new restraints on capital transfers and some investors were induced to bring back funds transferred abroad in for hedging purposes Second a tightening of credit conditions in the United States relative to some major European countries led to a reversal in the flow of interestsensitive funds. In line with this trend foreign banks placed liquid funds in the U.S. money market Third the rapid expansion of the U.S. economy created improved investment opportunities in the United States and sluggish rates of growth in a number of major foreign countries reduced incentives for U.S. investment in these countries. In particular the improved economic prospects in the United States made purchases of U.S. stocks more attractive to foreigners These factors affected both short-term capital movements which recorded a net inflow of $ billion at an annual rate in the first quarters of compared to a net outflow of $ billion in and long-term capital flows which recorded net outflows of $ billion at an annual rate in the first quarters of compared to $ billion in FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET DEVELOPMENTS IN When the supply of a currency exceeds the demand its value tends to drop in foreign exchange markets and when the demand exceeds the supply its value rises. In order to hold currency values in the foreign exchange market within certain limits governments other than the United States have followed the practice of entering the market as buyers or sellers of their own currency whenever its value in terms of U.S. dollars falls or rises beyond a certain range. On the basis of the Smithsonian Agreement that range was established as a maximum deviation of plus or minus % percent from the announced parity or central rate of that currency vis-a-vis the dollar ; a total of ^ percent Movements in the exchange rate between the dollar and the major foreign currencies can be seen in Table Chart shows the movements of the currencies of the European Community ( EC ) The EC countries have agreed to keep their currencies within a maximum range of ^ percent of each other which is half the maximum spread allowed between any two currencies other than the dollar by the Smithsonian Agreement. This narrowed intra-European band of fluctuation is generally known as the " EC snake in the Smithsonian tunnel. " Chart Movement of European Community Exchange Rates PERCENT DEVIATION FROM SMITHSONIAN RATES STRONGEST EC CURRENCY I I I I I I I I I I I I I M i l I I I ll I I I II II II I I I JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC STERLING CRISIS NOTE : DATA RELATE TO FRIDAY RATES IN THE EXCHANGE MARKETS OF COUNTRIES BELONGING TO THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY ( EC ) SOURCE : TREASURY DEPARTMENT T A B L E Percent deviations of major foreign currencies from central rates December December [ Currency units per U.S. dollar1 ! Deviation of currency at end of period from central rate Currency Central rate December February British pound Belgian franc Swiss franc.. West German mark French franc Italian lira.. Netherlands guilder Canadian dollar 2_ Japanese yen April August June October December British pound and Canadian dollar are expressed in U.S. dollars per unit of currency. Percent deviations are based on mid-day selling rates in London Measured by deviation from 1-to-l relationship between U.S. dollar and Canadian dollar Less than Source : Treasury Department Changes in reserves of the major countries as well as changes in U.S liabilities to all foreign central banks are shown in Table Changes in reserve holdings of foreign central banks reflect primarily their intervention in the foreign exchange market to keep the value of their currencies within the agreed margins. Changes in U.S. liabilities to foreign central banks show the extent to which foreign central banks have acquired claims against the United States as a result of intervention in the foreign exchange market T A B L E Changes in official reserves for selected countries and changes in U.S. liabilities foreign official reserve holders to change ( billions of dollars ) I Country First quarters Total Third quarter Total official reserve for countries below Belgium Canada Fra nee Italy Japan Netherlands. Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom West Germany Second quarter ^ ( U.S. liabilities to foreign official reserve holders Quarterly changes are based on data for end of quarters Total change for first quarters Total official reserves in the first quarter include SDR allocations of $ billion Second quarter data have been adjusted to reflect sterling outflows which were not recorded until the third quarter Less than $ billion Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : International Monetary Fund The dollar was under downward pressure and conversely most other currencies were under upward pressure at the beginning of the year before the Smithsonian rates had become fully established and during the summer when a loss of confidence in the established value of the pound sterling raised questions about the whole Smithsonian structure of exchange rates During the spring and the latter part of the year the dollar strengthened relative to most other currencies. These movements in the value of the dollar reflected primarily changes in the degree of confidence in existing exchange rates. Changes in credit market conditions in the United States relative to those abroad also played a role Two major currencies did not follow the general pattern described above the British pound and the Japanese yen. The pound sterling came under considerable downward pressure toward the end of June when a number of factors created considerable doubt regarding the long-term viability of the British exchange rate established at the Smithsonian. After losing a considerable amount of foreign exchange in preventing the pound from dropping below the Smithsonian floor the British authorities allowed the pound to float downward in response to market pressures. Over the next months the pound dropped percent below the rate set at the Smithsonian The Japanese yen has been under upward pressure since the end of June reflecting the sizable surplus in the Japanese balance of payments. Throughout the second half of the year the Japanese authorities were required to purchase large amounts of dollars in the foreign exchange market to keep the value of the yen from rising above the Smithsonian ceiling. During this period forward yen rates remained substantially above the Smithsonian ceiling reflecting market uncertainty over the existing yen parity The renewed confidence in existing exchange rates in the latter part of with the two exceptions just described had several causes. One was that the determination of governments to support the Smithsonian rates was reaffirmed in July by a number of major governments. U.S. intervention in the exchange markets on a limited basis and the stated willingness of the United States to take such action when it was desirable as a means of dealing with speculative pressures were important symbols of cooperative support for the Smithsonian Agreement. The fact that the U.S. price performance in was better than that of any of its major partner countries despite our ra pid expansion also contributed to the improvement in confidence during the second half of the year REFORMING THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SYSTEM Changes are required in monetary arrangements in trading arrangements and in procedures for dealing with policies usually considered to be " domestic " but having a significant impact on international transactions. The United States has strongly emphasized not only that reform is needed in all three of these areas but also that the reforms in all three must be considered as part of a single package since policies adopted in one field may complement or conflict with policies in the others. However thinking is now farthest advanced with respect to monetary reform and we devote most of this chapter to it The President has also taken steps to improve the handling of international economic issues within the U.S. Government to take better account of the close interconnections of all aspects of international economic policy with each other and with domestic policy. The recently created Council on Economic Policy will provide a framework for the unified consideration of domestic and international economic issues. The Council on International Economic Policy ( CIEP ) continues to have responsibilities for foreign economic policy within the framework of the Council on Economic Policy and the director of CIEP is a member of the latter group. Other steps to improve the handling of the economic aspects of foreign relations include the appointment of a higher ranking official to be responsible for economic policy in the State Department and the development of more effective procedures for the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies the body which coordinates the foreign lending policies and activities of the U.S. Government THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM The suspension of the convertibility of the dollar into gold on August gave public recognition to the fact that the postwar international monetary arrangements known as the Bretton Woods system had become untenable. Interim arrangements including the negotiation of a multilateral realignment of exchange rates at the Smithsonian Institution in December have been developed but they do not provide a long-term solution to the problems which made changes in the rules of the Bretton Woods system inevitable. The arrangements have greatly facilitated the maintenance of normal international commercial and investment relationships but they do not constitute an adequate system of rules for the international monetary system in the long run A stable international monetary system must meet several major requirements if it is to serve as the basis for the continued expansion of world trade and investment. First it should be market-oriented. For the sake of both efficiency and equity the mechanism for balancing each country 's total foreign exchange receipts and payments over the long run should function in such a way as to minimize interference with individual market transactions Second the settlement of payments balances among countries should be multilateral so that every country can offset its deficits with some countries by means of surpluses with others. To fulfill this condition the system must provide for the ultimate settlement of claims in terms of commonly accepted reserve assets. Such a generalized payments system makes possible a far higher level of international trade and investment transactions than would be feasible if each country had to balance its payments bilaterally with every other country in a network of barter relationships. Third the system should be stable. International commerce frequently entails long-run commitments and hence requires stable expectations about conditions affecting the future profitability of international transactions In order to meet these requirements the international monetary system must fulfill certain specific functions. It must provide an effective and equitable mechanism for adjustment of payments imbalances among countries so that external payments imbalances are not allowed to persist and accumulate. It must also provide international monetary reserves in adequate amounts and in forms acceptable to the participants in the system i.e. international liquidity has to be adequate. If the system permits the creation of too much international money international inflationary pressures will be created ; if too little international money is created deflationary pressure or pressures for restrictions on international transactions will result. Finally the system must operate in such a way as to create and maintain confidence in its continued viability and in the value of the international reserve assets associated with it Characteristics of the Brett on Woods System The Articles of Agreement which established the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in the immediate postwar period reflected a heavy emphasis on the need for stability and confidence in the international monetary system The rules embodied in the Articles dealt primarily with such questions as the conditions under which governments could change their exchange rates or borrow from the Fund to cover deficits or impose exchange restrictions. The primary objective was to prevent arbitrary actions by governments in these areas and in meeting this objective the Articles were highly successful Under the Articles of Agreement governments were obligated to support their exchange rates at agreed parity levels in either of two ways by buying or selling their own currency in the foreign exchange market whenever the rate rose percent above or fell percent below parity or by making their currency convertible into gold or other reserve assets at the request of a foreign official institution. In practice all countries but the United States have supported their currencies by buying or selling them for dollars while the United States has maintained the convertibility of dollars into gold or other reserve assets tied to gold The rules permitted changes in a country 's parity when its balance of payments was in fundamental disequilibrium. In practice the parities were changed only infrequently generally after a prolonged period of disequilibrium in external payments. There was also a widespread belief that because of the importance of the United States in world trade and the central role of the dollar in the international monetary system the United States could not change its exchange rate. In any case since most other countries were pegging their rates to the dollar in the foreign exchange market the United States could not be certain that a change in the price of gold would actually result in a change in the value of the dollar in terms of foreign currencies The Articles of Agreement did not address themselves explicitly to the question of liquidity. The expectation was that as in the past newly mined gold would provide the major source of new official reserves. It was also implicitly assumed that countries would hold certain currencies as additional reserves. There were no arrangements however for reviewing or influencing the growth of liquidity. The growth of reserves was thus dependent on the vagaries of gold markets and on deficits in the balance of payments of reserve currency countries. In practice the U.S. deficits provided the bulk of new reserves for the rest of the world The inadequacies of the system with respect to the process of liquidity creation led to an important step forward with the recent creation of Special Drawing Rights ( SDR 's ) an internationally created obligation of the International Monetary Fund. With the establishment of SDR 's the system no longer had to rely on a persistent deficit in the U.S. balance of payments for the creation of new reserves. The creation of SDR 's could not in itself restore equilibrium to international payments however since provisions for the adjustment of payments imbalances remained inadequate The Articles of Agreement were not very explicit about the circumstances under which countries should take action to remove balance-of-payments deficits or surpluses. The assumption was that deficit countries would sooner or later run out of reserves or borrowing facilities and therefore would have to adjust. However surplus countries could postpone adjustment as long as they were willing to accumulate reserves. Since the major deficit country the United States could not adjust its exchange rate without endangering the operation of the system and since most of the surplus countries were persistently reluctant to change their own rates the disequilibrium in world payments increased through the latter half of the 's until it reached a breaking point in mid-1971. At that time the disequilibrium became so large that speculative pressures caused billions of dollars to be exchanged for foreign currencies within a few days. These currency movements greatly increased U.S. liabilities to foreign official institutions and further reduced the stock of U.S. reserve assets. This brought to a head a problem which had been developing for some time : how to maintain convertibility as the stock of dollars held by foreign official institutions grew and the United States ' own stock of reserve assets mainly gold shrank On August the President announced a suspension of the convertibility of the dollar into gold or SDR 's. This action withdrew U.S. support from the old exchange rates between the dollar and other foreign currencies and in effect put the dollar on a floating basis. Subsequently a new set of exchange rates was agreed upon at the Smithsonian Institution and as part of that realignment the United States agreed to increase the U.S. official price of gold from $ to $ an ounce. This 8.5-percent increase in the price of gold was signed into law on March The United States has not resumed the convertibility of the dollar but has said that it will undertake appropriate convertibility obligations in the context of a suitably reformed international monetary system provided that the U.S. balance-of-payments and reserve positions improve sufficiently to make such an undertaking viable Preparations for International Monetary Reform Some of the major problems to be dealt with in a reform of the international monetary system as well as a number of approaches to their solution were examined in a report submitted by the Executive Directors of the International Monetary Fund to the Board of Governors in August At about the same time the member countries of the International Monetary Fund agreed to create a committee to conduct negotiations on reform. This committee the Committee of Twenty is patterned after the representational system used in the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund where the membership is broken down into twenty constituencies each with a single spokesman to act on behalf of all the countries in the constituency Although some of the constituencies are formed by single large countries as is true with the United States most comprise several smaller countries The first meeting of this new group was held at the annual session of the International Monetary Fund in September ; this was followed by several meetings of deputies who expect to prepare a draft outline of the main reform proposals in time for the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund U.S. Ideas on International Monetary Reform In order to help get the negotiation process underway the United States has advanced some general proposals on reform. The U.S. approach is evolutionary seeking to build on existing principles and practices where they have proved useful and have met with international approval. At the same time it proposes certain important changes to ensure the viability of the new system. The primary emphasis is on the creation of an effective and evenhanded mechanism for the adjustment of payments imbalances that would place all countries surplus and deficit alike under agreed and broadly symmetrical rules and responsibilities for taking action to restore equilibrium. In the U.S. view the most promising approach is a system in which disproportionate changes in a nation 's reserves in either direction indicate the need for measures to eliminate the payments imbalance. Within such a system of symmetrical adjustment discipline the U.S. approach would allow considerable diversity in the choice of instruments for bringing about adjustment. One way to widen the choice of adjustment tools would be to allow increased flexibility of exchange rates With respect to international liquidity the U.S. proposal envisages an increase in the importance of the SDR and the elimination of various encumbrances which reduce its usefulness as a reserve asset. At the same time the U.S. proposal contemplates a gradual diminution of the role played by gold in the international monetary system. Holdings of foreign currency reserves would be neither banned nor encouraged but it is expected that they would become a smaller proportion of total international reserve assets than they are today The Adjustment Process In developing its proposals the United States has taken into account a number of realities about the international adjustment process. First every government seeks to retain a large degree of discretion in managing its economy in order to meet the specific social and economic concerns of its citizens. Second the policies of every government are necessarily affected and constrained by the interaction of its economy with the outside world since international trade and investment are increasingly important factors in the economic prosperity of all countries. The U.S. proposal seeks to achieve a proper balance between these two conditions by retaining considerable national discretion with respect to the method and timing of adjustment but by imposing a stronger international discipline to ensure the achievement of adjustment objectives Reserves as objective indicators for adjustment. The U.S. proposal that disproportionate changes in reserves in either direction be used as the primary indicator of the need for balance-of-payments adjustment is described in detail in Appendix A. In summary the proposal is that certain points should be established above and below each country 's " base " or " normal " level of reserves and that movements in reserves beyond these points would signal the need for balance-of-payments adjustment The U.S. proposal is based on the recognition that countries experiencing a persistent deterioration in their reserve positions have always had to devalue their currencies or to take other adjustment measures. The U.S proposal would make this discipline symmetrical for both deficit and surplus countries by providing that a disproportionate gain in reserves would indicate the need for adjustment actions by surplus countries to the same extent that disproportionate reserve losses now impose pressure on deficit countries to adjust Symmetry in the adjustment process as provided for in the U.S. proposal is desirable for several reasons. Active implementation of adjustment policies as opposed to passive acceptance of the domestic consequences of adjustment by others frequently entails political costs ( as in the case of an exchange rate change which governments have commonly considered to be a confession of weakness ) And it may sometimes involve economic costs of adjustment as well ( when for example a deficit country tolerates an increase in unemployment in order to improve the payments balance through demand restraint ) Thus a balanced distribution of the responsibility for initiating adjustment is in part a question of equity Such symmetry also makes the process of international adjustment more efficient. If countries on both the deficit and the surplus sides of a payments imbalance follow active policies for the restoration of equilibrium the process is likely to be easier than if the deficit countries try to bring about adjustment by themselves. Deficit countries would in any case be unable to restore equilibrium unless surplus countries at least followed policies consistent with a reduction of the net surplus in their payments positions. Such problems can best be avoided by clarifying the responsibilities of both groups of countries in bringing about payments adjustment The use of reserve criteria also focuses on the close relationship between the speed of adjustment and the need for liquidity. The less efficient and prompt the adjustment process the larger is the global need for reserves ; the smaller and less elastic the total stock of reserves the more stringent the demands will be on the adjustment process. In a system where the adjustment process is tied to reserves the total volume of reserves created can be related to the sum of countries ' individual reserve targets as reflected in the internationally agreed indicators. If the two are not made consistent sustained balance-of-payments equilibrium can not be obtained. Failure to provide the system with adequate reserves puts deflationary pressure on deficit countries and induces a disruptive competition for scarce reserves. In contrast the creation of too large a volume of reserves places the major share of adjustment pressures on surplus countries and exacerbates tendencies toward world inflation A link between adjustment measures and reserve changes is essential if a generalized system of convertibility of national currencies into international reserve assets is to be sustainable. In the long run convertibility can be maintained only if the adjustment mechanism prevents the development of large and persistent imbalances which would inevitably prevent a deficit country from providing conversion of its own currency into primary reserve assets Reserve indicators have several other advantages as compared to other conceivable adjustment guides. They are comprehensive quickly available and relatively unambiguous. Furthermore they do not discriminate between one set of transactions and another. They leave the relation between specific types of transactions to market forces focusing only on the overall level of the balance of payments. In a system based on the market principle it would be inappropriate to base judgments about the need for adjustment solely on trade or the current account or the capital account Adoption of reserve criteria as a primary indicator of the need for adjustment does not imply automaticity. The system would operate in the context of a multilateral review procedure. While excessive reserve changes may create an increasingly strong presumption that effective adjustment measures are called for a country could still convince the international community that the signals were wrong and adjustment was not appropriate In such a case the reserve indicator could be overriden. Moreover the use of reserve indicators would not preclude such supplementary guides as might be available http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O ! Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Short-term capital movements may present a problem in managing any system of adjustment including one based on reserve indicators. Large movements of such funds in response to differences in interest rates or the expectation of future changes in exchange rates could bring about large changes in reserves. This could signal the need for adjustment actions even though they might not otherwise be thought appropriate. It should be possible however to identify such cases in the multilateral review and to override the signal by international agreement. Moreover the wider margins within which exchange rates can fluctuate have already provided a useful cushion against short-term capital movements initiated by interest rate differentials and these margins should become more effective in a system where the maintenance of inappropriate parities is avoided Greater flexibility in the exchange rate. An important feature of the U.S. proposals is that they would make exchange rate changes a more useful internationally acceptable instrument of adjustment. The U.S. suggestions regarding the exchange rate mechanism assume that most countries will generally choose to continue their practice of maintaining established values for their currencies. At the same time the United States recognizes that the difficulties caused by prolonged maintenance of inappropriate exchange rates can be avoided only if countries adjust their parities more promptly than was usual in the past The U.S. proposal recognizes the current evolution of more flexible techniques of exchange rate management. For example despite the fact that floating a currency suspending the maintenance of its value by exchange market intervention is technically a violation of the Bretton Woods Agreement a number of important countries have done so. Such floats may be either transitional as a way of utilizing market signals in determining a new rate or indefinite in their duration. The Canadians have floated during long intervals for more than two decades the Germans have floated twice in recent years and the British have been floating since mid1972. The U.S. proposal would permit either transitional or indefinite periods of floating but it would impose standards on countries adopting floating regimes to guard against their use as instruments for competitive devaluation The United States also proposes that countries which maintain parity exchange rates adopt wider margins within which the market exchange rate is allowed to fluctuate. The Smithsonian Agreement temporarily increased the permissible margins from percent on either side of dollar parity to * percent above or below dollar parity implying a maximum spread of 4J4 percent between any two nondollar currencies. A number of countries have adopted these wider margins. The United States favors the permanent adoption of margins for all currencies,- including the dollar that are in the same range as those permitted for nondollar currencies under the Smithsonian Agreement. Since the dollar currently serves as the chief intervention currency it can never deviate from its parity with any other currency by more than the width of the margin or 2J4 percent. For any two nondollar currencies however the maximum spread is twice the margin because one currency could be at the floor while the other currency was at the ceiling To do away with this particular asymmetry will require innovations in the techniques of exchange market intervention a question which will have to be addressed in the context of the general reform effort A larger zone within which fluctuation can take place without government intervention implies more opportunity for the operation of market forces and can facilitate small changes in parities. Wider margins can also lessen the incentives for short-term capital flows in response to interest rate differentials by increasing the scope for forward premiums or discounts in the exchange markets thus neutralizing such differentials The desire for symmetry between the margins for the dollar and for other currencies reflects the view that whereas the dollar had unique functions and responsibilities in the old system its role in the new system should be closer to that of other important currencies. Under the Bretton Woods system other countries maintained or changed the values of their currencies in relation to the dollar and the United States was passive. The proposed change would give the United States more freedom to exercise control ov6r its own exchange rate not only in influencing the rate within the margins around parity but also in changing the parity itself. Of course under any system this freedom will be limited by the fact that the United States is so important in world trade that any change in the value of the dollar would strongly affect other countries. In addition the dollar will undoubtedly continue to be an international medium of exchange even when no Americans are involved and substantial amounts of dollars will still be held abroad in private and official hands. Therefore reasonable stability in the value of the dollar will be desirable. Nonetheless in a reformed system the dollar should have considerably more flexibility than it did before Other techniques of adjustment. Under the U.S. proposal a variety of mechanisms for restoring payments balance would be available among them changes in monetary and fiscal policy. Furthermore in keeping with the goal of the international monetary system to encourage a freer flow of resources surplus countries would be encouraged to remove barriers to imports and capital outflows while deficit countries would be encouraged to remove barriers to exports and capital inflows Such a choice among adjustment measures is essential not only to preserve national sovereignty but also because the nature of the imbalance may itself suggest a particular form of policy response. Furthermore the existence of uncertainty about whether or not adjustment will take the form of a change in the exchange rate can itself be a stabilizing influence by holding down speculation in response to reserve changes The U.S. proposal would in extreme circumstances permit the imposition of direct restraints for balance-of-payments purposes. Their use however would be appropriately circumscribed to ensure that controls remained tem porary and caused the least possible distortion in the pattern of trade and investment. Controls or surcharges on some transactions and not on others distort economic relationships and for that reason broad adjustment measures are generally preferable. And where selective measures are used pricebased barriers such as taxes or surcharges are generally preferable to quantitative barriers such as quotas. Taxes on some transactions and not on others change relative prices but they do not insulate such transactions from market pressures as quotas do. This view contrasts with the present rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) which specifically authorize quantitative restrictions but not surcharges for balance-of-payments purposes The U.S. proposal furthermore reflects the view that controls on capital transactions for balance-of-payments purposes should not be encouraged and certainly should not be required in lieu of other measures of adjustment nor should they become the means of maintaining an undervalued or overvalued exchange rate. This position is based on a belief that restrictions have a distorting influence whether they are focused on trade in commodities in services or in assets ( the capital account ) and that this parallelism should be recognized in the rules governing the reformed international monetary system. In contrast the provisions of the earlier system made a sharp distinction between controls on trade and other current transactions and controls on capital transactions The U.S. proposal assumes that countries would take their responsibilities seriously and would usually take steps toward adjustment before such steps became necessary on the basis of the indicators. In the few cases where countries might persist in avoiding adjustment however certain international sanctions would become operative. On the deficit side for example failure to adjust might lead to refusal to provide credit as under the old system or to loss of scheduled SDR allocations. On the surplus side the international inducements for adjustment might include the risk of losing scheduled SDR allocations or a tax on the country 's excess reserve holdings. In some situations other countries might be authorized to impose a surcharge on imports from the chronic surplus country until effetive measures were taken to correct the situation. The Bretton Woods Agreement incorporated a provision similar to this last one the so-called scarce currency clause. However because this provision was never invoked there was no effective form of international pressure on surplus countries to adjust International Liquidity The magnitude composition and distribution of world liquidity have undergone substantial changes in recent years. From the end of to the end of October gross international official reserves increased from $ billion to $ billion or almost percent in years. Part of this increase was in newly created Special Drawing Rights but most of it was in dollars. Gold and reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund remained at approximately the same level as in As a result a significant change occurred in the proportional composition of international reserves Gold dropped from percent to percent reserve positions in the IMF dropped from percent to percent foreign exchange rose from percent to percent and SDR 's which did not exist in provided percent of world reserves For the future the United States supports movement toward increasing reliance on the SDR as the primary source of world reserve growth and toward progressive reduction in the role of gold as a reserve asset. The U.S. proposal also assumes that currencies will play a much smaller role in reserve holdings in the future than they do today. In that connection proposals for exchanging a portion of reserve currency holdings into a special issue of SDR 's deserve careful study as part of the transition to a new system SDR 's as the primary international reserve asset. As part of its proposals for reform the United States has supported increased importance for SDR 's ; they should become the formal unit of account of the system to serve as the common reference point for currency rates and as a common measure of the value of reserve assets. Such an arrangement would offer important advantages in that it would eliminate several potential sources of instability private and official which have been particularly troubling for the international monetary system in the past First the system would not be subjected to strains arising from private demands for the primary reserve asset. The SDR has no commodity uses and there are no plans at least at the present time for allowing the SDR to be held as a financial asset in private hands. The value of the SDR in terms of currencies would be determined purely on the basis of considerations related to the monetary system itself and not by occurrences in often volatile commodity markets Second the system would not have to depend on increasing the value of the SDR for increases in official liquidity. Instead the SDR was designed to expand ( or contract ) international liquidity through changes in the volume of SDR units outstanding thus avoiding speculative problems caused by changes in the value of the basic reserve asset relative to other types of money Third SDR 's would not be subject to the problem of confidence created by primary reliance on reserve currencies. Under the Bretton Woods system the demand for reserve assets was increasingly met by the reserve currencies The larger the amount of a currency held by foreign official institutions however the greater the risk that confidence may be undermined by the accompanying deficit in the balance of payments of the issuing country Furthermore the commitment of the reserve currency country to maintain convertibility into reserve assets becomes less and less credible as the stock of its outstanding liquid liabilities increases. The SDR is not subject to these particular problems of confidence since the liability is spread among all participating countries and it is not convertible into other reserve assets. Con- fidence in the SDR is primarily a function of the commitment and willingness of governments to accept it in settlement of debts Certain changes in the nature and the use of the SDR would make it a more attractive and useful asset. To the extent possible for instance SDR 's should be freed from the encumbrances of reconstitution obligations designation procedures and holding limits. These special features of the SDR mechanism were probably necessary when that instrument was a new and untested asset. In the absence of an effective adjustment mechanism it was considered desirable to place limitations on the magnitude of payments imbalances to be financed through SDR transfers. The need for such special features would be reduced or eliminated in a reformed system. Moreover the elimination of these special provisions would enhance the SDR 's practical utility. The rules of the International Monetary Fund should also be changed to permit SDR 's to be used in all IMF transactions now permitting or requiring gold. SDR 's would thus truly become the basic international money The role of reserve currencies. The United States has also proposed that in a reformed system official holdings of foreign exchange should be neither banned nor encouraged. Such holdings of national currencies may provide a useful margin in reserve management and fluctuations in such holdings could add some elasticity to the system as a whole in meeting sudden flows of volatile capital. A system which prohibited nations from holding foreign exchange other than working balances would be a much more rigid system It would provide no short-term flexibility to allow for reserve expansion over and above SDR allocations when the demand for reserves is abnormally high for brief periods and there are no other immediately available means for responding to sudden and reversible speculative pressures. In practice there would be a much greater danger that such a rigid system would break down under the normal pressures which can develop in a liberal world trading and payments order where the level of international transactions is large in comparison with the level of world reserves. Inability of the international reserve mechanism to adapt flexibly in periods of strain could seriously undermine the effort to move toward a more liberal trade and payments system. At the same time since countries would commit themselves to convert foreign official currency holdings into common reserve assets a country should be able to place limits on the amount of its currency which other countries may hold as reserves Gold as reserves. The United States believes that the role of gold in the international monetary system should continue to diminish and would support orderly procedures to facilitate that process. A declining role for gold is fully consistent with the long-term trend of monetary history. Governments long ago recognized the inadequacy of gold as a basis for national monetary systems and in recent decades the dependence of the international economy on that metal has diminished sharply. With the physical supply of gold limited ; with its commodity uses competing inevitably and increasingly with its monetary uses ; and with residual noncommercial availability in no way related to the liquidity needs of a prosperous and expanding international economy the world has naturally developed supplements and substitutes The current situation where speculative pressures on a thin and volatile commodity market have led to a price much higher than the official gold price is evidence of the instabilities and tensions inherent in a system based on gold or other commodities. In alone the commodity price of gold varied between $ and $ a difference of percent of the lower figure. Whatever the established monetary price of gold it is certain to get out of line with the price tendencies prevailing on the private market. Care must be taken to avoid exposing the reformed monetary system to that source of instability THE INTERNATIONAL TRADING SYSTEM A new round of multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of the GATT is scheduled to begin in the fall of The purpose of these negotiations will be both to expand the scope for international trade and to improve the institutional process for resolving international trade disputes The world as a whole including the United States has benefited substantially from the expansion of trade made possible by previous multilateral reductions of trade barriers. At the same time conflicts over trade issues have intensified in recent years. In the approaching trade negotiations new ways will have to be found to resolve such conflicts in ways conducive to the growth of trade World trade expanded more than fivefold in the last years and this expansion has been accompanied by an equivalent expansion of world output. The average annual growth in the value of both world trade and economic output during this period was about percent. While the expansion of trade was only one reason for these output gains it was undoubtedly an important source of growth. Trade not only allows each country to produce what is best suited to its capabilities it also provides competition which stimulates everyone to produce goods more cheaply and to improve their quality Although the United States is less dependent on trade than most other nations the role of trade in the economy has grown. Over the last two decades GNP in the United States has increased about three and one-half times while trade has increased more than four times. Exports have become a more significant source of employment and income for those sectors in which the United States has a comparative advantage particularly agriculture and high technology manufactures while imports are becoming more important as the source both of the raw materials and fuels used by U.S industry and of consumer goods whose production requires much use of relatively unskilled labor Over the last years imports of goods by Americans have increased much faster than foreign purchases of goods made in the United States This imbalance has caused difficulties for the United States as well as for the world economy and its correction is therefore in the interest of both. It can be accomplished in part through equilibrating changes in exchange rates and relatively more effective anti-inflationary measures in the United States both of which change relative prices and thus improve the competitiveness of U.S. goods and services. Much progress has been made on this front in the past months. Reductions in foreign trade barriers can also contribute to correction of the payments imbalance. A number of countries particularly Japan took some liberalizing actions in aimed at alleviating the disequilibrium situation. It is hoped that further actions during will contribute to this adjustment process Aims of Trade Negotiations The trade negotiations scheduled to begin in the fall of look to the longer term. Their goal is to remove the sources of difficulties that have arisen under present trading arrangements and to provide for the expansion of trade on the basis of mutual advantage and mutual commitment with reciprocity. However results from the negotiations in the form of concrete changes affecting the world trading system are likely to be gradual and will not begin to take effect for several years In approaching these negotiations the United States seeks as it has since the end of World War II a more open and equitable world trading system A freer movement of goods services and capital throughout the world in response to market forces is in the U.S. interest for several reasons. To the extent that trade is undistorted by artificial barriers our producers can sell what they make best and our consumers will reap the benefits of efficient production and competition on a worldwide basis. These benefits to the United States will not conflict with the interests of other countries. All countries can expect gains from expanded world trade on a nondiscriminatory basis A world trading system that minimizes trade distortions is also one of the important prerequisites for a smoothly functioning international monetary system. The more barriers that countries erect to the flow of goods services and capital the more the adjustment of payments imbalances is focused on the narrower range of economic activity which remains free to respond to market forces. The result is to place heavy and uneven burdens of adjustment on particular sectors often forcing countries to choose between accepting severe economic dislocations and postponing overall adjustment Comprehensive trade negotiations are made even more urgent by the accelerated liberalization of trade within the enlarged European Community and countries associated with it. This development will stimulate growth and increased trade among countries within Europe and will make possible ex- pansion of trade with the outside world as well. At the same time when a group of countries eliminates trade barriers among themselves while maintaining them against the outside world the immediate effect is to divert trade from outside suppliers to suppliers in member countries In the process of harmonizing their tariffs with the EC 's common external tariff the new members of the EC will be increasing some tariffs and reducing others. Under the rules of the GATT compensatory tariff reductions must be offered for any increase in tariffs fixed in previous agreements. In the course of this year the United States and others will negotiate with the EC over the amount of compensation considered adequate. But such compensation will not be able to take full account of the new situation that has been created by the changes in European trading arrangements. Only a negotiated reduction in the general level of tariffs and nontariff barriers ( NTB 's ) can effectively reduce the discrimination that results from the removal of trade barriers within Europe The expansion of the EC has also been accompanied by the negotiation of preferential trade agreements between the members of the European Community and a large number of other countries in Europe and Africa Most of these agreements provide for preferential access for exports of both parties in each other 's markets thus inherently discriminating against exports of outsiders. This proliferation of preferential trade agreements threatens to erode the most-favored-nation ( MFN ) principle which provides that all trade concessions agreed on between two or more countries be extended to all countries that adhere to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade While the GATT permits formation of free trade areas or customs unions that involve the elimination of barriers on substantially all internal trade it does not permit more limited selective preferential arrangements The MFN principle has been the cornerstone of the postwar liberalization of multilateral trade. By ensuring nondiscrimination in the application of trade barriers it minimizes the inefficiency and distortions caused by such barriers. It also avoids trade diversion and thus injury to third parties from selective reduction of trade barriers. And finally it makes possible a greater trade liberalization in the course of multilateral GATT negotiations by ensuring that any trade concession negotiated between two or more countries will be promptly extended to a large number of countries. For these reasons it will be important to clarify the obligations assumed by GATT members with respect to the MFN principle In view of the increasing importance of nontariff barriers as tariff barriers are reduced it is crucial that the movement toward a more open trading system be comprehensive encompassing all forms of barriers to trade. Among the major types of NTB 's that distort trade are quantitative import restrictions export subsidies restrictive government procurement policies and discriminatory design and performance standards Negotiations covering such a wide range of issues will be difficult for a number of reasons : trade distortions may arise from otherwise legitimate domestic social policies ; many of these practices are embedded in domestic laws ; there is no simple basis for measuring reciprocity in tradeoffs between one type of NTB and another ; and the feasible time schedule for concluding negotiations and implementing agreements is likely to vary widely from one NTB to another. Nonetheless inclusion of these measures in future trade negotiations is essential ; and considerable preparatory work both technical and definitional has already been done in the United States as well as in a number of international groups and organizations Further steps toward trade liberalization should also be comprehensive in the sense that they encompass all economic sectors. From the point of view of the United States it is particularly important that such negotiations include agricultural as well as industrial trade. Abundant natural resources and advanced farm management and technology give this country a comparative advantage which makes our farm products highly competitive in world markets. Our agricultural exports are estimated to have reached an all-time high of $ 9j/ billion last year. With rationalization of the agricultural policies and liberalization of the related restrictive import policies maintained by most industrialized countries the United States could realize its full potential for trade in this important sector Institutional Reforms Certain institutional reforms would greatly help the movement toward a more open and more equitable trading system. The present GATT framework which has served well for the liberalization of trade particularly tariff barriers now needs to be strengthened and modified. In particular better procedures should be found to deal with difficulties and disputes arising out of changes in trade patterns and trading arrangements among particular countries The failure of institutional arrangements to deal effectively with this range of problems pokes certain dangers. Countries that can not find a satisfactory multilateral solution to their trade difficulties will increasingly be under pressure to adopt unilateral restrictive measures that make trade less free and are often discriminatory in their effect. Trade disputes that are not resolved promptly and in accordance with agreed rules also tend to create political problems at home that spill over into other areas and affect political and security relations among countries. Such trade disputes can also prevent the smooth functioning of the international monetary system both by distorting economic flows and by undermining confidence in existing economic relationships Difficulties have arisen in the past with respect to measures which countries take to cushion the domestic impact of abrupt changes in trade patterns Under the existing rules of the GATT countries can take temporary measures to restrain imports when rapid increases threaten to disrupt domestic industry. A country imposing such restraints however is required to compensate other countries for any loss of trade that may result by making equivalent reductions in other trade barriers. These rules have proved unworkable in practice and governments have tended to evade them In limited instances the adjustment required by a change in trade patterns may be too large to be accomplished in a short time without excessive social personal and political costs. In such cases temporary restraints on the pace at which imports increase can provide time for the adjustment of domestic resources to take place in the most constructive and least painful way. These safeguards can also make it less likely that some countries will resist general trade liberalization fearing that it would cause abrupt dislocations in particularly sensitive industries A number of proposals have been put forward for a new safeguard system which would assure that such measures are taken within the multilateral framework. If safeguard actions are negotiated on a multilateral basis they are not nearly so likely to become a disguised form of protectionism as they are if they are imposed by individual countries without international standards. Under the proposed system it would be possible for importing countries to restrain imports temporarily without compensatory reductions of other trade barriers. Such actions would however be subject to commonly accepted criteria a procedure for international review and provisions to prevent abuse of the system. The system should also include an understanding that temporary safeguards must be accompanied by effective domestic adjustments in the allocation of resources These various matters relating to reform of the international trading system were discussed over a 2-year period by the OECD High Level Group on Trade and Related Problems a group of experts representing the major industrial countries. Its report issued in the summer of addresses all the major issues concerning trade including tariffs nontariff barriers unilateral safeguards trade in agricultural products involvement of the less developed countries and East-West trade. Although there were divergences of opinion on some issues among the group particularly on agriculture a high degree of agreement was found on major substantive issues. The report emphasizes the desirability of further liberalization of world trade and points to the economic and political dangers inherent in a return to protectionism OTHER ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION The reform of the international monetary and trade systems will have a global focus inasmuch as the scope and membership of both the International Monetary Fund and the GATT are worldwide. Not all problems that arise in international economic relationships can best be solved in a global framework however since many issues that arise are of special interest to certain groups of countries. In many cases institutional mechanisms have been created for the purpose of examining common problems or exploring common approaches in other cases there exists only a focus for analysis The discussion below examines three sets of relationships that cut across trade and monetary lines. The first is concerned with problems that arise among the industrialized market economies as a result of the high degree of economic integration among them. The second focuses on the various dimensions of the monetary trade investment and economic assistance relationships between developed and developing economies. The third looks at the problems that may arise as economic relationships expand between centrally planned economies and the rest of the world Domestic Policies Affecting Trade and Investment International monetary and trade rules are focused on measures affecting the flow of goods and financial assets across national borders. They do not on the whole touch upon internal policy measures which are not directed to international transactions as such but which nevertheless affect the international location of economic activity. In an integrated world economy however measures taken in one country may have substantial effects on the allocation of resources in other countries and conflict among policy objectives of various countries is therefore possible. These interrelations have reached a particularly advanced state among the industrialized market economies. For this reason the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) whose membership comprises most of the industrialized market economies provides a useful forum for discussions on questions of internal economic policies their role in transmitting economic influences from one country to another and their relation to international economic transactions A step toward intensified use of the OECD forum for such discussions was taken recently when the Executive Committee of the Organization met for the first time at higher political levels than before ( Executive Committee New Style ) to discuss new fields for possible cooperation. Just how the focus of this area of international cooperation will be delineated remains to be worked out since it is not always possible to distinguish the matters that clearly belong in the international monetary or trade sphere from those relating primarily to internal policies. In particular this latter area overlaps with nontariff barriers which affect international trade and also with capital controls related to the monetary adjustment process. Among the questions likely to fall within the purview of this area however are those concerned with national investment policies including policies relating to multinational corporations At its recent meeting the OECD Executive Committee New Style agreed to explore possible forms of cooperation on national policies affecting investment. Such policies are a particularly sensitive concern of all governments representing an area where national interests can conflict. By subsidizing or otherwise encouraging some industries and not others governments can affect the pattern of domestic production and international trade Investment policies can thus be used to some extent as substitutes for trade policy measures. The use of either may distort relative prices and cause a less than optimal allocation of world resources. Although subsidies and trade restrictions can influence the location of production in similar ways subsidies affect adversely the terms of trade of the country giving them while trade barriers such as tariffs can shift the terms of trade in favor of the country which imposes them Subsidies are not the only internal policy measure affecting investment production and trade. Other frequently used policy tools are taxes antitrust policies regulatory policies patent policies and government procurement policies. There is a need to explore cooperatively the possibility of limiting the use of such policies where they severely affect other countries Another field of investment policy open to conflict among national interests is the matter of rules governing the ownership of capital including land productive facilities and financial assets. No nation would readily surrender the right to implement such rules but every nation has an interest in protecting its citizens from arbitrary treatment by other governments. Considerable cooperation in this area has already been achieved by the OECD in particular in promulgating the Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements. Further progress would increase both efficiency and fairness in international economic relations Another item of common interest in the investment area is the multinational corporation. Multinational corporations transmit capital technology and management skills from one country to another. Their ability to manage resources in an international rather than a national market has tended to improve the overall efficiency of the world economy. Because their operations extend beyond the boundaries of any single nation however a number of jurisdictional questions arise and with increasing frequency these corporations are believed rightly or wrongly to affect a country 's ability to pursue and achieve its domestic economic objectives. Moreover multinational corporations personalize what would otherwise seem to be impersonal market forces that transmit the impact of economic decisions from one country to another. For this reason these corporations tend to become a focal point for problems faced by national governments as a consequence of the growing economic interdependence among nations The OECD may also seek to work out cooperative arrangements on such questions as regional policies industrial policies agricultural policies general adjustment policies regulations governing financial markets and principles of taxation Industrialized and Developing Economies One of the important objectives of reform is to create a more stable and mutually beneficial framework for economic relations between developed and developing countries. Both groups of countries can benefit from reducing the degree of arbitrariness in national decisions affecting international trade investment and aid. The approaching negotiations provide an opportunity for mutual commitments that will serve the common interest and can facilitate achievement of the commonly accepted goal of reducing the gldbal gap in economic prosperity Developed and developing countries are dependent on each other in many ways. Developing economies are the source of a substantial proportion of the raw materials used by the industrialized economies and increasingly the source of manufactures involving labor-intensive production methods as well On the other hand industrialized economies are the source of much of the capital equipment technology management skills and financial capital needed by the developing countries to increase their production capabilities and provide the basis for long-term diversification of their economies Most developing countries are members of the International Monetary Fund. They are represented by nine members on the Committee of Twenty which is mapping out a reform of the international monetary system. This participation should help assure that the new rules will work effectively on a global basis and will give due weight to the needs of the developing countries For developing countries exports not only provide most of their foreign exchange but are also an important means of achieving economies of large scale production in many industries. In order to increase their opportunities for trade the United States supports the general reduction of tariff barriers in industrial countries to exports of developing countries. The United States is also actively encouraging the full participation of these countries in the approaching trade negotiations. The agenda for the negotiations including such items as the reduction of nontariff barriers and the imposition of safeguards covers matters of even greater concern to these countries than tariff questions. But their influence on the outcome of the negotiations will also be greater if countries which are not currently members of the GATT are willing to accept the obligations of GATT membership. The commitment to this framework of rules and obligations would help to ensure developing countries against arbitrary action by others. An obligation to avoid highly complex and discretionary nontariff barriers could also improve the efficiency of their own planning efforts and facilitate trade with each other which has been declining in relative importance for many years The efficient transfer of capital from developed to developing countries is another important objective of a well-functioning international economic system. Such transfers of capital are desirable because they make available to developing countries more resources for investment as well as giving them access to new production and management techniques. In recent years there has been a reduction in the relative importance of bilateral economic assistance and increased reliance on the multilateral development banks as channels of public aid. Loans by these institutions have almost doubled in the 5-year period from through and U.S. contributions have also increased substantially. At the same time U.S. bilateral economic assistance has declined slightly. Private capital flows from developed to developing countries have also continued to expand at a rapid rate nearly doubling during the 5-year period from through the last year for which data are available. The size of these private flows makes it increasingly desirable to create arrangements which assure developing countries that such investments contribute to their economic advancement and assure developed countries that their investments will not be treated arbitrarily Such arrangements should include internationally accepted standards and procedures for the settlement of disputes Market and Centrally Planned Economies Trade and monetary relations between market economies and centrally planned economies have been carried on outside the framework of the multilateral trade and payments system generally on the basis of bilateral trade agreements. These agreements may sometimes specify the quantities and prices of commodities to be exchanged. More often they are more open-ended providing only a set of ground rules for trade contracts negotiated between individual state trading companies and private firms Trade between market and centrally planned economies can be advantageous for both sides and with a relaxation of political tensions this trade can be expected to grow significantly. In the past the United States has engaged in less trade with the centrally planned economies than has western Europe Recently however the United States has taken a number of steps to expand its trade with these countries ; among such moves have been the signing of trade agreements with the Soviet Union and Poland and the elimination of the embargo on bilateral trade with the People 's Republic of China Trade with the Soviet Union is likely to grow particularly fast. The Soviet Union has large quantities of raw materials and fuels many of which are beginning to be in short supply in the United States. On the other hand the Soviet Union has a large import requirement for food and for manufactured products that depend on advanced technology. The United States can supply both The particular characteristics of the centrally planned economies will require the development of special rules as trade between them and the market economies expands. In trade among market economies bilateral settlement of claims has been abandoned in favor of a multilateral settlement system. Since few of the centrally planned economies are part of this multilateral payments system special arrangements will have to be made to assure that settlements of net balances will be effected For trade among market economies rules have also been developed to prevent excessive disruption of domestic production and trade with third countries by large and rapid shifts in trade patterns. As trade with the centrally planned economies grows it may be necessary to develop similar rules to prevent sudden disruption not only of economic activity within individual market economies but also of trade patterns among the market economies Finally it is important to ensure that commercial disputes are settled amicably and are not allowed to spread into the political sphere. In trade among market economies contracts are usually made between individual firms and whatever disputes arise are settled through the respective courts in a manner that is usually acceptable to both parties. In trade with centrally planned economies the fact that one of the parties to any trade contracts is the state can create special problems with respect to the settlement of disputes In anticipation of some of the possible problems that a rapid expansion of trade could give rise to the recent trade agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union included these provisions : The creation of a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Commercial Commission to resolve difficulties arising at the government level A procedure for guarding against market disruptions. Under it after consultation the U.S.S.R. will not ship products to the United States which the U.S. Government has advised will " cause threaten or contribute to disruption of its domestic market. " An arbitration agreement which encourages the settlement of commercial disputes by arbitration in a country other than the Soviet Union or the United States under the Arbitration Rules of the Economic Commission for Europe a United Nations agency. The U.S.-Soviet trade agreement also provides for the reciprocal extension of credit facilities nondiscriminatory tariff treatment of each other 's imports the establishment of commercial offices in the two countries the availability of business facilities and the settlement of the World War II lend-lease debt owed the United States by the U.S.S.R * * * * * In advancing proposals for reform the United States has kept in mind the necessity of building on commonly accepted principles. Foremost among these principles is the belief that an open exchange of goods services and capital based on market relationships can benefit all countries. Moreover if all countries are to remain committed to freer trade and investment the international rules must give everyone a chance to share in the benefits Recent experience has shown the need for certain reforms in current rules and practices. The rules should more explicitly define international standards of conduct and yet provide greater flexibility in the means of discharging these international responsibilities. Also the various aspects of the international economic system dealing with monetary trade and investment questions should be better related to each other. Lastly any stable and wellfunctioning international economic system must rest upon sound domestic policies to promote domestic growth and price stability in the major countries Appendix A SUPPLEMENTS TO CHAPTERS IN THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER Description of the Controls Program The regulations that spelled out the Economic Stabilization Program ( ESP ) in covered hundreds of pages. Quarterly Reports of the Cost of Living Council describe the program fully. Here the discussion includes only the principal elements which explain the general character of the system The system began on August with an initial freeze affecting nearly all wages prices and rents and lasting days. One of the main purposes of the freeze was to permit the development of a more durable although still temporary program without giving prices and wages a chance to run away in anticipation of the new program The Phase II program was announced on October to succeed the freeze on November The initial design of the system and the modifications to it during were made in accordance with a few general themes : The success of the system would depend primarily upon voluntary support. The standards of the program and their application had to be regarded as fair and reasonable so that the great voluntary support which came forth when the program began could be preserved. To achieve this result it was desirable that price and wage controls should not be imposed unilaterally on the economy by the Government but that representatives of the private sector should participate in the system 's development The system would operate in circumstances where the expansion of output and employment would be a major national objective. Price and wage controls should not interfere with that expansion The controls were intended to be temporary. Some standards and procedures that if permanent could not be tolerated from an equity standpoint would be tolerable and accepted if temporary. Similarly elements of the system that if they were permanent might have serious adverse economic effects would be much less harmful if retained for a limited period. The complexities and refinements of standards and the magnitude of administrative apparatus which might be necessary in a permanent system could be minimized in a temporary one. However the temporary system had to be designed to avoid a price upsurge once the controls were removed or relaxed The controls were not expected to withstand a strong pressure of excess demand on inelastic supply of products or labor. The system in its standards and administrative mechanism did not contemplate the elaboration and force that would have been needed to resist excess demand pressure. Moreover the system was not to be applied in some of the main areas where increases if they did occur would result from demand pressure notably farm product prices and market interest rates ORGANIZATION OF THE PROGRAM The program was based on a broad grant of authority originally given to the President ( although not requested by him ) when Congress passed the Economic Stabilization Act in August of This authority was extended with a number of qualifications some of which will be referred to below by Public Law of December The renewed authority would expire on April The President delegated his authority under the Act to the Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) an interagency committee at Cabinet level chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. The CLC in turn delegated authority for major functions under the Act to a number of committees composed mainly of private citizens. The involvement of private citizens was intended to bring to the program both special expertise and a representation of the interests of diverse segments of the community. ( The structure is depicted in Chart ) The CLC retained authority to set objectives of the program to determine its coverage and to assure general consistency in the operation of the various segments. It delegated to the Price Commission and to the Pay Board authority to prescribe standards of permissible prices and employee compensation and to decide on the application of these standards in particular cases. The Price Commission consisted of seven citizens including a full-time chairman and was assisted by a staff of about The Pay Board initially consisted of members five each from labor management and the public. In March four of the five labor members withdrew in disagreement with the decision made in the Pacific longshoremen 's case. The Pay Board was then reconstituted to consist of seven members all representing the general public although one was a labor leader and one was from management. By the time this revision of the Board occurred the tripartite group had already established the basic pay standards and procedures which continued to be applied by the new Board and were generally observed by employers and employees. The Chairman of the Pay Board served full time and the Board had a staff of about The Construction Industry Stabilization Committee ( CISC ) a tripartite body was established in March to restrain construction costs which had been rising rapidly because of unusually large wage increases Although CISC was established prior to the freeze and followed procedures Chart Organization of the Economic Stabilization Program in Committee on Interest and Dividends COST OF LIVING COUNCIL National Commission on Productivity Committee en Health Services Industry Committee on State and Local Government Cooperation PAY BOARD Construction Industry Stabilization Committee STABILIZATION OFFICES ( INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE ) of its own during the program it operated under the general guidance and standards of the Pay Board The Price Commission was advised in particular areas of its jurisdiction by a Rent Advisory Board and a Retail Advisory Committee. Advisory committees on the health industry and on State and local governments assisted both the Price Commission and the Pay Board The Economic Stabilization Act required that mandatory ceilings be placed upon interest rates when necessary to prevent them from rising at a rate which would interfere with orderly economic growth. The Cost of Living Council found that the behavior of interest rates was not such as to call for mandatory ceilings under the Act. However as a part of the Phase II structure a Committee on Interest and Dividends was established consisting of the heads of the chief financial agencies in Government and chaired by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Its role was to enlist voluntary cooperation of lenders and corporations in holding down institutionally determined interest rates and dividends The field operation of the stabilization program consisted mainly of providing information on the regulations and checking compliance with them These duties which during the freeze had been assigned to the Office of Emergency Preparedness were assigned to a staff from the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) operating under the policy supervision of the Director of the Cost of Living Council. For the public the local offices of the IRS were usually the point of contact with the program About IRS personnel were assigned to the Economic Stabilization Program in Including them total employment in the program was about In contrast during World War II people had been employed in controlling prices. During the Korean war the number was about GOALS AND STANDARDS When Phase II was announced in October the Cost of Living Council set an interim goal of getting the inflation rate down to to percent by the end of Attainment of the goal would be measured mainly by the consumer price index ( CPI ) the most familiar of all price indexes. For a certain class of American consumers namely urban wage earners and clerical workers and their families it is the best available measure of changes in the average prices they pay for the things they buy although this is not true of every consumer The goal would be measured in terms of the consumer price index but the calculations leading to the idea that the goal was feasible and to the control standards by which it was to be achieved related in the first instance to the gross national product ( GNP ) deflator for the priavte economy. The feasible behavior of the private GNP deflator was derived from estimates of private compensation per man-hour output per man-hour labor costs per unit of output and the relation between prices and unit labor costs. Conversion of the estimate into a goal for the CPI rested on the observation that over extended periods the increases in the CPI and the private GNP price deflator were not very different. Short-term differences resulted mainly from the behavior of food prices. In the fall of when the goal was set food prices were not expected to rise rapidly in and cause an exceptional rise in the CPI relative to the private deflator. As it turned out the rise in the CPI rela- tive to the rise in the private deflator was greater in than in all but year since Setting percent as the upper end of the target range implied a determination to reduce the rate somewhat below what would have been commonly considered probable in the absence of the controls. A 3-percent inflation rate would be a reduction by half from the peak CPI rate reached in and would bring the rate to a level last seen in The basic standards set by the Pay Board and the Price Commission were intended to achieve the goal set by the Cost of Living Council. In fact for a variety of reasons including provisions of the Economic Stabilization Act as amended these basic standards were modified in many ways. Some of these qualifications will be discussed below. Here we confine ourselves to the logic of the system itself The Pay Board set a standard for permissible pay increases of 5J4 percent per year. The " normal " rate of productivity growth the trend in output per man-hour was considered to be about percent a year. If total labor compensation per hour rose by 5J/2 percent on the average the normal rise of labor costs per unit of output would be ( approximately ) 2J4 percent. The basic standard for prices was the pass-through of costs that prices would be permitted to rise in the same proportion as costs. In the calculation of costs however allowance would be made for the normal rise of productivity Application of these two standards together would limit average price increases in the controlled sector to 2j/i percent if the system was closed that is if all costs consisted of labor or purchased supplies whose prices were governed by the same standards. However if some of the costs of the controlled sector originated outside that sector and rose by more than * /2 percent a year the prices of the controlled sector would also rise by more than 2J4 percent. As a practical matter the controls affected purchases originating in the domestic nonfarm nonfinancial sector of the economy a sector representing about percent of the total It was recognized that productivity would probably rise by more than the 3-percent trend rate during the expansion of One consequence might be an increase in the share of the value of output going to profits and other nonlabor shares. However since the labor share of income was at or close to a cyclical high point when the control system began some movement in that direction seemed appropriate Pay standard. The / -percent pay standard was modified in a number of respects all of which raised the permissible wage increase : Increases in excess of / percent scheduled under agreements reached before November could go into effect unless specifically disallowed by the Pay Board. With some exceptions payments held up during the freeze were permitted to be made retroactively in the early part of Phase II Increases in excess of ^ percent would be allowed in order to correct a gross inequity in the relation between the pay of one group of employees and another group with which the first group had a well-established parity During the first year of Phase II increases beyond * /2 percent were allowed to workers whose pay had increased less than percent a year in the preceding years Wage increases would be permitted above the standard if they were granted as part of an incentive program designed to improve productivity Congress also specified that certain fringe benefits would not be subject to restraint unless they were " unreasonably inconsistent with the standards for wage salary and price increases. " To implement this mandate the Pay Board decided to permit increases in compensation above * /i percent equal to percent of compensation when in the form of pension profit-sharing or savings plans thus raising the standard to percent Additional increments were allowed for units which had lagged in implementing fringe benefits in the past The Economic Stabilization Act specifically exempted wages paid to individuals whose earnings were " substandard " or who could be considered to be among the " working poor. " The Cost of Living Council initially decided that this provision exempted all wages of less than $ an hour However in July a Federal court agreed with the contention of a suing labor union that the $ figure was inconsistent with the intent of Congress. The Cost of Living Council then raised the exemption level to $ per hour At this level more than percent of the workers in the private nonfarm sector were estimated to be exempt from coverage Price standard. The basic price standard as already noted provided that prices could be increased in the same proportion as allowable costs. There were however a number of qualifications to this standard In the calculation of costs to justify price increases the rise in wage rates was to be discounted by the rise in productivity to permit calculation of an estimated increase in labor costs per unit of output. The productivity rise used for this purpose was at first calculated by each firm on the basis of its own forecast of its own experience. Thus if the actual productivity increase exceeded or fell short of the calculated rate the actual cost increases might be less or more than the costs allowed for price determination. Moreover beginning in April the Price Commission required that instead of using their own estimates firms should compute their allowable costs by applying productivity factors calculated by the Price Commission using data developed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for different industries on the basis of experience. This created another source of possible discrepancy between a firm 's actual costs and the costs used in determining its permissible prices ; but the change gave the firm a greater incentive to improve its productivity Wholesale and retailing firms were permitted to pass through increased costs of merchandise but there was no provision for passing through increases in operating costs. If operating costs rose by a larger percentage than merchandise costs the permitted price rise would not be as large in percentage terms as the total cost increase When a material with a particularly volatile price constituted a large part of a firm 's co3ts the firm was permitted to raise its price to pass through an increase in that cost without notifying the Price Commission in advance even though the firm 's size would otherwise require prenotification. However if the firm operated under the volatile pricing rule it might raise its price only by the absolute dollar-and-cents amount of the cost increase not by the percentage of the cost increase. It also had to reduce its price correspondingly when the volatile cost declined Many large multiproduct firms operated under term limit pricing ( TLP ) agreements with the Price Commission. These agreements specified a maximum percentage by which the firm might raise the average of all its prices during a period usually a year. This percentage was arrived at after consideration of the firm 's cost increases and the arrangement permitted the firm to raise the price of a particular product without notifying the Price Commission. Such TLP agreements as negotiated were subject to a maximum limit which was initially percent and was subsequently reduced to percent. They also commonly specified a maximum increase permitted for any single product or product line. Thus a common agreement might permit a firm to increase the average of all of its prices by percent but not to increase any single price by more than percent ; many firms found this latter rule the most restrictive. The rationale of the TLP system was that in exchange for flexibility and relief from red tape firms would agree to smaller price increases than they might have been able to justify by costs on a case-by-case basis The Price Commission usually did not recognize for purposes of price determination labor cost increases in excess of 5j/i percent even though these might have been approved by the Pay Board Even if otherwise justified price increases were not permitted where the firm 's profit margin ( profits as a percentage of sales ) exceeded the average profit margin of the best of the fiscal years preceding August The main purpose of this rule was to provide a safeguard against the unavoidable difficulties of estimating unit costs in advance or even checking them after the fact especially for multiproduct firms. In this situation there might be a tendency for firms to overestimate their costs and effective monitoring would be impossible. The profit-margin test provided a simple means of limiting any slippage resulting from imperfect application of the other tests. It did not apply to a firm which had not raised its prices above the levels of the base period usually defined as the days preceding the freeze of August THE FIRM-BY-FIRM APPROACH An important and unusual feature of the price-wage control system is that the unit of control was the firm or in some cases the collective bargaining unit rather than the product or occupation. That is the Price Commission did not set a price ceiling for each covered product men 's white button-down shirts of certain specifications for example which applied to all sellers of that product. Instead it laid down rules for determining the ceiling price of each product sold by a particular firm or where the TLP applied the average price of all the products sold by that firm This system had the great advantage that each firm could compute its permissible prices for itself from information available in its own accounts aside from the sector productivity factor published by the Price Commission and the overall TLP terms which were applicable to a relatively small number of firms. Firms did not have to wait for price determinations by the control agency although the larger firms had to have approval of their calculations. This do-it-yourself approach to price control was the only way to get the system into operation quickly and then keep it in operation without a large Government staff to determine the ceilings. Moreover it gave recognition to differences among products and firms that the market recognized but that could hardly be taken into account in price-control regulations On the other hand the firm-by-firm approach contained a number of actual or potential difficulties. Customers and enforcement officers were unable to tell what a firm 's ceiling price was without study of the firm 's books In some cases it froze a price relation among firms which for some transitory reason existed in the base period but which would be unfair or inefficient if continued for long. Since with some exceptions a firm 's ceiling prices would depend on its own costs the pressure to hold down costs would be weakened. If the product in question were scarce a situation might emerge in which it carried different prices simultaneously in the market and which created problems of fairness and efficiency in allocation. These difficulties were not expected to become pervasive however as long as excess demand and shortages were not common and as long as the controls were considered to be temporary. Competition would tend to establish a one-price system even if ceiling prices differed among firms ; for that reason and also out of regard for what would happen when controls ended companies could not be complacent about increases in their costs The application of the pay standards on a firm-by-firm basis or on the basis of individual bargaining units could raise similar problems. However the factors determining permissible pay increases were more uniform among firms than the factors determining permissible price increases and they were less likely to produce distortions. Moreover the standards of the Pay Board made more explicit provision for preserving customary relations among groups of employees COVERAGE AND ADMINISTRATION The Phase II program was initially very comprehensive in its coverage measured either by the number of economic units or by the proportions of the value of output and income to which it applied. During the number of economic units covered was substantially reduced but the proportion of the value of output covered remained large The system applied directly to the prices of goods and services including residential rents and to employee compensation including the compensation of executives. It applied indirectly to profit rates through the control of the relation between costs and prices and through the profit-margin rule and it applied to rental income on residential property in the same way Interest rates and dividends were the object of a voluntary restraint program The most important exempt sector was agriculture ( defined to include fisheries and forests ) Initially farm products were exempt at all stages of distribution as long as they were unprocessed. Thus lettuce in a retail store was exempt from price control. In June the exemption was narrowed to only the first sale at the farm. However since the percent increase in farm prices for all types of products could be passed through at the subsequent stages this modification amounted to control of the processing and distribution margins rather than control of the farm prices Farm product prices were exempted because they did not conform to the pattern upon which the controls system was based. The theory of the controls system was that the price increases to which it was directed both occurring and in prospect were not " equilibrating " ; that is they were not price increases necessary to elicit more production or to distribute a short supply. In fact in many cases where supply could be quickly expanded there would be more demanded and therefore produced if prices did not rise. These price increases could therefore be repressed without creating shortages. Farm prices however are determined in highly competitive markets and they adjust continually to equate the quantities demanded and supplied. To repress the price increases in those markets would create shortages and rather than increase supply would probably reduce it. Similar reasoning justified exemption of market interest rates prices of financial assets and prices of imports. Prices of exports were exempted because they did not enter into the price level confronting American consumers Pay scales of the Federal Government and prices charged by it were exempted with the understanding that other means would be used to keep these wages and prices consistent with the goals of the stabilization program. A number of less important categories were exempted for administrative reasons Within the controlled area firms and bargaining units were divided for purposes of administration into three categories or tiers on the basis of size ( Table ) Although the same standards of price and wage behavior applied on all tiers the large economic units were subjected to closer surveillance than the smaller ones but not because the large units were believed likely to be more " inflationary " than small ones. There were two main reasons for this decision. First an administrative staff of a given size could observe a given volume of economic activity more effectively by watching a few large companies than by watching many small ones. Second close scrutiny of a part of the market was believed likely to yield better control than loose scrutiny of all of it the reasoning being that the behavior of the closely watched part would discipline the behavior of the others because of competitive pressures TABLE Classification of firms and workers in Economic Stabilization Program l Tier Firm Employees Prenotification of wage or price increases ; quarterly reporting of price sales profits Sales of $ million and over ( firms percent of sales ) Wage units of or more workers ( percent of total ) II Reporting of increases ; quarterly reporting of price sales profits Sales of $ million to $ million ( firms percent of sales ) Wage units of to workers ( percent of total ) III No reporting ; subject to ESP regulations and monitoring Sales of less than $ million ( million enterprises percent of sales ) Other workers ( percent of total ) As of the end of exemptions had been granted to million enterprises with percent of total sales and to percent of all employees ( including exempted employees of State and local governments ) Source : Cost of Living Council The largest firms those in Tier I were required to notify the Price Commission in advance and to get approval of any price increase unless they had previously obtained a term limit pricing agreement or some other special provision such as a volatile price rule. The firms in Tier II were not required to obtain advance approval unless they sought an exception from the rules ; but they were required to file quarterly reports which were prescribed by the Price Commission and from which compliance could be checked. Tier III firms were not required to file reports but their compliance was open to spot check by the Internal Revenue Service The procedures relating to pay were similar to those governing prices Small business exemptions. Despite the tier arrangement described above it became clear almost as soon as Phase II began that a disproportionate part of the administrative capacity of the system was being used to provide information and to process complaints in cases that had little effect on the inflation problem. The Cost of Living Council decided that it could use its resources better by concentrating them on the larger economic units relying on competition from them to restrain price increases by the smaller ones. In January retail firms with annual sales of less than $ were exempted. This action removed from control three-fourths of all retail firms but only percent of all retail sales. At the same time the Cost of Living Council exempted from rent controls all apartments or houses whose landlord owned four or fewer units. Apartments renting for $ or more a month were also exempted but on a different ground namely that keeping down the rents of luxury apartments was not so urgent a national interest as to justify the administrative burdens it involved. The effect of these actions was to exempt from control about percent of all rental units In May the Cost of Living Council exempted from both price and wage controls all firms and local government units with or fewer employees with certain exceptions. The exceptions were firms in the construction and health service industries and firms in which more than half of the employees were affected by a collective bargaining contract which covered more than employees. The selection of as the cutoff point was influenced by the desire to exempt as many firms as possible but at the same time to keep a significant fraction of the sales of each industry under control Administration and compliance. The relatively small staff of the economic stabilization agencies had the twofold task of informing the public of the rules and regulations and of developing procedures for ensuring compliance. The staff was also responsible for processing inquiries requests for approval of price and wage increases complaints alleging violations applications for exceptions and exemptions and appeals for review of decisions. At the end of there had been million direct contacts with the public. Of these percent were inquiries percent of which referred to rents with questions on prices and wages making up the remainder in equal proportions. More than prenotifications of price increases by larger Tier I firms were received many necessitating detailed Price Commission analyses and lengthy meetings with company representatives. Notification of many wage increases negotiated by larger employee units numbering more than workers also required review procedures by the Pay Board The major burden of responding to inquiries complaints and requests for exceptions fell on the seven regional offices and district and subdistrict offices of the Internal Revenue Service. As the program matured and guidelines and decision precedents became established more authority for decision making was delegated to these field offices particularly in administering price and rent controls Reliance primarily on voluntary compliance adopted at the beginning of the Economic Stabilization Program was maintained through The Internal Revenue Service did however conduct numerous investigations based on citizens ' complaints in addition to the more than investigations carried out at the direction of ESP officials. Most potential violations were handled through price rollbacks rather than legal action. Administrative sanctions ordinarily required firms to refund or reduce prices in amounts sufficient to offset the dollar amount of the apparent excess profit margin or in the amount of revenue derived from the price increases whichever was smaller. However double or treble price reductions and refunds were sometimes required. In exceptional cases legal action was initiated. About such actions were undertaken in the first year of Phase II SUPPLEMENTARY ANTI-INFLATION MEASURES As progressed rapidly rising prices of food especially meat became a more and more critical problem for the controls program. Partly because food prices weigh heavily in the public 's perception of what is happening to living costs the higher food prices were threatening to weaken public confidence in the program The control system could not satisfactorily restrain the increase of food prices. Prices at the farm level were exempted ; and although controls were repeatedly considered during they were always rejected on the ground that such controls would cause shortages immediately and discourage the expansion of supplies for the future A large part about two-thirds of the value of food is added in processing and distribution after the products leave the farm. The price or margin at these stages was controlled ; but sometimes the controls left room for increasing margins and from time to time the Cost of Living Council made special appeals to food processors and distributors to hold margins down. The Internal Revenue Service also concentrated on assuring compliance with the controls in food processing and marketing However over the Phase II period competition controls and voluntary cooperation successfully constrained the margin between food prices at the farm and food prices at retail. According to Department of Agriculture estimates this margin increased by only percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of In the same period the farm price of domestically produced farm foods increased by percent while retail food prices increased by percent Rising food prices and the inability of price controls to curb them focused attention on the range of other measures available to Government which could restrain the rise of food costs. In general five measures were applied which operated to increase supplies either immediately or in the longer run In June limitations on the import of meat were suspended for In December this suspension was continued into Government-controlled stocks of meat and grains were reduced Export subsidies for wheat and rice were discontinued ; this action eliminated an artificial incentive to export that was reducing domestic supplies Limits on the planting of wheat rice feed grains and soybeans in were eased Import quotas on nonfat dry milk were increased temporarily at the beginning of In addition to foods two other commodity areas lumber and hides registered substantially higher prices despite the controls. In both cases the Administration tried to curb price increases by special measures. Steps were taken to increase timber cutting in the national forests and to enforce the control regulations more strictly on lumber sales. The Department of Commerce imposed a limit on the export of hides in order to increase the domestic supply a move that was soon overturned however by congressional action SUPPLEMENT T O CHAPTER In order to answer the question whether the occupational distribution of women has moved closer to that of men 's an index of occupational dissimilarity was constructed for and The particular measure of dissimilarity used here is calculated by taking the absolute difference ( for each of occupations ) between the percentage of the female experienced civilian labor force in a given occupation and the percentage of the male experienced civilian labor force in the same occupation summing these differences across the occupations and then dividing this sum by Those persons in the experienced labor force who did not report their occupation were excluded from the denominator. If men and women were to have the identical occupational distributions then the value of the index would be At the other extreme if men and women were completely occupationally segregated so that they were never in the same occupation the index would have a value of The values of the occupational dissimilarity index calculated as described were as follows : The index therefore indicates a very small change in the direction of increased occupational similarity between and The data for the calculations were taken from the decennial censuses of and In Table women 's representation in a group of detailed occupations is given for and TABLE Women in experienced civilian labor force I960 and ( years of age and over ) Number of women ( thousands ) Women as percent of all persons in occupation Occupational group Professional and technical workers Accountants Architects Engineers Farm and home management advisers Lawyers and judges Librarians Life and physical scientists Personnel and labor relations workers Pharmacists Physicians medical and osteopathic Dietitians Registered nurses Therapists Health technicians.. Clergymen Other religious workers _ TOTAL ( i ) fl TABLE Women in experienced civilian labor force I960 and Continued ( years of age and over ) Number o f women ( thousands ) Occupational group Women as percent of all persons in occupation Professional and technical workers Cont 'd Social scientists Social workers Recreation workers Teachers elementary Teachers secondary Teachers college and university Engineering and science technicians Draftsmen Radio operators Authors ^ Dancers Designers Editors and reporters Musicians and composers Photographers Other professional technical and kindred workers M n J a Buyers wholesale and retail trade Credit men Public administrators and postal inspectors. Managers and superintendents building Administrators n.e.c Federal Administrators n.e.c State Administrators n e e local Officials of societies and unions Postmasters and mail superintendents Purchasing agents and buyers n e e Restaurant cafeteria and bar managers Other specified managers and administrators except farm ) ( Managers and administrators except farm ( ( Managers and administrators n.e.c. salaried : Construction Manufacturing Transportation Communication and utilities Wholesale trade Retail hardware etc Retail general merchandise Retail foodstores Retail motor vehicles and accessories Retail apparel and accessories Retail furniture etc Other retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Business and repair services Personal services All other industries Managers and administrators n.e.c. selfemployed : Construction Manufacturing Transportation Wholesale trade Retail hardware etc..__ Retail general merchandise Retail food Retail gas service stations Retail apparel and accessories stores Retail furniture etc Other retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Business and repair services Personal services All other industries _ TABLE Women in experienced civilian labor force and -Continued ( years of age and over ) Number of women ( thousands ) Women as percent of all persons in occupation Occupational group _ Bakers Bookbinders Compositors and typesetters Decorators and window dressers Electricians Linemen and servicemen telegraph telephone and power Engravers except photoengravers Foremen nonmanufacturing Foremen manufacturing inspectors Machinists Mechanics and repairmen except air auto.. Aircraft mechanics Auto mechanics Opticians lensgrinders and polishers Painters construction and maintenance Pressmen and plate printers printing Stationary engineers Tailors _ Upholsterers Other craftsmen _ Dressmakers and seamstresses except factory Filers polishers sanders and buffers Laundry and drycleaning operatives Meatcutters and butchers except manufacturing _ Milliners Painters manufactured articles Photographic process workers Sawyers Textile operatives Bus drivers Deliverymen and routemen Taxicab drivers and chauffeurs Truckdrivers Other specified operatives O Craftsmen Operatives Bank tellers Bookkeepers Cashiers Collectors bill and account Dispatchers and starters vehicle. Library attendants and assistants Mail carriers post office Messengers and office boys Office machine operators Shipping and receiving clerks Stenographers typists and secretaries Telegraph operators Telephone operators Ticket station and express agents Other clerical workers Clerical and kindred workers- Advertising agents and salesmen Demonstrators Hucksters and peddlers Insurance agents brokers and underwriters Newsboys Real estate agents and brokers Sales representatives manufacturing Sales representatives wholesale Salesmen and clerks retail. Other salesworkers Sales workers ( O ) T TABLE Women in experienced civilian labor force I960 and Continued ( years of age and over ) Number of women ( thousands ) Occupational group Women as percent of all persons in occupation Operatives Cont 'd Miscellaneous and not specified operatives n.e.c Lumber and wood products except furniture Stone clay and glass products Metal industries _ Electrical machinery equipment and supplies ' Food and kindred products.. Textile mill products Apparel and other fabricated textile products Leather and leather products Other manufacturing _ Transportation communication and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade... Public administration Other nonmanufacturing industries Other nonfarm laborers Farm workers Farmers owners and tenants Farm managers Farm laborers wage workers Farm laborers unpaid family workers Other farm laborers ) ) O ) Miscellaneous and not specified laborers Laborers except farm Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Fabricated metal industries ._ Machinery except electrical Electrical machinery equipment and supplies Transportation equipment Professional and photographic equipment and watches Miscellaneous manufacturing industries.. Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Apparel and other fabricated textile products Paper and allied products Printing publishing etc Chemicals etc Rubber and miscellaneous plastic Leather products Wholesale and retail _ Business and repair services Public administration Other nonmanufacturing 3.S 1U ) ! TABLE ~ Women in experienced civilian labor force I960 and Continued ( years of age and over ) Number of women ( thousands ) Occupational group Women as percent of all persons in occupation Service workers Cleaners and charwomen Janitors and sextons Bartenders Cooks except private household Counter and fountain workers Waiters and waitresses Practical nurses Other health services Attendants recreation and amusement Attendants personal service n.e.c Boarding and lodging housekeepers Elevator operators Barbers hairdressers and cosmetologists Housekeepers except private household Guards and watchmen Policemen and detectives Other protective service workers Other service workers except private household Housekeepers private household Laundresses private household. Other private household workers Occupation not reported i Data are not available because of changes in classification n.e.c. = not elsewhere classified Note : Occupational classifications in this table are not exactly comparable with Census classifications because of regrouping detailed occupations Detail for is not always strictly comparable with later years because of changes in classification The data are based on samples drawn from the decennial censuses. The sample sizes are : ZlA percent ; percent ; percent Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census and Council of Economic Advisers SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER The following memorandum elaborates the United States proposal for establishing a system in which nations ' reserve movements would serve as quantitative indicators to guide the balance-of-payments adjustment process. The basic U.S. proposal was contained in an address by Secretary of the Treasury Shultz at the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development September The memorandum was made available to the Deputies of the Committee of Twenty in November THE U.S. PROPOSALS FOR USING RESERVES AS AN INDICATOR OF THE NEED FOR BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENT I. INTRODUCTION There appears to be general agreement that a reformed international monetary system should promote prompter and more effective adjustment of balance-of-payments disequilibria. The U.S. proposals are based on the premise that each country will be willing to work within the context of a system that provides strong equitable and balanced incentives to achieve and maintain external balance In the U.S. view the most promising approach is a system in which disproportionate changes in a nation 's reserves in either direction serve as objective indicators that balance-of-payments adjustment measures are needed. We visualize a system in which disproportionately large gains in reserves for a particular country indicate the need for adjustment measures to eliminate a balance-of-payments surplus just as in any system of convertibility into reserve assets disproportionately large losses of reserves indicate the need for adjustment to eliminate a balance-of-payments deficit. A variety of adjustment instruments would be acceptable. The purpose of this paper is to develop the logic of this approach The international monetary system in past years has failed to provide adequate inducements to achieve and maintain balance-of-payments equilibrium defined as a situation in which external payments are in reasonable balance at normal levels of employment and economic activity and without inappropriate utilization of controls. This failure was reflected in both large and persistent imbalances and in recent years in some tendency toward increased use of controls. Deficit countries could often maintain disequilibria for a considerable period through measures distorting trade capital flows or the internal economy ; they were usually permitted or even encouraged to borrow extensively. ( In the case of the United States this " borrowing " in large part took the form of increased holdings by foreign monetary authorities of U.S. dollar obligations. ) Surplus countries able to accumulate reserves more or less indefinitely felt under even less pressure to adjust and an increasingly common response has been controls on the inward flow of capital Viewed from the perspective of a single country particularly a country in a relatively advanced stage of development balance-of-payments surpluses have been considered a more comfortable and more desirable state of affairs than deficit or balance. A surplus country could avoid the politically embarrassing adjustment actions which a deficit country might be forced to take. A strong trading position was frequently considered a vehicle for domestic economic expansion and maintenance of full employment. A persistently strong currency and large reserves might be felt to provide useful protection against unexpected external influences and even to symbolize prudent economic management. Prior to the introduction of the SDR scheme the system depended on balance-of-payments disequilibrium for growth in reserves growth in global reserves over time could be accomplished only as other countries ran surpluses offset by U.S. deficits financed through an expansion of U.S. liabilities Some of these incentives to run surpluses were recognized in the discussion leading up to Bretton Woods and they were reflected in the strictures placed on competitive devaluation. Nevertheless while overt competitive devaluations have not been important many countries still more or less consciously have aimed for payments surpluses and adapted their economic policy instruments to that end. At the very least surpluses were tolerated while deficits were a source of concern and action. There was nothing in the system to assure compatibility of nations ' balance-of-payments objectives nothing to assure that the surpluses which many countries sought would be offset by targeted deficits in equal amounts on the part of other countries Within this general context there were systematic tendencies for surpluses and deficits to fall in a particular pattern. From the viewpoint of the United States as the largest unit in the world economic system and in important ways in the least flexible position these pressures toward surplus and currency undervaluation by others have had their counterpart in a persistent deficit in its own accounts. It was long felt inappropriate in the light of the disturbing implications for stability in world financial markets for the United States to initiate exchange rate action to correct this deficit When the imbalance increased substantially and such action was undertaken the resistance by its trading partners seemed to confirm their reluctance to lose a surplus position as well as to demonstrate the difficulty of achieving the needed adjustment in the absence of agreed criteria for reconciling balance-of-payments objectives. From the viewpoint of some other countries the mechanism that permitted the chronic U.S. deficit and their surpluses to persist namely the tendency for that imbalance to be financed in part by increased dollar holdings of other countries indicated that the United States was not subject to the usual constraints of a deficit country In concept the introduction of the SDR successfully freed the system of the need for continuous U.S. deficits to meet reserve needs. But by itself that reform was not sufficient to change the basic bias in the system While the system operated satisfactorily for a number of years in fact it may have been preferable to any realistic alternative it was a system of continuous imbalance of protracted disequilibrium. From the viewpoint of both the U.S. and other nations the results were increasingly unsatisfactory creating major stresses that undermined stability. The system failed in the end because it depended on a measure of broad equilibrium for sustained satisfactory operation yet failed to induce the adjustments required to achieve equilibrium. The actions taken by the United States on August signaled the untenability of the previously existing arrangements. The interim arrangements developed since that time including the Smithsonian Agreement of December do not provide a long-term solution to these problems The U.S. proposals for a future system are designed to encourage equilibrium by promoting needed adjustments actively rather than simply prohibiting unwarranted moves ; and to apply equivalent incentives for adjustment evenhandedly to all nations. The proposals are evolutionary in the sense that they would build on certain areas of widespread agreement incorporated in past arrangements : the SDR convertibility the prohibition on competitive devaluation and emphasis on the need for international financial arrangements to support liberal trade and payments. They would differ from the past in building these and other elements of the system into arrangements for actively promoting adjustment reconciling balance-of-payments objectives and overcoming the systematic bias toward surpluses II. THE NEED FOR OBJECTIVE CRITERIA The U.S. proposals take as a point of departure that the stability and durability of a new monetary system will be crucially dependent on finding an equitable and effective means of promoting the adjustment of external imbalances In approaching that objective we believe success is dependent upon finding an appropriate blend among three possible approaches each of which contains some advantages but none of which is satisfactory by itself The three approaches are : a ) national discretion a degree of which is essential in a world of sovereign nations and desirable in allowing maximum practicable freedom of action among individual countries but which relied on alone assures neither equilibrium nor an equitable sharing of adjustment responsibilities ; b ) discretionary authority of a central institution which can bring to bear the influence and collective wisdom of the entire world community on particular adjustment problems but which can lead to endless debate indecision or unbalanced decisions in a potentially politically charged atmosphere and which requires at least the appearance of ceding more authority to an international body than nations will yield at this stage of international development ; c ) objective criteria which can be helpful in establishing measurements for indicating adjustment needs for various nations and various situations on a standardized basis but which do not unerringly point to appropriate adjustments or permit needed discretion by national authorites The U.S. proposal aims at a balance among these approaches to utilize the advantages of each while avoiding the disadvantages which might result from excessive or singleminded reliance on any of the three We propose that objective criteria be established to note and locate the existence of an undesirable degree of balance-of-payments disequilibrium and to create a strong presumption that effective adjustment policies should be implemented. But we would leave to the country concerned substantial discretion in determining the composition of those adjustment policies. And international consultations would be utilized to determine the applicability of the criteria to particular situations and to consider exceptional cases in which the rules might be overridden Use of objective indicators as an important element of the adjustment mechanism appears essential on grounds of efficacy and equity. Adjustment decisions are frequently difficult for any government and there is a tendency to postpone and avoid such decisions until long after the time when adjustment policies should have been adopted. Equally international groups are reluctant to deal promptly with difficult and politically sensitive adjustment questions. Without objective indicators there is a danger that needed actions will not be taken. It is much better to get advance agreement in principle that when certain internationally agreed indicators recognized as being objective signal adjustment is needed there will be a strong presumption that appropriate measures will be adopted but recognizing there might be valid reasons for overriding the indicators in exceptional cases. Such an approach is much more likely to result in equal treatment for all nations : it would call for comparable adjustment inducements for all countries whether large or small developed or developing reserve currency country or not to eliminate payments disequilibria whether surplus or deficit III. ADJUSTMENT RESERVES AND CONVERTIBILITY The U.S. proposals assume that most nations will want to maintain established values for their exchange rates par values or central rates in conjunction with a generalized system of convertibility of national currencies into international reserve assets. In a system of established exchange values and convertibility there is a close relationship between balance-ofpayments disequilibria and reserve changes. Accordingly in our view the single most valid indicator that a country is in actual or emerging disequilibrium as well as the most readily available the most comprehensive and the least ambiguous is a persistent movement of its reserves in one direction or another To be viable a convertibility system must be capable of satisfying the sum of individual countries ' normal needs for and secular growth in reserves. Nations individually either explicitly through formulation of overt balance-of-payments objectives or more implicitly through their behavior express an effective demand for reserves. Unless the international monetary system is capable of meeting these national demands in the aggregate and changing the level of reserves to meet changes in such needs over time a satisfactory reconciliation of national balance-of-payments aims and therefore sustained balance-of-payments equilibrium can not be assured. For if reserves are not adequate to these demands in the aggregate nations are incapable by definition of reaching their desired reserve positions simultaneously. A decision to provide the system with too few reserves induces and sanctions a destabilizing and ultimately fruitless competition for scarce reserves. Creation of too many reserves pushes too great a share of the adjustment pressures onto surplus countries and facilitates world inflation A critical defect of the system in the past was that while it tried to promise unlimited convertibility and while fundamentally it required a broad measure of balance-of-payments equilibrium for sustained operation it did not provide the supply of acceptable reserve assets or the discipline on adjustment policies necessary to achieve these objectives. A basic feature of the U.S. proposal is that nations must through the process of negotiation reach a collective decision on the appropriate normal stock and rate of increase of reserves and be prepared to accept the consequences of that decision in terms of their own individual reserve positions and their own freedom of action to run surpluses or deficits It would be essential in the proposed system that countries regard their balance-of-payments disequilibria whether surplus or deficit as a source of concern before the agreed indicators came into play. In other words countries would not be expected to ignore imbalances blithely until their disequilibria had become so extreme as to prompt strong international concern through the indicator mechanism. Reserve fluctuations would signal emerging disequilibria ; movement to outer indicators signalling strong international concern would occur only when countries failed to make the appropriate responses as the disequilibria built up Convertibility itself can not promote adequate or equitable adjustment. Convertibility is in that sense an asymmetrical tool operating only on deficit countries. In the framework of the U.S. proposal the inherent link of convertibility to reserve fluctuations would result in broadly symmetrical pressures upon surplus and deficit nations In short the logic of the U.S. proposals is that a ) better balance-ofpayments adjustment is required and is essential to the maintenance of a convertibility system ; b ) such an adjustment process in turn requires recognition by both surplus and deficit countries of their obligations and responsibilities to take action ; c ) in that context objective indicators of the need for adjustment are essential ; d ) a broad equality between the availabiliy of and demands for reserves in the system must be satisfied ; and e ) all of these needs can be brought together in the context of a system of established exchange rates supported by convertibility by the use of reserve movements as the main indicator of the need for adjustment IV. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ADJUSTMENT/RESERVE/CONVERTIBILITY SYSTEM These principles could be incorporated into several alternative operational frameworks. Such alternative formulations could for example ( a ) emphasize the use of net or gross reserves as the basis for measuring fluctuations in reserves ; ( b ) focus attention largely on changes in resei yes from an existing starting level or on an appropriate distribution of individual countries5 reserves in relation to some " objective " standard ; and ( c ) provide for either relatively narrow or relatively wide ranges of fluctuation in reserves before international disciplines come into play. While the underlying principles and logic of the various approaches would be broadly similar the particular formulation chosen would determine the speed force and manner with which the adjustment pressures would operate. For its part the United States wishes to continue to examine the advantages and disadvantages of the alternatives with care and would welcome the contribution toward this effort that others can make The use of fluctuations in countries ' reserves as the main indicator of adjustment need requires a judgment about a " base " level and trend of reserves for each country. Abstracting from transitional problems ( noted later ) these " base levels " could be established in several different ways. For instance the distributional pattern of national quotas in the IMF ( allowing for any agreed revisions in the future ) might represent one approach toward determining a broadly acceptable distribution of reserves in normal circumstances. Another approach would be to give heavy weight to the actual level of reserves at the start of the system for the majority of countries relying on separate negotiations for those countries whose reserves at the start of the system were judged to be seriously excessive or inadequate. Countries ' " base levels " in any case would be expected to rise over time consistent with collective decisions about world SDR creation. The manner in which " base levels " should be calculated would clearly be a matter for careful ne- gotiation. What is necessary is that some pattern be accepted that is generally satisfactory Use of reserve fluctuations to achieve an evenhanded stimulus to adjustment will require a broad consistency between the total of established " base levels " for individual countries and the actual supply of reserves in the system as a whole. Conceptually in a system which did not provide for reserve currencies this need could be met simply by assuring that the aggregate of gold SDR 's and IMF positions that is " primary reserves " equaled the aggregate of countries ' " base levels " of reserves. If in such a system aggregate " base levels " were above total primary reserves a destabilizing and potentially deflationary competition for reserves could result ; if " base levels " were below the total of primary assets too large a share of adjustment pressures would be shifted toward surplus countries and world inflation might be facilitated In practice we assume that some nations will wish to hold foreign exchange in their reserves and should be permitted to do so. Some nations will want flexibility of reserve management and the system as a whole will benefit from an ability to respond flexibly to sudden and reversible increases in the need for liquidity during periods of strain related to speculative or other factors. Thus in structuring the proposed system consideration will need to be given to the complication introduced by the existence of a possibly fluctuating margin of foreign exchange holdings. In a convertibility system foreign exchange holdings are potential claims on primary reserves Consequently a stable system must provide enough primary reserves in relation to the whole to meet reasonable demands for conversion of these potential convertibility claims and/or must limit demands for conversion by individual countries that would otherwise claim an excessive proportion of the available supply of primary reserves There are a number of complementary approaches which could reconcile the existence of foreign exchange holdings in reserves with the stability and evenhanded working of a system of reserve indicators. One approach would be to equate the aggregate of " base levels " with the total of primary reserves and provide limits on the disproportionate accumulation of primary reserves by a country above its base level. Some assurance against excessive claims for primary reserves growing out of past accumulation of foreign exchange could also be provided by arrangements providing for bilateral or multilateral funding of existing foreign exchange reserves to the extent the holder wished to fund such balances or by a facility for exchange of such balances initially or over time into SDR 's. These aspects of the question should receive careful study but are not further considered here Under a reserve-indicator system certain points would be established above and below each country 's base level to guide the adjustment process and to assure even-handed convertibility disciplines. Such points would be set according to uniform procedures for each country and could be de scribed as follows again abstracting from special arrangements that would be appropriate during a transitional period. ( See Chart ) a ) A " low point " would be set at some point below the " base level. " In concept this might approximate a level of reserves considered to be close to the minimum level ordinarily necessary to maintain confidence and to guard against extreme emergencies. If a country 's reserves fell below its " low point " for a period of time definite adjustment pressures would be anticipated and acceptable adjustment measures would be expected. In the absence of adequate policies over a specified period international sanctions for example refusal to provide credit or loss of scheduled SDR allocations might become effective. Such sanctions would be avoided only if the IMF through approval of a satisfactory program of adjustment made a finding that sanctions were not warranted. Negotiated credits to deficit countries would ordinarily be permitted but excessive or prolonged borrowing to circumvent the indicators would not be allowed b ) A " lower warning point " would be set at a point between a country 's " base level " and the " low point. " Small devaluations would be freely permitted a country at any time its reserves were below its base level. Proposals for larger devaluations would always require IMF approval ; such proposals would not ordinarily be looked upon with favor unless a country 's reserves had fallen below its " lower warning point. " c ) An " outer point " would be established above a country 's " base level. " As a country moved toward its " outer point " it would be expected to apply adjustment measures of progressive intensity. If reserves rose to the " outer point " remained at or above that level for a specified period and an adequate program of adjustment were not in place international action to induce adjustment would take effect. For example the IMF might authorize other countries to impose general import taxes or surcharges against the country concerned there might be a loss of scheduled SDR allocations or there might be a tax on the country 's excess reserve holdings with proceeds to go to development assistance. Such sanctions could be avoided or postponed only if the IMF made a positive finding they were not warranted on the basis of an agreed program of adjustment involving for example major moves toward liberalization of import restrictions removal of any controls on the outward flow of capital provision of concessional untied aid or revaluation Standards should be developed for judging the adequacy of such programs and their consistency with progress toward a liberal world economic order. If reserve gains persisted despite the agreed program authorization for sanctions would after a further period take Chart Illustration for Individual Country of Reserve Indicator System RESERVES If reserves remain at outer point for specified period adjustment measures required. International sanctions unless IMF overrides Location of convertibility point related to volume of primary reserves relative to base levels for system as a whole. If a country reaches the convertibility point further acquisition of primary reserves prohibited Convertibility Point J \ Outer point- Warning Point ' Base Level Warning P o i n t If reserves remain at low point for specified period adjustment measures required. International sanctions unless IMF overrides Low Point- TIME effect. In any event the IMF would review the country 's position periodically and make such recommendations and authorizations as it deemed appropriate d ) An " upper warning point " would be set between the " base level " and the " outer point " analogous to the lower warning point representing an international judgment that adjustment is called for. The IMF would be expected to report on the country 's balance-of-payments position and prospects and revaluation or other adjustment measures would be anticipated e ) Depending on the volume of total reserves relative to primary reserves in the system this " upper warning point " might coincide with a " convertibility point " representing the maximum accumulation of primary reserves for each country that would be justified consistent with the level of aggregate primary reserves in the entire system for the convertibility mechanism to operate equitably with respect to both deficit and surplus countries. Both to provide an incentive for adjustment and to prevent countries from placing further convertibility pressures on others a country reaching such a " convertibility point " would be unable to acquire additional primary reserves through either purchase or SDR allocation A reserve-indicator system such as the one sketched above should be supplemented and elaborated by consultative procedures within the IMF concerning adjustment programs and problems. For such procedures to be effective national policy officials at a politically responsive level should be drawn into the process. Such IMF review could take into account supplementary criteria in considering the nature and magnitude of any need for adjustment Countries would not be expected to delay adjustment action until they had reached the indicator points. The purpose of a reserve-indicator system is to provide strong incentives for countries to act in limited steps using a variety of tools suited to their circumstances before their situation becomes so urgent as to involve international concern and action. Moreover while countries would at given points be brought under overt international pressure for adjustment they would still have a range of policy options at their disposal. The range of " acceptable adjustment measures " for the system would however be limited to those consistent with market mechanisms and a liberal world trade and payments order. Exchange rate changes are not seen as the only or necessarily the most desirable means of adjustment in all cases Even though the aim of the system is to promote equilibrium some scope for fluctuation in reserves is obviously necessary and desirable. No workable system can or should try to assure lock-step economic performance from nations differing greatly in size stage of development and economic circumstance. Through the process of negotiation an international consensus should be reached in defining the indicator points so as to get " enough " elbow room for some fluctuation in reserves to meet transitory payments imbalances but not " so much " that adjustment is inappropriately delayed The reserve-indicator system should be designed to permit countries maximum flexibility to the extent compatible with maintaining the system 's basic principles : a ) As noted a small devaluation without requirement for approval might be permitted at any time a country 's reserves were below base level. Small revaluations might be permitted at any time. While in practice situations would seldom if ever arise for withholding international approval from larger revaluations restraint will continue to be necessary to guard against competitive devaluation b ) A country could opt for a transitional float under agreed rules in lieu of a discrete exchange rate change. If it intended to reestablish and maintain a central value for its currency within a given period a reserve-deficient country could be permitted under suitable guidelines to increase its reserves toward its base level. If a country 's reserves were above its base level at the time of initia tion of the transitional float it would not be permitted further reserve accumulation c ) A country could depart from the regime of established parities to float for a period of indefinite duration but only if it adhered to internationally agreed standards that would assure the consistency of its actions with the basic requirements of a cooperative order These standards would relate for example to movements in its reserves its intervention policies elimination of controls on the inward flow of capital avoidance of restrictive trade controls imposed for balance-of-payments purposes and elimination of any existing extraordinary balance-of-payments measures. Exchange rate systems nominally establishing a central or par value but envisaging very frequent changes such as those now in force in some less developed countries could be integrated with this rule d ) Any group of countries in the process of forming a monetary union with an implicit high degree of political and economic integration could choose to operate as a unit. In this instance the relevant criteria would be applied to the unit as a whole which would be expected to speak with one voice in international forums The reserve norms for the unit would have to be recalculated to reflect external trade and appropriate treatment of intra-unit assets e ) On a selective basis consideration should be given to special arrangements for exclusion from reserves and thus from measurements of adjustment need of an " investment fund " of foreign securities or other foreign assets held by official agencies. Such funds might be appropriate for selected countries that wanted to hold over a prolonged period of time within official accounts ( or with official inducements ) foreign assets for long-term investment purposes. Such countries could be asked to observe certain criteria with respect to term size and nature of the holdings. Oil producing countries with relatively large external assets would be candidates for such arrangements f ) Negotiated official credits ( including IMF credits ) should be permitted. Satisfactory procedures for the recording of such credits under the reserve-indicator system would need to be devised g ) In general the system should neither ban nor encourage official holdings of foreign exchange. However in the context of the proposed system such holdings would presumably not loom so large relatively as in recent years. Each country should have the right to place limits on the further accumulation of its own currency of issue by official institutions in any other individual country or group of countries. Each country that chose to permit foreign official holdings of its currency must provide reasonable and normal investment facilities for those holdings The United States proposal neither gives special rights to nor imposes special obligations on any country or group of countries. It assumes a monetary system in which all countries are treated equally. All would have the same freedom to use the full exchange rate margins permitted in the system All would have the same rights to allow their currencies to float transitionally or indefinitely under the same internationally agreed rules of behavior and surveillance. All maintaining established values for their currencies would have the same obligation to assure convertibility of their currencies meaning that officially held balances of foreign currencies could be freely presented to the issuing country for conversion into primary reserve assets with the choice among SDR 's reserve positions in the IMF and gold to be made by the issuing country V. TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS At the present time there is a highly unbalanced pattern of reserves and balance-of- ^ payments positions among the major industrial nations. Unquestionably there would be a need for special transitional arrangements to put into being the system proposed by the United States. Various approaches for dealing with these problems can be developed. For example proposals that have been put forward for funding consolidating or otherwise dealing with foreign exchange balances which holding countries may regard as excess may be particularly relevant. The U.S. has an open mind on particular arrangements that might be proposed. We merely want to note that some generally acceptable transitional arrangements are necessary. This transitional problem is not unique to the proposed system. Any monetary system based upon concepts of equilibrium and convertibility will require special measures to deal with transitional problems VI. SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT THE PROPOSALS Three questions which might be raised about the operational feasibility of the U.S. proposal are discussed below. These questions could arise under any system based on reserves as an indicator of adjustment need Indeed we should note comparable problems will arise perhaps in a different form in any par value-convertibility system and often in more severe form The first question is : Is it possible to define reserves so as to assure they are useful and accurate criteria ? Based on reserves as the key indicator of disequilibrium and the need for adjustment the system proposed by the U.S. depends on clear and reliable definitions of what constitutes both primary and total reserves to assure that they give the appropriate signals in a given situation and to assure that the rules can not be easily circumvented by artificial reserve transactions or concealment of reserves Primary reserves are more easily defined. They would consist of SDR 's reserve positions in the IMF and monetary gold. There would be a precise and known amount of primary reserves for each nation and for the system as a whole Primary reserves would of course be widely transferred among nations for settlement purposes. Primary reserves might also be borrowed and lent. In order to assure the consistency of the aggregate level of primary reserves in the system with the operation of the system appropriate rules would need to be devised to assure against double counting of primary reserves. For example it might be agreed that lending and borrowing should not increase the calculated primary reserves of the borrower nor reduce those of the lender Definition and measurement of reserves other than primary reserves have in the past been more complicated and more ambiguous. Possibilities for evading the adjustment rules might arise unless there were agreement on a suitably broad definition of what constitutes reserves. An appropriate approach to this problem would be to start from a very broad definition of reserves all official claims on foreigners liquid or non-liquid whether held by or on behalf of the monetary authorities or by other government agencies. Exceptions would be made as appropriate. Long-term aid loans for example and normal export credits would presumably be omitted ; approved " investment funds " as described above would be excluded though care must be taken that such funds not be used as a subterfuge for reserve increases. At any rate with experience in operating the system technical discussions would probably help to refine the definitions so as to reduce the risks of window-dressing and make the system function as effectively as possible The second question is : How do we deal with problems of heavy speculative capital flows ? Speculative problems will be a factor in any system indeed they proved to be a critically important factor in the Bretton Woods system. The system proposed by the U.S. actually contains a number of features which should reduce the problem of speculation as compared both with the past and with other approaches to reform of which we are aware The proposal aims at a system which fosters balance and prompt adjustments to restore equilibrium through a variety of adjustment measures Thus the persistent payments imbalances which in the past were a major factor in generating massive speculative capital movements would be eliminated or sharply diminished With the system based broadly on the concept of equilibrium it can not be overemphasized that national behavior which is truly in the spirit of this concept must help to assure that crisis points are not reached. The existence of the various indicator points on reserve movements does provide limits on disequilibria and it is possible that movement close to those limits could stimulate some speculative activity just as very large reserve gains or losses trigger speculative activity in the present system. But for fully satisfactory operation of the system countries should endeavor to adjust their positions as the disequilibria emerge and well before they reach the extremes both because of the consequences involved in reaching the limits and because they have accepted external balance as a practical operative balance-of-payments objective. If a country persists in avoiding adjustment it will eventually and appropriately be subject to the disciplines of the system including speculative pressures. Much as in the past system adjustment of some kind becomes unavoidable when disequilibria become extreme. What is missing in " the past and present systems and what the proposed system attempts to provide is a real incentive for needed adjustment to occur before it is forced by crisis Also the proposal has to be looked at in the context of a system of adequately wide exchange rate bands which would be expected to reduce the prospect for large capital flows significantly Nonetheless even with an improved adjustment system there could still be some question of whether false signals could result from speculative capital flows. The answer is that the proposed system contains several important " safety valves. " First there are areas or zones within which reserves can move in response to speculative or other pressures without bringing overt international requirements for adjustment measures. Second there is a time factor envisaged at both the " low point " and the " outer point " which would provide scope for speculative or other flows to occur and reverse themselves without bringing strong international action to induce adjustment. ( This factor could also play an important role in inhibiting speculative movements themselves. ) Third if a nation were pushed across its " outer point " by say a heavy inflow of speculative capital and remained above that point it need not necessarily appreciate its exchange rate the requirement is for any " acceptable " adjustment program. Fourth if the reserve increment were due to capital inflows based on unfounded speculation on an exchange rate change and the IMF agreed that basic adjustment was not needed a program dealing exclusively with that problem in an internationally acceptable manner would presumably satisfy the international community. The international community could vote to override the reserve indicators in a case where the signals are judged to be obviously wrong In discussing these " safety valves " however it should be remembered that signals are not necessarily " wrong " simply because speculative capital flows arise such flows may indicate a genuine need for adjustment measures. The system can not enable nations to avoid needed adjustments simply by blaming their problems on speculation The third question is : Are n't reserve indicators retrospective and insufficiently refined pointing to past maladjustments rather than present or future needs and unable to take account of the composition of the balance of payments ? Reserves are more comprehensive more reliable and more quickly available indicators than other criteria of external balance. While reserves may be distorted in the short run no other single series provides a superior O x ' u basis for analysis. In a convertibility system reserve data are necessarily indicative of disequilibrium in the adjustment process ; this has always been understood in terms of inducements to adjust for deficit countries and the concept applies with equal logic to adjustment needs of surplus countries While other data may provide useful information affecting international judgments of adjustment need such data should be supplementary It would of course be helpful to have reliable indicators of future economic performance. But we do n't. It would be useful to know each nation 's balance-of-payments position for the next year or two or three but the present state of the art does not provide data of such reliability that governments can place primary reliance on them in formulating policies for the future. Nor are governments likely to agree on any given assessment of prospects. Attempts to rely on such projections can lead to endless disputes One has only to recall the discussions prior to the Smithsonian Agreement of prospective cyclically adjusted current account balances to realize the opportunities for disagreement The U.S. proposal does envisage that such " supplementary criteria " as are available should be used to assist the reserve indicators in pointing to adjustment needs. In particular some countries may have objectives with respect to certain elements in their balance of payments such as for the current account. And these elements in some cases may be considered more stable. Since inconsistent objectives in that respect could inhibit the process of balance-of-payments adjustment attention to current account results and objectives could be useful. However in the end we will require a consistency in the total balance-of-payments results ( as reflected in reserve movements ) and primary attention to one sector of the balance of payments however important would not be consistent with this requirement Appendix B REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISEES Washington D.C. December T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully HERBERT STEIN Chairman EZRA SOLOMON MARINA V.N. WHITMAN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of established the Council of Economic Advisers to advise and assist the President in discharging his responsibilities under the act. In carrying out its duties in the Council devoted major attention to the programs and policies that were initiated by the President 's New Economic Policy announced in August Herbert Stein became Chairman of the Council on January succeeding Paul W. McCracken who returned to the University of Michigan Mr. Stein is on leave of absence from the University of Virginia where he is A. Willis Robertson Professor of Economics. Ezra Solomon served on the Council throughout He became a Member in June and is on leave of absence from Stanford University where he is Dean Witter Professor of Finance On March Marina v.N. Whitman became a Member of the Council filling a vacancy created by the departure of Mr. McCracken at the end of Mrs. Whitman is on leave of absence from the University of Pittsburgh where she is Professor of Economics Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Edwin Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich James Tobin Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Hendrik S. Houthakker Paul W. McCracken Position Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member.. Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Oath of office date August August November May Augusts May June September8,1952 March September December April December May December November May January January January August _. November May September November February February February July February February Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January July December November February August February January June January January July December ECONOMIC POLICY MAKING AND THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The central responsibility of the Council is to contribute economic analysis to the solution of public policy problems that warrant the attention of the Executive Office of the President. In the Employment Act of which created the Council the primary goal mandated by the Congress was " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Council 's major responsibility continues to be to provide the President with analysis and recommendations directed toward reaching that goal. The Council furnishes the President with regular reports on current economic conditions and forecasts of the economic outlook. Economic studies contribute information for Presidential decisions on appropriate policies to achieve greater price stability to expand employment and economic growth and to reach balance in the Nation 's external payments position. In particular emphasis was placed on the proper evolution of aggregate demand management the operation and evaluation of the price-wage control system of the Economic Stabilization Program and the formulation of proposals for international economic reform The Council 's role has broadened far beyond the primary goal of macroeconomic policy set forth in the Employment Act. Under the act the Council is also given responsibility " to appraise the various programs and activities of the Federal Government. " Experience has demonstrated that economic analysis can be useful in dealing with many issues other than employment and price stability. As the Council has become increasingly involved in a broader range of subjects its direct advisory role to the President has been expanded to include advisory work with many departments agencies and offices in the executive branch. Members of the Council 's staff maintain close working relations with other agencies and assist in evaluating current programs and developing new ones The Council 's activities in covered a wide range of economic issues The Council participated in areas of emerging prominence including the evaluation of science policies the development of programs to improve environmental quality studies of productivity in the food sector and an intensive review of the Nation 's energy problems. Contributions were made to the analysis of changes in tax regulations social security benefits and financing Federal credit programs and regulation of financial markets as well as to the formulation of agricultural programs review of the timber supply situation and the evaluation of housing programs. The Council continued to analyze the problems of certain regulated industries particularly transportation and examined several aspects of national growth policy. Work in the area of human resources included a review of manpower programs and the study of a variety of issues in health and education. In many instances the Council provided leadership to interagency studies in these fields The problems and policies of international trade and investment continue to be a major concern of the Council. The Council helps formulate the Administration 's position on overall international trade policy and it also works on the resolution of specific trade problems. In the Council contributed to decisions on meat imports preparations for upcoming trade legislation and negotiations and studies of the impact of direct foreign investment and the transfer of technology abroad The Council also provided liaison with the President 's Advisory Panel on Timber and the Environment. The Panel is expected to submit its report and recommendations to the President in early In September the President announced that he had requested the Chairman to organize an Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women The Committee 's purpose is to expand knowledge of the role of women in the economy to highlight problem areas and to ensure that the economic interests of women are considered in the formation of economic policy. The first meeting of the Committee is planned for early Early each year the President submits the Economic Report of the President to the Congress as required by the Employment Act. The Council assumes major responsibility for preparation of this Report which together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers reviews the progress of the economy over the past year and outlines the Administration 's policies and programs to achieve the goals of the act POLICY COORDINATION Much of the Council 's work is performed through joint activities with other agencies of the executive branch. The " Troika " system is the main working group that monitors the overall performance of the economy examines the economic outlook and analyzes stabilization policies. It ensures close working relationships between officials of the Treasury the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) and the Council. A group of senior staff economists from all three agencies known as T-3 conducts studies which are submitted to a second tier composed of a Council Member the economist for OMB and the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy. This group called T-2 reviews the analysis and clears it for consideration by the Troika which includes the Chairman of the Council the Director of OMB and the Secretary of the Treasury. The Troika meets on a regular schedule every weeks. When problems or concerns are such that the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System joins the Troika the group is referred to as the " Quadriad. " Both the Troika and the Quadriad meet from time to time with the President During the Council worked closely with the Cost of Living Council which supervises the Economic Stabilization Program. Mr. Stein is Vice Chairman of this group Mrs. Whitman serves on its planning committee and senior staff economists are members of its senior review group and various informal working groups The Council is active in several areas of work coordinated by the Council on International Economic Policy and the Domestic Council. The Chairman also served as a member df the National Commission on Productivity the Regulations and Purchasing Review Board the Property Review Board the Oil Policy Committee the Joint Board on Fuel Supply and Transport and the Defense Programs Review Committee In addition to these relatively formal groups that provide for coordination of economic analysis and policy the Council and the professional staff served as members of approximately other interagency working groups including several on the quality of Federal economic statistics In November the President announced a new Council on Economic Policy which will be chaired by George P. Shultz the Secretary of the Treasury. The Council of Economic Advisers will be a member of the new Council and will participate actively in many of the working groups that will be the main vehicle through which the new Council will function The Chairman and Council Members appeared before the Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) of the Congress four times during The JEC like the Council was created by the Employment Act of The act requires the JEC " to make a continuing study of matters relating to the Economic Report " and to submit its own report and recommendations to the House and Senate. The Council testified on the Economic Report before the JEC on February and appeared again on July in connection with the midyear review of the economy. In addition the Chairman presented testimony with Mrs. Whitman to the JEC regarding the Economic Stabilization Program ( April ) ; and he presented testimony with Mr. Solomon during the hearings on unemployment problems ( October ) Mr. Stein also testified before two other congressional committees in : before the House Ways and Means Committee on June and September in connection with raising the Federal debt ceiling and before the House Appropriations Committee on January concerning the Federal budget. Mr Solomon testified on the relation between the Federal budget and the economy before the Senate Appropriations Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee on February The Council maintained an active role in the growing international dialogue on economic policy. The Chairman heads the U.S. delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. He also serves as Vice Chairman of the Committee. Council Members and senior staff economists attended meetings of several different working parties of the Committee during the year. Mr Solomon and Mrs. Whitman head the U.S. delegations to Working Party II on economic growth and resource allocation and Working Party IV on inflation respectively. A new activity was initiated in March when Mr. Solomon and two members of the staff met in Tokyo with officials of the Japanese Economic Planning Agency to discuss economic issues of common interest In September a six-member delegation from Japan came to Washington to continue the informal discussions. This exchange proved to be productive and plans are being made to continue it in The Council was also host to a delegation from the Economic Council of Romania in March The delegation was headed by Manea Manescu Chairman of the Economic Council and one of Romania 's Vice Presidents PUBLIC INFORMATION The annual Economic Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration 's overall economic policy both domestic and international. Distribution of Reports in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators a publication prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the supervision of Frances James The Joint Economic Committee issues Indicators which has a distribution of approximately copies Information is also provided to the public through the speeches and participation in seminars and panels by the Chairman the Members and the senior staff economists throughout the year. The Council held frequent press conferences during to comment on important economic statistics shortly after they were released. Each year the Council answers numerous requests from the press and provides economic information in response to inquiries from individual citizens. In addition the Council and staff schedule visits from business academic and other groups and individuals as often as they can without interfering with other responsibilities ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is officially charged with reporting the Council 's views to the President under authority of the Employment Act as amended in by Reorganization Plan No. He performs this duty through direct consultations with the President regular memoranda on the economy and written submissions on special issues that arise. The Chairman represents the Council at meetings of the Cabinet and in many other formal and informal contacts with Government officials COUNCIL MEMBERS Together the two Council Members are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council including direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of meetings and assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement in many activities. One of the Council Members automatically becomes Acting Chairman whenever the Chairman is absent from Washington In practice the small size of the Council 's staff permits the Chairman and Council Members to work as a team in most circumstances. There is however an informal division of subject matter between them. Mr. Solomon 's areas in included domestic economic and financial conditions and outlook ; fiscal policy and monetary policy ; manpower programs ; taxation and social security ; energy ; defense ; housing ; and national growth policy Mrs. Whitman is responsible for the analysis of international economic developments and policy. Other areas under her supervision include price and wage developments particularly the Economic Stabilization Program ; human resource programs ; industry studies including agriculture and transportation ; environmental programs ; and issues related to regulated industries PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of senior staff economists two statisticians and eight members of the junior research staff. Members of the professional staff were responsible for economic analyses and policy recommendations in major subject areas involving the Council 's interests and responsibilities. In addition staff economists carried out many different Council and interagency assignments requiring a broad application of their general knowledge and analytical skills The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : Senior Staff Economists John D. Darroch Geza M. Feketekuty Murray F. Foss William E. Gibson Ronald F. Hoffman Mary W. Hook William A. Johnson Leo V. Mayer June A. O'Neill Nicholas S. Perna Gary L. Seevers Robert D. Tollison Robert C. Vogel Prices and Industry Studies International Finance and Trade Economic Analysis and Forecasting Monetary Policy Financial and Mortgage Markets and International Finance Public Finance and Social Security Business Conditions and Forecasting Energy Defense Urban Economics and National Growth Policy Food and Agriculture Manpower Programs Health Education Welfare and the Economic Role of Women Labor Economics and Manpower Programs Special Assistant to the Chairman Environment Industry Regulation Research and Development Fiscal Policy Public Finance and Econometrics Statisticians Frances M. James Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Statistician Junior Staff Economists Paul W. Boltz David G. Munro Andrew J. Safir Lydia Segal Mary E. Sullivan Public Finance Economic Analysis and Forecasting International Finance and Trade Econometrics and Forecasting Financial and Mortgage Markets Research Assistants and Interns Zell Berman Irwin L. Collier Jr Robert S. Dohner Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician continued to be in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Miss James has major responsibility for managing the Council 's economic and statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of tables and charts for the Economic Report and for a wide variety of meetings throughout the year. She also handles the fact checking of memoranda testimony and speeches. Catherine H. Furlong Dorothy Bagovich V. Madge McMahon and Natalie V. Rentfro assist Miss James The Council conducts a student intern program employing a limited number of promising graduate and undergraduate students of economics for temporary periods particularly during the summer months. Interns who served during wfere Irwin L. Collier Jr. ( Yale University ) Robert S Dohner ( Harvard University ) Eric B. Herr ( Indiana University ) Susan C Nelson ( Princeton University ) William P. Starnes ( Rice University ) Mary E. Sullivan ( University of Minnesota ) and Michelle J. White ( Princeton University ) Each year the Council obtains the consulting services of several economists Consultants who provided services during included Alan Greenspan ( Townsend-Greenspan & Co. ) Hendrik S. Houthakker ( Harvard University ) Stephen P. Magee ( University of Chicago ) Thomas G. Moore ( Michigan State University ) and G. Paul Wonnacott ( University of Maryland ) James R. Golden ( U.S. Military Academy ) was a member of the professional staff during the summer In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office provides administrative support for the entire Council staff including preparation and analysis of the Council 's budget ; procurement of equipment and supplies ; processing of legislative referrals ; distribution of Council speeches reports and congressional testimony ; and responding to correspondence and inquiries from the general public. James H Ayres served as Administrative Officer assisted by Nancy F. Skidmore Elizabeth A. Kaminski Margaret L. Snyder Bettye T. Siegel and D. Carolyn Fletcher. The duplicating mail and messenger department was operated by James W. Gatling Frank G. Norman and Kharl A. Williams Tne secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members consisted of Joyce A. Pilkerton Mary Catherine Fibich Alice H. Williams Mayme Burnett and Patricia A. Lee. Secretaries for the professional staff included Cheryl L. Green Dorothy L. Green Bessie M. Lafakis Jean P. Noll Julie L Ohner Earnestine Reid Linda A. Reilly and Lillie M. Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff is drawn primarily from universities and research institutions and these economists normally serve for or years Senior staff economists who resigned during the year were Eric A. Hanushek ( U.S. Air Force Academy ) Alan K. McAdams ( Cornell University ) Edward J. Mitchell ( Cornell University ) J. Carter Murphy ( Southern Methodist University ) Mark J. Riedy ( Federal Home Loan Bank Board ) Frank C. Ripley ( Data Resources Inc. ) Bernard Saffran ( Swarthmore College ) and James R. Wetzel ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) A. Gilbert Heebner also resigned from the position of Special Assistant to the Chairman to return to the Philadelphia National Bank Junior economists who resigned in were Ray ton Gerald William R Keeton and H. Kemble Stokes Jr. Other resignations included Daisy S Babione secretary ; Evelyn D. DeZerne research assistant ; Karen J. MacFarland secretary ; Joanne M. Vinyard research assistant ; and A. Keith Miles of the Administrative Office. Laura B. Hoffman secretary and Eleanor A. McStay secretary retired from Federal service during Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : G-l. Gross national product or expenditure C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product C-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross private product C-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars G-6. Gross national product by major type of product G Gross national product by major type of product in dollars C-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups G-9. Gross national product by sector G-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars G Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations and dollar costs per unit of output C-12. Personal consumption expenditures G-l3. Gross private domestic investment G-14. Relation of gross national product and national income C-15. National income by type of income C-16. Relation of national income and personal income G-17. Disposition of personal income G-l8. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars C-19. Sources of personal income G-20. Sources and uses of gross saving C-21. Saving by individuals C-22. Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : C-23 C-24 C-25 C-26 C-27 C-28 C-29 C-30 Population by age groups Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Selected unemployment rates Unemployment by duration Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries C-31. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries C-32. Output per man-hour and related data private economy C-33. Changes in output per man-hour and related data private economy http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : C-34 C-35 C-36 C-37 C-38 C-39 C-40 C-41 C-42 C-43 Pag Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate New construction activity New housing starts and applications for financing Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups PRICES : C-44 C-45 C-46 C-47 C-48 C-49 C-50 C-51 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : C-52 C-53 C-54 C-55 C-56 C-57 C-58 C-59 C-60 Money stock measures Commercial bank loans and investments Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves Bond yields and interest rates Short-and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding Instalment credit extended and repaid Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing C-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender C-62. Net public and private debt GOVERNMENT FINANCE : C-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years C-64. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt fiscal years C-65. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years C-66. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts C-67. Public debt securities by kind of obligation C-6L8. Estimated ownership of public debt securities C-69. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt C-70. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts C-71. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts C-72. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : C-73. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations C-74. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations C-75. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group C Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business C-77. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations C-78. State and municipal and corporate securities offered C-79. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit C-80. Business formation and business failures Page AGRICULTURE : C-81 C-82 C-83 C-84 Income of farm people and farmers Farm production indexes Farm population employment and productivity Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio C-85. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs C-86. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : C-87. U.S. balance of payments C-88. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups C-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area C-90. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years C-91. International reserves and C-92. U.S. reserve assets C-93. Price changes in international trade C-94. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars See Economic Report for data for intervening years not shown here Symbols used : p Preliminary __ Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE C-l. Gross national product or expenditure Year or quarter Total gross national product Personal consumption expenditures i Government purchases of goods and services4 Gross private 'domestic investments Net exports of goods and services Federal Total Total National defense * Other State and local Percent change from preceding period total gross national product6 Billions of dollars I960. 197L P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IV. : I Ill IV. : II IV i See Table C-12 for detailed components See Table C-13 for detailed components See Table C-8 for exports and imports separately * Net of Government sales * This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E iO * Gross national product or expenditure tn dollars Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Total gross national product Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Serv- Total ices Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Residential structures Change fn business inventories IMillions of dollars P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II..III.. IV... : ! _ _ II.. III.. IV.. : L II.. III.. IV v See footnotes at end of table J TABLE C-2. Gross national product ^ orexpenditure in dollars Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services i Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Continued Addendum : Gross private product Percent change from preceding period3 Total gross national product Gross private product Billions of dollars ~ T.O * ._ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II I M IV : | | III IV : | | III IV * Net of Government sales Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investment1 Persona ! consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross national product i Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total I960. 1972' Seasonally adjusted : L. II. III IV. : I II. III IV : L II. III IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services * Exports Imports Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total State and local Gross national product by sector Private General government G9.9 ; : v Seasonally adjusted : II Ill IV : II... Ill IV : II Ill IV P * Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables C-9 and C-10 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross private product Gross national product price measures = Year or quarter Total Percent change from preceding period i Total Private Price Implicit index Implicit Price index price price deflator weights deflator weights Implicit price deflator Price index weights Private Chain price index Implicit price 'deflator Price index weights Chain price index v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV : II III IV * Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexes Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Year AgriTotal culture Congross fores- tract natry contional and strucproduct fishtion eries Manufacturing Total TransGovportaFinance erntion Whole- insurment Non- comDusale ance ServAll and rable durable muniand and ices govern- other i goods goods cation retail real ment indus- indus- and trade estate entertries utilitries prises ties & i Mining rest of the world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Final sales Durable goods Total Inventory change Total gross national product Total Final sales ll U Total Final sales Nondurable goods ll c o Gross Serv- Struc- auto ices tures product > > Total Final sales II c o ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? .O P... g ? n ? l n ? ? ? .O ? > f ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? " i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II... ! o III.. IV '. : ! ____ II.. III. IV. : l__._ II.. III. IV- i Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Total Ingross na- Final ventional sales tory prodchange uct P Total Total Final sales Nondurable goods Durable goods Total Final sales Total Final sales II Serv- Strucices tures Gross auto product Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II.. III. IV.. : L.. II Ill IV. : I... II. III IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE G-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Government Disposable personal Income Year or quarter Total Less : Interest paid and transfer payments to foreigners Net receipts Expenditures PerEquals : sonal Tax Less : PerTotal and TransTranssonal conexclud- sump- saving nonfers fers Equals : Total or ing intax interinterNet extion terest reest disest reexpendiand and and ceipts pendi- saving ceipts tures transor ac- sub- subtures fers cruals sidies sidies * Equals : Purchases of goods and services '.B ia55_ I960. 1967_ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L... II... III.. IV.. : II III. IV. : II.. III. IV * See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business nternational Net Year or quarter Gross retained earnings Net exports of goods Excess Gross of and services transpritransExcess fers to vate of inforfers domes- vest- eigners or tic Equals : of net ment by perExexinvestsons Less : Net ( ) ports ment4 and ports Imex ( _ ) Governports ports Total income or receipts Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expenditure ment .'9 I960. ._ v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV * Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Capital consumption allowances corporate inventory valuation adjustment and undistributed corporate profits and private wage accruals less disbursements * Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table C-13 Net foreign investment less capital grants received by the United States with sign changed Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-9. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product * Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm * Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product 103J v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : _ II Ill IV..... : II III IV v : II III IV Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-10. -Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private product1 Business Total Nonfarm3 Total Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product ' I960. p Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( : II III IV : L.. II III IV : II III IV v Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises * Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE C-ll. Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations and dollar costs per unit of output Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations ( billions of dollars ) Current dollar costs per unit of dollar gross product ( dollars ) Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Year or quarter Total costsi Capital consumption allowances ComIndirect pensaNet tion of interest business emtaxes ployees Profits after taxes plus inventory valuation adjustment Total Profits tax liability Current dollars dollars * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II Ill IV : I. II Ill IV : I. II III This is equal to the deflator for gross product of nonfinancial corporations with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-12. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Nondurable goods Durable goods Services Year or quarter 5o '.Z I960. '03.5 * _. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I. II. III IV : L_ II. ML IV : III IV p Includes consumer purchases of mobile homes Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Total Residential structures Producers ' durable equipment Structures Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonfarm Farm Nonfarm -L5 I960... * 1953__ A. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II Ill IV ? : I II III IV : I II Ill IV'..- Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Capital consumption allowances Equals : Net national product Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business Statistical discreptransfer payments ancy Equals : National income \ l 1955._ I960. P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L_ II III IV : II III IV : IL III IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-15. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Business and professional income Compensation of employees Year or quarter Total national income Total SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages and ries salaries In- Inventory Total unin- valucorpo- ation rated adjustenter- ment prises come nf OT Income of farm proprietors Rental income of persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate Total profits before taxes * Inventory valuation adjustment -.'5 P * \ J Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II.. III. IV. : I.. II.. ML IV. : I... II.. III- IV National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that i t excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table C-14 * Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories * See Table C-73 for corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-16. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Year or quarter National income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Equals : Plus : ContriWage Govbutions accruals ernment for transfer less payments social disto perinsur- bursesons ance ments Interest paid by government ( net ) and by consumers Dividends Business Personal transfer income payments '.5 I960. P ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.. II. III IV : IIIII IV : II. Ill- Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE CM Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total Equals : PerPerPersonal sonal Interest transfer sonal consaving sump- paid by paycontion ments expend- sumers to foritures eigners Personal outlays Total Billions of dollars Consumption expenditures Personal saving Percent : : : " V I960 * Seasonally adjusted annual rates Seasonally adjusted : L___ I I III.. IV.. : I... II IV.. : I... II III IV p. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) dollars Current dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) ^ Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars ',673 ',308 I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II Ill IV i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE O Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Total personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Proprietors ' income Distributive industries Service industries Government Other labor income i Business and professional I960. * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III. IV. : I II.. III. IV. : I... II.. III. IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE O19. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental income Diviof per- dends sons Personal interest income Old age survivors disability and health insurance benefits Total State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans benefits Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income ! " * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III.. IV... : I II... III.. IV... : ! ..._ * The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-20. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Persona ) Total saving Gross business saving Total Federal State and local Gross investment Capital grants received by the United States i Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investments Statistical discrepancy Q ( ) v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II I I I IV : II III.-.IV... : II III... IV p Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners Surplus of $ million * Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-2 \ Saving by individuals 1946-72l [ Billions of dollars } Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Securities Currency Savand ings Gov- CorpoTotal deacern- rate mand counts ment and Corporate desecu- for- stock * posits rities eign bonds Insurance Non- MortCon- cor- gage and debt Con- Other pen- Non- sumer porate on sumer debts sion farm dure- homes rables busi- non- credit ness farm serves assets homes ( ) -A Less Increase in debt Net investment in Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II.. III. IV.. : II.. ML IV.. : ! ____ II.. III. i Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and State and local obligations * Includes investment company shares * Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves * Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System unrelated individuals TABLE C-22. Number and money income { in dollars ) offamilies and by race of head Year Negro and other races White Total With incomes under $ Total Total number ( millions ) Median income FAMILIES ^ $ ^ > > * * Number Per ( milcent lions ) With incomes under $ With incomes under $ Total number ( millions ) Median income Number Per ( milcent lions ) number ( millions ) Median income $ $ ? Number Per ( milcent lions ) With incomes under $ UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS With incomes under $ With incomes under $ Number Percent ( millions ) Number Per ( mil- cent lions ) Number Per ( mil- cent lions ) $ $ $ '.6 The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family Based on revised methodojogy The term " unrelated individuals " refers to persons years old and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE C-23. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census and over TABLE C-24. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Noninstitutional population i Year or month Total labor force ( including Armed Armed Forcesi Forces ) Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Labor force participation Unemrate ploy ( total ment rate ( per- labor cent of force as civilian percent of nonlabor force ) institutional population ) Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over _ _ ! * See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-24. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( includ- ing Armed Forces * Employment Armed Forces ) Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor force participation Unemrate ployment ( total rate ( per- labor cent of force as civilian percent labor of nonforce ) institutional population ) Seasonally adjusted May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fc June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan * Feb Mar i Not seasonally adjusted Data beginning with not strictly comparable with prior data because of adjustment to Census data which added to the noninstitutional population to the civilian labor force and to civilian employment For further details see " Employment and Earnings " February Note. Labor force data in Tables C-24 through C-27 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Seasonally adjusted data in this table have been revised and do not agree with those published beginning February They are subject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE C-25. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age ( Thousands of persons years of age and over ) Employment Males Unemployment Females Males Females Year or month Total Total Total 16-ia years Total years years and years and over over Total years Total years years and years over " " * __ " 66,i ! ; * ; Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan__ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. " : J,627 46i ' till " " Note.-See Note Table C-24 Seasonally adjusted data in this table have been revised and do not agree with those published beginning February They are subject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-26. Selected unemployment rates> [ Percent ] By sex and age Year or month All workers By selected groups By color Both sexes years Men years and over Women years and over White Negro and other races Experienced wage Houseand hold salary heads workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Labor force time lost * I960. Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. MarApr May. June. % July Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. MarApr May_ June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. i Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craftsmen operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part-time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note See Note Table C-24 Seasonally adjusted data in the first four columns of this table have been revised and do not agree with those published beginning February They are subject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-27. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Year or month Total unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over Seasonally adjusted l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i ; July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec i Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals no * Data beginning with not strictly comparable with prior data because of adjustment to ' Census data which added to unemployment ( detail by duration not available ) Note See Note Table C-24 Seasonally adjusted data in this table are as published beginning Feburary and therefore do not agree with data shown in Tables C-24 through C-26 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-28. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employmenu Insured Total unem- benefits Insured ploypaid unemment ( milploy ( weekly lions ment3 averof dolage ) " lars ) a * Thousands L.879 ' S I960. '1,973 * * : Nov * _ Dec p Percent July p Aug * Sept p. Oct p.. thousands Seasonally adjusted AverTotal weekly ( millions of check dol ( dollars ) * lars ) * Apr p. May * __ June _ Unadjusted Benefits paid : Jan * Feb * ._ Mar * Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct * Nov P Dec p Exhaustions Initial claims Weekly average Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs Covered workers who have completed at feast week of unemployment Includes benefits paid under extended benefit provisions of State laws beginning June Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year. Data for New Jersey not available for April-June For total unemployment only. Excludes data for New Jersey for April-December Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July June is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of t h e total Source : Department of Labor Manpower Administration TABLE C-29. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Government Federal State and local % * * See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-29. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers I/On- Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining tract construction Transportation and public utilities Government wnoicsale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Whnlp Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. actNay * >_ Dec * Note. Data in Tables C-29 through C-31 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables C-24 through C-27 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-30. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month Total private Manunonag- facturriculing tural i Contract construction Total private Retail Manunontrade agri- facturing cultural Contract construction Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural s = Retail trade $ $ $ $ I960 Current dollars dollars * : Current dollars dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates Seasonally adjusted : Percent change from preceding period Jan.. Feb. Mar Apr Apr. May Vlay_ JuneJuly. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec $ $ $ $ Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. JuneJuly Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table C-29 Includes eating and drinking places Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts * Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index Computed from indexes to two decimal places Note. See Note Table C-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C ~ Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultwral industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ] Average spendable weekly earnings total private nonagricultufal ' Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural i Current dollars dollars2 Manu- Contract facturing construction Retail trade Amount Percent change from preceding period Current dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ $ $ $ I960. v Seasonally adjusted annual rates Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June $ $ $ $ $ $ $ M.6 July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June M.6 * July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov * Dec * l ! Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table C-29 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index Includes eating and drinking places * Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes for a worker with three dependents In annualizing the rates of change the effect of the change in tax rates at the beginning of and is taken into account separately Note.-See Note Table C-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-32. Output per man-hour and related data private economy [ = ] Output i Man-hours Output per man-hour Compensation per man-hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Year or quarter Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private nonnonnonnonnonprivate farm private farm private nonfarm private farm private farm private farm * Seasonally adjusted : II III IV : l__ II III IV : II III. IV v Output refers to gross national product in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contribution for social insurance and private benefits plans. Also i ncludes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross product divided by constant dollar product Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-33. Changes in output per man-hour and related data private economy [ Percent change from preceding period ] Man-hours Output ' Output per man-hour Compensation per man-hour3 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator < Year or quarter Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total nonnonnonprivate farm private non- private farm private non- private farm private farm farm Private nonfarm I960. -'.5 P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I III IV. II Ill IV : : II III IV * Output refers to gross national product in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contribution for social insurance and private benefits plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Current dollar gross product divided by constant dollar product Note. Data relate to all persons Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE C-34. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions ^ [ = ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable I960 Seasonally adjusted Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov * Dec * Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE O-35. Industrial production indexes ^ market groupings [ = ] Final products Year or month Total ndustrial production Consumer goods Total Total Automotive products x Materials ) Equipment Home goods Total Intermediate products Total Business Durable goods Nondurable goods v Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec. : Jan. Feb. Mar AprMay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov v Dec p i Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately i Also includes industrial fuel and power not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E C Industrial production indexes selected manufactures { = ] Durable manufactures Year or month Nondurable manufactures OrdTransFabrinance Lumporta- I nstru- private ber Pricated Mation mary metal and clay metals prod- chinery equip- ments govand ment ucts ernglass ment ChemFurni- j Texicals ture ! tiles Paper petro- Foods and ! apparel and and print- leum tobacco miscel- and and ing rubber laneous leather I960. p Seasonally adjusted May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. May " June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov p Dec __ : J a n Feb... Mar.. Apr Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-37. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate Utilization rate Period Output Capacity Total Primary processing output = Advanced processing Percent Seasonally adjusted : : 19R9- II III IV II III IV II III IV : II III IV II ill IV P II P. Ill P IV P May differ slightly from data shown in Table C-34 because of rounding Output as percent of capacity Note. For description of series see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " October and November Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data of Federal Reserve Department of Commerce and McGraw-Hill Information Systems Company TABLE Q-38. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings i Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction Total Total Total New housing units Total Commercials Industrial Other * p j State and erally locally owned owned New series * See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-38. New construction activity Continued ( Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other constructionl I Residential buildings i Total Total Public construction New housing units Total Total Commercials Industrial Federally owned Ctata Oldie ana locally owned ' Other * _ j Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr.... May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct * __. Nov ___ t,807 ) \ t1,523 '5,970 I1,052 I1,271 ( I1,381 i1,160 I1,557 i1,835 ( M24 ( ( i Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc < Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm public utilities and all other private * Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census except as noted http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE C-39. New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Proposed Private and public i home construction Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Type of structure Nonfarm Government home programs ( nonfarm ) New private housing units authorized Total One family Two or more families FHA * VA Applications for FHA commitments * Requests for VA appraisals New series O ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE O-39. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Proposed home construction Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Type of structure * Nonfarm Government home programs ( nonfarm ) Total One family Two or more families FHA< VA New private housing Appliunits author- cations for ized FHA commitments Requests for VA appraisals Seasonally adjusted annual rates : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Jan. Feb.. MarApr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. : NOVP Dec p ( < ( ( ( ) t ) & i ) i ) t I ) ( ( ( J L,415 Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act ars included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for Data are not available for new homes started under the Department of Agriculture Farmers Home Administration program Units are for to 4-family housing Data beginning cover approximately permit-issuing places. Data for are based on places and places. The addition of approximately permit-issuing places in contributed an increase of percent in total permit authorizations Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction i Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency " Not available separately beginning January Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Housing and Urban Development and Veterans Administration ( except as noted ) TABLE C-40. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 1947-73l [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Railroad Air Other Public utilities Communication Commercial and other Seasonally adjusted annual rates : IL III IV : IL III.. IV... : I IL III.. IV : | 3._. IM.. * Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural service ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December ? Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-41. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade ; [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month InvenSales i tories Ratio Sales InvenInven- Ratios InvenSales i tories Ratio s tories Ratio Sales i tories * _ * ; _ _ ; i Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr... May.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June.. 185i July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov * _ Dec * : ) i,974 Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period ~ Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly " if ii data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month : a. See Department of Commerce Bureau * Manufacturing data prior to not com of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September l l _ _ Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) C-42. Manufacturers * shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ] Shipments l Year or month Total Inventories DuraNonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries Durable goods industries Total Total MateFinrials Work ished and in sup- process goods plies ; 1961s * Nondurable goods industries Total MateFinrials Work ished and in sup- process goods plies Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov... Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July... Aug Sept-.. Oct.... Nov * ___ Dec ? Monthly average for year and total for month > Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-43. Manufacturers * new and unfilled orders ( Amounts in millions of dollars ] New orders i Unfilled orders ' Unfilled ordersshipments ratio Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods industries nondefense Nondurable goods industries I960. Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. May " ! June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. NOVP Dec * * Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December except as noted < Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. Comparable data for new orders ( total durable and nondurable ) are available for and only. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September for these data * Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE C Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = Housing Year or month All items Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Medical care Reading Other ersonal and goods care recreaand tion services I960. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. MayJune- July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-45. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Commodities Year or month All items Commodities less food All commodities Food Special indexes Services Alt Durable Nondurable All ervices Rent Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct._ Nov.. Dec.. : Jan._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July Aug.. Sept. Oct__ Nov.. Dec.. Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E C Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Used cars Household durables Total Apparel commodities Services less rent Nondurables Total less food and apparel House- Transhold serv- portation ices servless ices rent Medical care services Total i New cars : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug.. Nov Dec Other i Includes certain items not shown separately s Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E C Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted ( = seasonally adjusted ] Special indexes Year and month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug.. Sept Oct Nov Dec Selected expenditure classes Commodity groups All All All items All items items less comless less med- modfood shelter ical ities care Food Commodities less food Durable Nondurable ter Total utilities Apparel Trans- Medand por- ical up- tation care keep Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Fuel TABLE C-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month All commodities Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides Fuels skins and leather related Chemicals and products and allied products related and products power I960 : Jan Feb Mar May.. June July.. Aug.. _ Sept Oct Nov Dec ,_ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr See footnote at end of table TABLE C-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued ( = ] Industria ! commodities Continued Pulp paper and allied products Furniture and household durables Transportation equipment : NonmeMotor tallic mineral vehicles products and equipment i Rubber and plastic products Lumber and wood products I960 Year or month Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ._ Metals and metal products Machinery and equipment i Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Miscellaneous products TABLE C-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = Intermediate materials supplies and componentsl Crude materials Materials and components for manufacturing Year or month All commodities Materials and components For For For Com- for connonfood durable durable ponents struction manu- manu- manufactur- factur- facturing ing ing r Materials Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Fuel Total Total I960 1C0.0 S : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued = ] Finished goods Special groups of industrial products Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials a InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods and com- excluding ponents foods : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct._ Nov Dec Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-50. Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups [ Percent change from preceding period i ] All items Food Commodities less food Services Year or month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Unadjusted : July Nov.. ^ Dec Aug Sept Oct : Jan Feb.. Mar Apr Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted 'A ! [ July Aug Sept Oct : ! l EJ1CO May ftov Dec : Jan Feb. '.5 'A CO \ l CMCMCO '.5 '.S a CO CM Nov Dec CM CO Oct " t July Aug Sept COCOCM May June CMCOCM Mar Apr COCM -< June Annual changes are from December to December Percent changes for services are based on unadjusted indexes since these prices have little seasonal movement Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for the all items index are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes carried to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-51. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups [ Percent change from preceding periodl ) All commodities Year or month Industrial commodities Consumer Farm products and processed finished goods total foods and feeds Consumer finished foods Consumer finished goods excluding foods SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adjusted justed adadjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted justed justed justed justed justed justed _ i _ i _ : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June -A -i ! i _ .l July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June L4 '.7 \ l July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec ! " ! l l'.l Annual changes are from December to December Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for all commodities and industrial commodities are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes carried to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE C-52. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Overall measures Year and month Components and related items M2 M3 ( M i plus Mi ( M plus time ( Currency deposits deposits plus at nonat comdemand bank mercial deposits ) thrift banks instituother than arge CD 's ) tions ) : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec ' Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec 19j7O : Dec : Dec : Dec p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Deep Deposits at commercial banks Currency l Time and savings3 Demand Total 3S.2 Large CD 's * Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ) * Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve System and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government. Effective June excludes balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) Negotiable time certificates of deposit issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks and savings and loan shares Deposits at all commercial banks Note. The effects of the implementation on November of revised Regulation J have been eliminated from data for November-December to avoid a discontinuity in the series. The upward adjustment of demand deposits resulting from that implementation will be incorporated into the various series at a later time Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-53. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans End of year or month Total loans and investments Total Investments Commercial and industrial U.S. Government securities Other securities : June : June Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusted I960.. s_ * < M8. 6L4 * : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octp Nov p Dec v Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic bank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods * Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans * Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes totaling about $ billion are classified as other securities rather than as loans Excludes $ billion due to loan reclassification Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Item U.S. Government Total funds raised Public debt securities. Budget agency issues. All other sectors. Corporate equity shares Debt instruments Debt capital instruments. State and local government securities.. Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages _ Home Other residential. Commercial Farm Other private credit- l ! At commercial banks.. At savings institutions Credit market instruments net. Foreign funds At banks Direct... Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paperOther By borrowing sector : Total funds raised Foreign State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency.. Time and savings accounts... U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other See footnote at end of table TABLE G-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item III II III II I Total funds raised U.S. Government Public debt securities Budget agency issues All other sectors Corporate equity shares Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government securities Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages Home Other residential Commercial Farm _ Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Ooen-market paper Other Other private credit _ By borrowing sector : Total funds raised Foreign State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors _ Financed directly or indirectly by : At commercial banks __ At savings institutions.__ _ Demand deposits and currency Time and savings accounts Deposits Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Foreign funds At banks Direct Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans _ _ Private insurance and pension reserves Other TABLE C-55. Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Year and month Total liquid assets Total Currency Demand deposits U.S. Government securities Commercial banks Nonbank thrift institutions Savings bonds Shortterm marketable securities Negotiable certificates of deposit Commercial paper : Dec : Dec : Dec : Jan Feb : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ._ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec v Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-56. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) s-850 Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Daily figures beginning November adjusted to include $ million of certain reserve deficiencies on which penalties can be waived for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J ( as amended effective November ) Daily figures beginning December adjusted to include $ million in lieu of $ million Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-57. Bondyields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S Government securities Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Year or month 3-mo nth Treasmonth ury issues2 bills i Taxable year issues bonds Baa FedFHA eral new Reserve home Bank mortdisgage count yields * rate Aaa Average rate on HighPrime shortgrade comterm municmerbank ipal cial loans bonds ( Stand- to busi ? ! ard & n e s s Poor 's ) selected months cities U.00 3.9S ._ See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-57. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i Taxable month year issues issues bonds Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July... Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Average rate on shortterm bank loans to businessselected cities Prime commercial paper Federal Reserve Bank discount rate months FHA new home mortgage yields ' " : Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues Selected note and bond issues * First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissible interest rate ( percent beginning February ) Through July computed on 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages prepaid in years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less ' Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data Note. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Department of Housing and Urban Development Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation O TABLE G-58. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of year or month Total Total Automobile paper Noninstalment credit Home Other repair conand sumer goods modernization paper loans I960. : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. Ap Ma Way. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec Personal loans Total Charge accounts Other Addendum : Policy loans by life insurance companies * Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in other consumer goods paper Single-payment loans and service credit Year-end figures are annual statement asset values ; month-end figures are book value of ledger assets. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) TABLE C-59. -Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Other consumer goods paper Automobile paper Total Home repair and modernization loans Extended Year or month Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Repaid Personal loans Extended Repaid I960 ( Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov. DecV Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-60. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financings [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Nonfarm properties FHA-VA underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family houses propproperties erties i Conventional * to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses III * IV * ___ : " II * _._ Ill p IV P.. P P ._ : II Ill IV : p... UP.. Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE C-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender [ Billions of dollars ] Selected financial institutions End of year or quarter otal Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banksi Other lenders Life U.S insurance agencies companies Individuals and others I'.. ' ___ * : I II.. IllIV. : I * _ II * III * IV _ : I p ll > III p IV P. Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not bank trust departments Includes former FNMA and new GNMA as well as FHA VA PHA Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years RFC HOLC and FFMC. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks GNMA ( Pools ) and FHLMC. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE C-62. Net public and private debt [ Billions of dollars ] Private Public Individual and noncorporate End of year Total FedFederal eral finanGovcial ernagenment cies State and local governments Total Nonfarm Corporate Total Farm * Total Mortgage Commercial Conand sumer financial * _ _ _ Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " This comprises the debt of federally sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories s Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers'debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Treasury Department Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Land Banks and Federal National Mortgage Association GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE C-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Receipts Fiscal year Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Administrative budget : Consolidated cash statement : Unified budget : _ i Estimate Note. Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays Sources : Treasury Department and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-64. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trus * funds Intragovernmental transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds. Trust funds.. BUDGET FINANCING : Total means of financing Net borrowing from the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt. Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income iaxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Interest General government General revenue sharing Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions : Employer share employee retirement Interest received by trust funds See footnotes at end of table TABLE G Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt,fiscalyears Con [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds I ntragovernmental transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds I ntragovernmental transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds BUDGET FINANCING : payment of borrowing ( ) Total means of financing Other means of financing Net borrowing from the public or re- OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology _ Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Interest General government General revenue sharing Allowances Undistributed i ntragovernmental transactions : Employer share employee retirement. Interest received by trust funds Excludes changes due to ^ classification and to conversion of mixed-ownership enterprises to private ownership. ( See footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " and footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " ) Sources : Treasury Department and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-65. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts,fiscalyears [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Total receipts budget Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts -l'.3 EXPENDITURES Total outlays budget Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Other " ' I " " " ' " Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures.. 2.'3 Note. See Special Analysis A " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Treasury Department Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE C-66. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Year or quarter Total Fiscal year : P Calendar year : Expenditures Indirect Per- Cor- busi- ConPursonal ness tribuchases potax tax of rate tions and and for Total i goods non- profits nonand tax social tax tax servacinsurreacices ance ceipts cruals cruals Transfer payments To persons GrantsNet in-aid into State terTo and est forlocal eign- govern- paid ers ments ( net ) Surplus or Subsi- defidies cit less current surplus of government enterprises na- ' tional income and product accounts q Seasonally adjusted annual rates : III IV : IL III IV p Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of and and in the quarters of respectively > Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-67. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Total public debt securities End of year or month Marketable public issues by maturity class Within yea- to years years and over Nonmarketable public issues U.S savings bonds and notes Foreign and international Other Special issues Matured public debt and debt bearing no interest I960 C l.S 2.C : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug SeptOct Nov Dec ._ Source : Treasury Department TABLE C-68. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values,i billions of dollars } Total public debt securities3 Held by private investors End of year or month : Jan Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. " : : : : : : : : : : June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec Held Total Held by Federal Govern- Reserve ment Banks accounts Total Mutual savings State MiscelOther banks ComIndilaneous mercial and in- corpo- and local viduals < invesgovernbanks ' surance rations * ments s tors ? companies fr.O i U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value s Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers Federal oriented agencies not included in Government accounts and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the I nternational Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the International Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government Source : Treasury Department O TABLE C-69. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year Ito5 years to years to years Average length years Millions of dollars Fiscal year : : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June Years ; July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec Jan. Feb. Mar_ Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Treasury Department TABLE C-70. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Federal Government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( -> national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts ( ) l 1S71 v " " ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IV * i Surplus of $ million 'Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E C-71. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Expenditures ndirect PerCorbusisonal porate ness tax tax jrofits and and tax nontax ccruals nontax ccruals eceipts Contributions for social insurance Purchases Fedof eral Total * goods grantsand n-aid services TransLess : fer Current payurplus Net ments nterest of govto paid ernperment sons enter- Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts prises > C ) ? n Seasonally adjusted annual rates | II Ill IV : I II Ill IV ! l II Ill IV * ! Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) in each of the quarters of and and in the quarters of and and in the quarters of respectively Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-72. State and local government revenues and expenditures ^ selectedfiscalyears \ [ Millions of dollars ) General expenditures by function General revenues by source * Fiscal year * Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes ReveIndi- Corponue All other vidual ration from net Federal reveincome taxes income Govern- nues taxes ment Total " ; * * * * * * Public All wel- other * fare Highways Education i Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt 2nd unallocable expenditures * Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table C-62 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE C-73. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits after taxes All other industries Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability i Manufacturing Year or quarter All industries Transportation Dur- Noncomable dur- muniable goods goods cation Total inand indus- dus- public tries tries utilities Total P UndisDivi- tribdends uted profits Corpo- Profits rate plus capital capital conconsump- sumption tion allowallowances ances | Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV U. : II III IV : II Ill IV v i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes > Includes depreciation and accidental damages Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-74. Sales profits and stockholders9 equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations i Profits Profits Year or quarter Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Stock- Sales StockStockBefore After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Before After holders ' Federal Federal equity ( net ) Federal Federal equity ( net ) Federal Federal equity * income income income incomi income income taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes : I II.. III. IV. : I II III. IV : I II.. III. Includes newspapers beginning Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Data for fourth quarter and year are for industry classifications prior to the reclassifications made during the fourth quarter Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. Specific information about the effects of the more significant changes and revisions is contained in the following issues of the " Quarterly Financial Report " : third quarter third quarter first quarter and first quarter Source : Federal Trade Commission T A B L E C Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders9 equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries Year or quarter ElecAll trical manMoMama- chinufactor turery Total vehi- Air- chinery ing cles craft ( exdurand equip- cept cor- able and poraequip- parts ment elecand trical ) tions ! ment supplies Fabricated metal products Primary iron and steel industries Primary nonferrous metal industries Lumber Stone Furni- and clay wood ture and and prodglass ucts fixprod- tures ( exucts cept furniture ) Instruments and related products Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent3 : I II.. III. IV. : I II.. III... : I II III IV : I II III Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales cents " " See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-75. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Total nondurable Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent3 : II III IV : L II III : II III IV : II III Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales cents L2 L.I L3 L.O L.5 L.4 i Includes newspapers beginning s Includes certain industries not shown separately Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See also Note Table C-74 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE C-76. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Sources Uses Externa Period Total Total Longterm Shortterm Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) Total Credit market funds Total Internal In- Purchase of physical assets ^ crease in financial assets Other Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III x " : | | III IV Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation adjustment ) and capital consumption allowances Stocks bonds and mortgages s Bank loans commercial paper finance company bans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans Plant and equipment residential structures and inventory investment Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-77 \ Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter Cash on Total hand and in banks * U.S Government securities C AdNet Revances FedOther and Notes ceiv- Notes eral Other working curand Inpreand inables current Total payacacvencome rent capifrom tal ments counts tax liaU.S. counts tories assets * U.S pay- liabili- biliGov- receivable Govable ties ties ernernment3 ment3 All corporations s Current liabilities Nonfinancial corporations9 II III IV : II III Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * Includes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Excludes banks sayings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Note. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-78. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Total corporate offerings Industry of corporate issuer Type of corporate security Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Manufacturing Electric gas and water Transportation Communication Other P : I II III IV : I II III IV Prior to also includes extractive radiobroadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE C-79. Common stock prices earnings and yieldsand stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price indexes l Year or month Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) Public utilities ( stocks ) Regulated Railroads ( stocks ) Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratio3 Total Brokers Banks Unregulated ; nonmargin stock credit at banks e Other security credit at banks7 Millions of dollars = Margin credit at brokers and banks : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug _ Sept Oct Nov Dec " " " " " " " p P ? ? " P p ? 1R " " " " " " ? M83 ? f ) ? ? ? Monthly data are averages of daily figures and annual data are averages of monthly figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of price index for last day of quarter to earnings for months ending with that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data * Margin credit includes all credit extended to purchase or carry stocks or related equity instruments and secured at least in part by stock. Credit extended by brokers is end-of-month data for member firms of the New York Stock Exchange. June data for banks are universe totals ; all other data for banks represent estimates for all commercial banks which accounted for percent of security credit outstanding at banks on June In addition to assigning a current loan value to margin stock generally Regulations T and U permit special loan values for convertible bonds and stock acquired through exercise of subscription rights Nonmargin stocks are those not listed on a national securities exchange and not included in the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 's list of over-the-counter margin stocks. At banks loans to purchase or carry nonmargin stocks are unregulated ; at brokers such stocks have no loan value ncludes loans to purchase or carry margin stock if these are unsecured or secured entirely by unrestricted collateral Sources'. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System New York Stock Exchange and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE C-80. Business formation and business failures Business failures * Index of net business formation ( = ) Year or month New business incorporations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rates * Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * C i e i " Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data ' Preliminary ; based on seasonally adjusted data through November Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE C-81. Income of farm people and farmers Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Net to farm operators Realized gross Year or quarter From From From farm nonTotal farm all sources sources sources ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- Includreceipts penses ing net ing net from inven- invenmarkettory tory ings change change4 Billions of dollars dollars s Dollars Oi r CO in Current dollars CO Net income per farm including net inventory change ' Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV : II.. Ill IV Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) < Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year ' Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid bv farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-82. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Livestock and products Farm output i Total 1965___ % P. Year Fruits Hay Feed and Food Vege- and grains forage grains tables nuts Cotton Oil Tobacco crops Total Meat animals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs * Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules. The Department of Agriculture also estimates net farm output which excludes all quantities used for feed Includes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-83. Farm population employment ' and productivity Farm population ( Aprill ) i Year Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Per man-hour Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population a Total Hired Family workers workers Per unit of total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre < Index = I960. * _ i Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation > Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table C-24 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) O TABLE C-84. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ Index = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm products Crops Prices paid by farmers Livestock and products All items interest taxes and wage rates Family living items Parity ratio Production items Actual : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Augl5_ Sept Octl5_ Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octl5_ Nov Dec Adjusted Percentage ratio of index of prices received by farmers to index of prices paid interest taxes and wages rates on = base The adjusted parity ratio reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E G-85. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Farm labor Feed Fertiseed lizer and Taxes Misceland liveand liming stock interest laneous mapurterials chases COCMO p ooc enen coco toto in tn Total Mechanical Farm real power estate and machinery to Year Manhours of farm work ( billions ) ? Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Includes service buildings and improvements on land Nonfarm portion of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-86. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Financial assets MaHouseDeReal Livehold Total estate stock ^ chinery equip- posits and Crops * ment and motor curand vehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' ment U.S debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives ? ? L.4 tt _ 1963_._ 1967_ * 1972_ Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE C-87. U.S. balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise i Year or quarter ExImports ports Military transactions Net balance Direct expend- Sales itures ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net balance Net investment income Privates Net travel Other and trans- servU.S. porta- ices Gov- tion ex- net pendiernment tures RemitBal- tances penBalance sions ance on and on goods other curand uniserv- lateral rent acices i trans- count fers i Seasonally adjusted : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV.. : II. Ill P. IV * __ See footnotes at end of table on next page TABLE C-87. U.S. balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Balance on current account and longterm Private ^ capital Long-term capital flows net Year or quarter U.S Government < AlloNoncaliquid tions shortof term speprivate cial capital drawflows ing nets rights Liquid Errors Net and liquid- private omiscapital sions & net ance flows net Changes in liaOfficial bilities Changes to reserve in U.S trans- foreign official actions official reserve agen- assets balcies ance net net U.S official reserve assets net ( end of period ) _ fl-1,200 " Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted : II Ill IV : II...... Ill IV : II Ill v " i Excludes military grants s Adjusted from Census data for differences in timing and coverage > Includes fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States * Excludes liabilities to foreign official reserve agencies * Private foreigners exclude the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) but include other international and regional organizations Includes liabTities to foreign official agencies reported by U.S. Government and U.S. banks and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States Official reserve assets include gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF s Not available separately Coverage of liquid banking claims for and of nonliquid nonbanking claims for is limited to foreign currency deposits only ; other liquid items are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims Includes gain of $ million resulting from revaluation of the German mark in October i Includes $ million increase in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December i First quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis ( except reserve assets are end of December ) Includes increase of $ million resulting from change in par value of the U.S. dollar on May Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Treasury Department TABLE G-88- U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise imports Merchandise exportsi Gross merchandise trade Total Year or quarter balFood Crude ManFood Crude ManSeabever- mate- ufac- ance seasonally Unad- Total bever- mate- ufacrials tured sonally ages rials tured Seaages adjusted and to- and goods sonally Unad- and to- and goods adjusted bacco fuels * justed bacco fuels * adjusted justed Total including reexports General imports Domestic exports * : II III IV. : II Ill IV : II III IV Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the M ilitary Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind * Includes fats and oils ' includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items in elude military grant-aid shipments Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. Import values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE C-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Area Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemsiphere Western Europe1 Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa General imports : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries2 _ _ _. i Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE C-90. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears ; [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total economic loans and grants ( obligations and loan authorizations ) i average Loans Grants Loans Grants Economic loans and grants to less developed countries by program Obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Agency for International Development Obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Export-Import Bank long-term loans Loan authorizations : average _ Repayments and interest : average Food for Peace Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average Contributions and Subscriptions to International Lending Organizations * Obligations : average Peace Corps and Other * Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average Total Near East and South Asia Latin America East Asia and Vietnam Africa Europe Other and nonregional Some data are preliminary Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa Canada and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes capital subscriptions and contributions to the Inter-American Development Bank and the International Development Association * Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE C-91. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] ~ Area and country All countries Developed areas United States November United Kingdom Other Western Europe Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and Sweden ) Spain Switzerland Other Canada Japan Australia New Zealand and South Africa Less developed areas Latin America Middle East Other Asia Other Africa % & ( i Not available separately Estimate Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold. Special Drawing Rights and Reserve Positions in the International Monetary Fund and convertible foreign exchange. Beginning December gold is valued at U.S. dollars per ounce and foreign exchange balances are expressed in dollars at the cross rates reflecting parities and central rates agreed on December and subsequently. Data cover all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE C-92. U.S. reserve assets [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Total reserve assets Gold stock Total I960. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. MayJune. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Treasury Special drawing rights a Convertible foreign currencies * e Reserve position in International Monetary Fund L M28 From through January includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with the right of repurchase and beginning also includes gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund Includes initial allocation on January of $ million second allocation on January of $ million and third allocation on January of $ million of special drawing rights ( SDR ) in the Special Drawing Account in the IMF plus or minus transactions in SDR * Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System The United States has the right to purchase foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could purchase additional amounts equal to the United States quota fl Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position Includes gain of $ million resulting from revaluation of German mark in October of which $ million represents gain on mark holdings at time of revaluation Includes $ million increase in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December Includes $ million increase in total reserve assets resulting from the change in par value of the U.S. dollar on May consisting of $ million total gold stock $ million Treasury gold stock $ million special drawing rights and $ million reserve position in the IMF Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-93. Price changes in international trade [ = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade i * a U09 United States : Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade K Latin America : Exports Terms of trade * ago Southern and Eastern Asia : Exports Terms of trade * World export price indexes Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Coffee tea and cocoa. Cereals Other agricultural commodities <_ B Rubber Minerals Metal ores Manufactured goods : Total Nonferrous base metals Fats oils and oilseeds Textile fibers Wool HI * Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Data are for second quarter Excludes Japan * Includes nonfood fish and forest products Data are for first quarters of Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Commerce and Bureau of Resources and Trade Assistance ) TABLE G-94. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries [ = Period United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom 1D5.9 : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV a i For United States 12-month average ; for all other countries January-October average October-December average for United States ; October data for all other countries Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O-490-000