ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS FEBRUARY Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent off Documents ^ U.S. Government Printing Office Washington IXC. 2G402.P Price $ Stock Number 4000-Q.Q305 CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER ECONOMIC PROBLEMS AND POLICIES CHAPTER DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICY IN CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT CHAPTER ENERGY AND AGRICULTURE CHAPTER DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY IN APPENDIX A ACTIVITIES OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF WOMEN APPENDIX B. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX C. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The United States enters in a position of leadership in the world economy. The dollar is strong we have constructive economic relations throughout the world and we have the greatest freedom of action resulting from our great capacity to produce. We must take the responsibilities and the opportunities this position of leadership gives us Nineteen hundred and seventy-three was a year of problems and progress in the American economy. In some respects the problems were greater than we expected and the progress was less than we had hoped But the areas of our solid achievements were more important than the areas of our disappointments. We and the world around us have difficult tasks ahead primarily to deal with an old problem inflation and to deal with one that has just become acute energy. But the United States confronts these difficulties with a strong and adaptable economy which means an economy of capable and enterprising people In the middle of when the New Economic Policy was launched the country had three economic objectives : to promote the expansion of output and reduce unemployment to correct the persistent deficit in the U.S. balance of payments and to check the inflation which had been going on for 5J/2 years. To achieve these objectives a comprehensive program of action was initiated. Taxes were reduced. Price and wage controls were instituted. The exchange rate of the dollar was set free to adjust to market conditions and steps were initiated to improve the international monetary system There has been great progress toward two of these three objectives Production and employment have risen rapidly. Total civilian employment was million higher in December than in June The unemployment rate had fallen from percent to a little under percent. In a larger percentage of the civilian population over the age of was employed than ever before With vigorously rising employment and rising productivity as well there was a big increase in output of goods and services the essential ingredients of higher living standards. In the ^ /2 years of the New Economic Policy total output increased by percent which is about percent above our average for a period of this length. The real income of American consumers per capita after taxes rose by Ql/2 percent also well above our long-term rate. Both real output and real income of course reached record highs The second goal of the New Economic Policy to strengthen the international financial position of the United States and of the world was also largely achieved. The significance of this goal is commonly neglected in America. But a country whose currency is weak whose currency others do n't want to hold is greatly limited in what its government and citizens can do in buying goods abroad in traveling freely in investing freely in maintaining forces abroad if necessary. And if a country goes on spending more abroad than it earns abroad its freedom of action is going to be curtailed. There has been a dramatic change in our balance of trade from a deficit of $ million in the first half of to a surplus of $ million in the second half of We have not only improved our own position but we have also taken the lead in strengthening the international system. The more flexible system we have promoted withstood numerous shocks during and at the same time the world economy and international trade and investment continued to expand It is the third of the three objectives of the New Economic Policy the control of inflation that has been our great difficulty. Until the end of the New Economic Policy drawing on the results of earlier fiscal and monetary restraints worked well in getting the rate of inflation down even though worrisome rises in food prices appeared. But in inflation speeded up sharply. During the year consumer prices increased by almost percent Of course the progress on the first two objectives was connected with the disappointment on the third. The rapid rise toward full employment the expansion of our net exports and the reduction in the value of the dollar to make the United States more competitive all contributed to the resurgence of inflation. But there were other factors at work less directly under our control. Food production lagged in major producing countries including the United States. An extraordinary combination of booms in other countries boosted prices of industrial materials. Countries jointly controlling a large part of the world 's exportable oil supplies decided to raise their prices substantially. During food prices accounted for percent of the total rise of consumer prices and energy prices accounted for another percent The American people generally prospered despite the inflation in Their incomes on the average rose more than prices. But there were many families for which that was not true. We can not accept continuation of the inflation rate of and still less can we risk its acceleration. We must dedicate ourselves to carrying on the fight against inflation in and thereafter There are at least four lessons we can learn from our past experience in combating inflation : The importance of patience. To correct a powerful trend of the economy which has been going on for some time requires time. Sharply squeezing down the economy in an effort to halt inflation would produce a severe drop in employment and economic activity and create demands for a major reversal of policy. Pumping up the economy to get quickly to full employment would risk setting off even swifter inflation. We need a greater steadiness of policy The importance of the rest of the world. The events of brought our external economic relations sharply to our attention. Most simply put it will be exceedingly hard for us to have a stable economy in an unstable world. We must contribute a stabilizing influence to the world economy of which we are a large part. We must promote concerted efforts to maintain the health of the world economy The importance of production. Despite other vicissitudes what determines the economic well-being of the American people more than anything else is the rate of production. The rapid increase of production has provided the rising real incomes of the American people. More specifically increasing food production is the best way to deal with the food price problem and increasing our energy supplies is the best way to deal with the energy shortage. We think of ourselves as a Nation with high and strongly rising output. We are. But we can do better and it is important that we do better The importance of free markets. In the past several years under the pressure of emergency conditions we have made great but temporary departures from reliance on free prices and free markets. In special circumstances and for short periods these departures have been helpful But taken together these experiences have confirmed the view that the free market is in general our most efficient system of economic organization and that sustained and comprehensive suppression of it will not solve the inflation problem At the beginning of the three problems which have dominated economic policy for many years inflation unemployment and the balance of payments have been joined by a fourth the energy problem Or rather the other three problems have been pervaded by the energy problem. The present oil situation means that we are paying much higher prices for imported oil than formerly and that the volume of imports at the present time is less than we would freely buy even at those prices. But the prices and volumes are both highly uncertain and add uncertainties to the economic picture for the year The current and prospective oil situation will at the same time raise prices limit production in some industries and reduce demand in others It will be the objective of the Administration 's policy to do three things in this circumstance : To keep the moderate slowdown of the economic boom from becoming excessive because of the energy shortage ; To keep the rise of fuel prices from spilling over unnecessarily into more inflation in other parts of the economy ; and To set the stage for stronger economic expansion with greater price stability after the initial price and output disruptions caused by the energy shortage have been absorbed Achieving these goals in this unpredictable economic environment will require alertness and adaptability. We can not set a policy at the beginning of the year and let it run without further consideration. But we can describe the main elements of our present strategy We will maintain a budget of moderate economic restraint. Even though the combination of urgent requirements and inescapable commitments generates pressures for huge expenditure increases the budget I will propose will keep the expenditures within the revenues that the tax system would yield at full employment We will be prepared to support economic activity and employment by additional budgetary measures if necessary We urge the Congress to enact the legislation I proposed last year for improving the unemployment compensation system with further strengthening amendments I will submit. This would provide better protection for workers who may lose their jobs whether because of the energy shortage or for other reasons and also help to protect the economy better against the secondary effects of their unemployment Working together with other consuming countries including the developing countries and with the oil-exporting countries we will try to arrive at an understanding on mutually beneficial conditions of exchange We will try to manage the energy shortage in such a way as to keep the loss of jobs and production to a minimum although some loss is inevitable in the short run. The allocation system is designed to assure an adequate flow of oil to those industries where lack of it would limit employment the most. We shall also have to provide or permit incentives including higher prices for maximum imports for maximum domestic exploration and production and for efficient use of our scarce supplies. To prevent higher prices from causing excess profits I have proposed an Emergency Windfall Profits Tax which I urge the Congress to enact promptly We will work with other oil-importing countries to prevent the higher prices of oil and its limited supply from generating a downward spiral of recession. The higher prices will cause dislocations and impose burdens on all consuming countries ; they do not have to cause a spreading recession if we manage our affairs cooperatively and wisely We will continue our policy of maximum agricultural production to help hold down food prices We will continue our policy of progressive removal of price and wage controls in order to restore the flexibility needed for efficiency and expansion in a time of economic strain The effort to maintain the stability of our economy in the face of the present unusual conditions will absorb a great deal of attention this year But we must not neglect the fundamental factors which determine the prosperity of the American people in the longer run. One of these has come to general public attention with a rush the need for adequate supplies of energy at reasonable cost. We are seeing the possible consequences of being deprived of these and we must not allow it The energy problem has had two main parts for some time : First with rapidly rising world demand for energy most of which comes from depletable resources we could run into sharply increasing costs of energy unless vast investments are made in research development experimentation and production Second we are exposed to the danger of being thrown back upon inadequate or very expensive sources of energy earlier than necessary by joint action of a few countries that control a large part of the existing low-cost reserves of oil To deal with this problem I began proposing almost years ago a number of governmental measures to permit or assist development of energy within the control of the United States. In the second part of the problem which had formerly been a threat became a reality at least temporarily and this has demonstrated unmistakably the urgency of the steps I have recommended I propose that the United States should commit itself to " Project Independence " to develop the capacity for self-sufficiency in energy supplies at reasonable cost. One key element of Project Independence is a 5-year $ billion program of federally financed research and development in the field of energy. My budget for fiscal year will include almost $ billion for this purpose. By far the largest part of the research development and production required by Project Independence will be private and steps to stimulate the private contribution are essential Among the numerous measures to this end which I called attention to in my latest energy message on January were several tax proposals Last April I proposed that the investment credit be extended to cover exploratory drilling for new oil and gas fields while the tax shelters for wealthy taxpayers associated with such drilling would be eliminated. In my recent message I asked Congress to eliminate the depletion allowance given to U.S. companies for foreign oil production but to retain it for domestic production in order to shift the incentive to exploration and production at home. I have also asked the Treasury Department to prepare proposals for revising the treatment of taxes paid by oil companies to foreign governments both to improve tax equity and to increase the incentive for domestic production Energy is only the most dramatic example of the need for policies to promote a rising American standard of living by increasing production and assuring the stability of supplies. There are many others I. We have discovered that we no longer have a surplus of food in the sense of producing more than we need either to consume at home or to sell abroad in order to pay for the things we buy abroad. We no longer have great reserves of food in storage and acreage withheld from use. We have freed the American farmer to produce as much as he can and we should keep him free. American agriculture is and should be heavily involved in exports. This means that the American food price level and the American consumer are directly influenced by the forces of world demand and supply. International cooperation is needed to promote food production and the maintenance of stocks adequate to shield consumers from the more extreme variations of output. At the call of the Secretary of State preparations are now being made for a conference on this subject to be held under United Nations auspices II. Our ability to buy abroad what is produced more efficiently abroad and to sell abroad what we produce more efficiently contributes to the productivity of the American economy. At my recommendation the countries of the world are now preparing to negotiate new steps in foreign trade policy which will further invigorate this beneficial process I urge the Congress to enact promptly the trade legislation I have proposed to permit the United States to participate in these negotiations III. One of our most essential industries freight transportation is unfortunately shot through with inefficiencies. Many of these inefficiencies are the result of obsolete shortsighted and excessive regulation. Hundreds of millions and probably billions of dollars a year could be saved by unleashing carriers and shippers to carry the freight on the most efficient mode of transportation in the most efficient way. I have sent to the Congress new proposals to this end IV. In as in relatively few days of work were lost as a result of industrial disputes. Continuation of this record would be a valuable contribution to the level and stability of production. I have appointed a Commission on Industrial Peace composed of leaders of management and labor with an impartial chairman to make recommendations for bringing that about V. In addition to the major research and development effort to provide secure supplies of energy without abusing our natural environment in doing so this Administration is continuing its support of research and development projects that will help maintain a healthy rate of innovation and productivity growth in the rest of our economy. These activities will be supported at record levels in the coming year and we are also trying to get a higher return for every dollar we spend VI. An indispensable source of economic growth is saving and investment in productive facilities. It should be the policy of government to interfere with this process as little as possible. The government should not absorb private savings into financing its deficits in times when private investment would otherwise utilize all the private saving. Our basic budget policy of balancing the budget or running a surplus under conditions of high employment carries out this principle. Moreover taxation should not depress productive investment by unduly burdening its return. We should not indulge in demagogic and shortsighted attacks upon profits VII. We must push forward as we have been doing to remove barriers against the entry of women and minorities into any occupation and against their maximum training and advancement. The men and women of the country are its greatest economic resource. To fail to use any of this resource to its full potential is a serious loss to us all Compared with our parents and grandparents we are enormously rich We have protections against the ebbs and flows of economic life that they never expected and barely imagined. But I can not assure the American people of an easy time. Like our parents and grandparents we have our own tests. If we meet them with fortitude and realism the period ahead can be one not only of material advance but also of spiritual satisfaction February I THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully HERBERT STEIN Chairman WILLIAM J. FELLNER GARY L. SEEVERS O CONTENTS Page CHAPTER ECONOMIC PROBLEMS AND POLICIES Where We Stand at the Outset of General Economic Implications of the Energy Problem. Goals for Policies for Achieving the Goals Goals Beyond Development of Low-Cost Energy for the Future Saving and Private Investment The Financial System Transportation Reform Efficient International Exchange Supplement Prospects for CHAPTER DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICY IN Demand and Output in Nonresidential Fixed Investment Inventories Housing Consumer Spending Net Exports The Labor Market The Labor Force Employment and Hours Unemployment Productivity and Potential Output The Behavior of Prices Compensation and Unit Labor Costs Fiscal Policy in Federal Expenditures Federal Receipts Balances of the Federal Budget Inflation and the Federal Budget at Full Employment. The State and Local and the Combined Budget Balances Monetary Policy and Financial Markets CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT The Economic Stabilization Program in Phase III Phase III Is Tightened The Freeze Phase IV The Effectiveness of Controls Fairness of Controls Effect of Controls on Components of Output Summary CHAPTER ENERGY and AGRICULTURE Energy The Energy Crisis Recovery from the Crisis Long-Term Prospects Energy and Environmental Policy Agriculture Agriculture : Fully Employed Agricultural Policy for the Future CHAPTER DISTRIBUTION of INCOME Outline and Summary The Change in Inequality of Family and Individual Income Secular Changes Cyclical Changes Omitted Sources of Real Income and the Inequality of Weil-Being Determinants of Differences in Earnings Among Individuals. Schooling Post-School Training Employment Earnings Differentials Between Groups Discrimination Race Differentials Sex Differentials Occupational Differences The Low-Income Population The Definition of Poverty The Decrease in Poverty The Characteristics of the Poor Ill Page Government Transfer Programs Federal Transfers in Aid to Families With Dependent Children Social Security and Supplemental Security Income Federal Food Subsidy Programs Medicare and Medicaid Income Distribution Effects of Money Transfer Programs Supplement The Variance of the Natural Logarithm of Income CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY IN What Happened in ? How Governments Behaved in the Monetary Arena Planning the Future International Monetary System How Governments Behaved in the Trade Arena Planning the Future International Trading System Supplement Measurement of Effective Changes in Exchange Rates APPENDIXES : A. Activities of the Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Federal Budget Surplus or Deficit Under Alternative Assumptions National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Changes in Gross National Product in Current and Constant Dollars to Changes in Manufacturing Plant and Equipment Outlays and Value of Starts to Changes in Manufacturing Real Plant and Equipment Outlays to Disposition of Disposable Personal Income Unemployment Rates for Selected Groups Selected Years Page Unemployment Rates by Sex and Age Selected Years Composition of the Civilian Labor Force Selected Years Aspects of Labor Utilization Selected Years Aspects of Capacity Utilization Selected Years Changes in Gross National Product Price Deflators Selected Periods to Changes in Selected Price Measures IV to IV Components of Percent Change in Compensation Per ManHour in the Private Nonfarm Sector Changes in Prices Costs and Profits Per Unit of Output for Nonfmancial Corporations to Distribution of Gross Product Originating in Nonfinancial Corporations Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Actual and Full-Employment Federal and State and Local Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Changes in Aggregate Monetary Measures and Gross National Product to Offerings of New Security Issues Net Savings Flows at Thrift Institutions Measures of Price and Wage Change During the Economic Stabilization Program Regulations of the Controls Program Phases II III and IV. Changes in Consumer Prices in OECD Countries Selected Periods Supply-Increasing Actions of the Federal Government During First Year Wage Rate Changes in Collective Bargaining Agreements Covering Workers or More Behavior of Items in Consumer Price Index During Phases II and III Classified by Type of Control Applicable Gross Consumption of Energy in Natural Units Selected Years Consumption of Energy By User Sector and Source Use of Energy Inputs for Electric Power Wholesale Prices All Industrial Commodities and Selected Fuels Selected Periods U.S. Grain Stocks Compared to Grain Utilization Selected Periods Page Change in Inputs Used in Farming to Production and Productivity in Agriculture Selected Years to Share of Aggregate Income Before Taxes Received by Each Fifth of Families Ranked by Income Selected Years Income Inequality Under Alternative Definitions of Income Selected Characteristics of the Lowest Middle and Highest Fifths of Families Ranked by Money Income and Average Usual Weekly Earnings of Male Workers Years of Age Who Worked Full Time by Years of Schooling and Race Average Usual Weekly Earnings of Males Who Worked Full Time by Age and Years of Schooling Income of Negro Males as Percent of Income of White Males by Type of Income and Age and Earnings of Negroes as a Percent of Earnings of Whites for Persons Years of Age Median Income of Negro Husband-Wife Families as Percent of White Husband-Wife Families by Region and Age of Husband and Relation of Wage and Salary Earnings and of Total Money Earnings of Women to Those of Men and Persons Below the Low-Income Level and Percent Below the Low-Income Level by Family Status Selected Years Work Experience of Family Heads Below the Low-Income Level by Sex and Federal Government Transfer Programs Fiscal Year AFDC Benefits and Families Selected Years Trends in the Employment Status of Mothers in the AFDC Program Selected Years Proportion of Families Having Transfer Income From Particular Sources The Effect of Money Transfers on Family Income Inequality Changes in the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar U.S Liabilities to Official Foreigners and U.S. Liabilities to Private Foreigners Relative Labor Costs in Manufacturing U.S. Balances on International Transactions Page Maximum Percent Change in Exchange Rates Between Various Foreign Currencies and the Dollar During Major Changes in Capital Controls Composition of International Reserve Assets A Comparison of Several Measures of the Effective Depreciation of the Dollar From May Changes in Exchange Rates From May Charts Changes in GNP Real GNP GNP Price Deflator and the Unemployment Rate Changes in Real GNP Changes in Selected Price Measures Productivity Compensation and Unit Labor Costs in the Private Nonfarm Economy Interest Rates Changes in Related Wholesale and Consumer Prices Consumer Prices of Gasoline and Motor Oil Real Income Profiles of Cohorts of Men Born in Selected Years Real Incomes for Men in Different Age Groups Change in the Value of the U.S. Dollar Relative to Selected Foreign Currencies CHAPTER Economic Problems and Policies F OR EIGHT YEARS economic policy and the news about the economy have been dominated by inflation. The story has been a frustrating one. Over the period from the end of to the end of consumer prices rose by percent or at an average rate of percent a year There were fluctuations. Twice during the period the rate of inflation declined significantly. But in the last of the years the rate of inflation was higher than in any of the others. During the years the inflation came in various forms sometimes led by wages sometimes by prices by foods by oil ; sometimes it was domestic and sometimes imported. Many programs have been launched to stop it without durable success. Inflation seemed a Hydra-headed monster growing two new heads each time one was cut off The problem was not confined to the United States ; indeed inflation was worse in most other countries Several important points seem clear to us from the experience of the past years. One is that while continued rapid inflation is not inevitable the course of unwinding it will be long and difficult. There is by now a great deal of inflation built into our system. For one thing both workers and employers are now used to high increases in money wages which reflect the expectation of rapid inflation and only gradually can these be moderated Inflation is similarly built into the level of interest rates. The public is highly sensitive to inflation and reacts in an inflationary way to any news which confirms its expectation of inflation. Against this background to hope that we can " wring the inflation out of the system " by the end of some short period is to assure disappointment. Whoever undertakes now to fight inflation must be prepared to stay the long course. We think it is necessary to do this and also to recognize why we must do it. Experience extending over almost a decade teaches us that if we do not fight inflation effectively it will accelerate The American people have prospered over the past years. Our real incomes have risen. Our real consumption expenditures have risen and our real assets have risen in total and per capita. These are facts of great importance. But they do not relieve us of the need to bring inflation under control and to accept the cost of doing so for the sake of avoiding the greater costs of an accelerating inflation We have specific problems too aside from the general inflation problem There are many things the American people want to do collectively or individually. They want to maintain an adequate defense to clean up the environment to provide more generously for the disadvantaged to improve standards of health and also to continue to raise the quality of their lives in all the ways that involve more private consumption. At the same time we see unusual obstacles to more rapid increases of production the increased costs of energy being the most obvious one at present. Beneath the tide of inflation the basic economic problem of increasing production goes on and requires attention even in a country as rich as ours The problems of specific price increases must be distinguished from the general inflation problem. Increases in some individual product or service prices beyond the average are essential if we are to maintain supplies and allocate shortages. The attempt to suppress the increase of particular prices while it may be necessary in emergencies is in general not an effective way to combat inflation and is harmful to production WHERE WE STAND AT THE OUTSET OF We enter in a condition of high inflation and in the early stage of a slowdown one result of which will be to reduce the rate of inflation although not immediately. All the features of this situation the high rate of inflation the slowdown of output and the slowdown of demand are intensified by the higher prices and reduced imports of oil. Moreover the oil situation makes the period ahead even more than usually difficult to predict Decisions of the oil-exporting countries resulting from a mixture of economics and politics can not be foreseen. American businesses and consumers are faced with unprecedented increases in relative prices and curtailments in supply and no one can tell just how they will react in their consumption and investment. Other oil-importing countries will be seriously affected by price and supply developments in oil and their responses will have repercussions here The rapid price and wage increases that were being experienced at the end of will undoubtedly be carried on and passed through in the early part of In the fourth quarter of last year wholesale industrial prices other than for energy products rose at an annual rate in excess of percent Much of this rise will appear in retail prices in early Similarly large increases that have already occurred in crude oil prices have not yet been fully reflected in retail prices. Wholesale food prices were also rising as the year ended and the outlook was that tight supplies would boost retail prices in the first months of The rate of wage increases had been drifting up during and since the cost of living was also continuing to rise rapidly this trend of wages was unlikely to be reversed soon Thus a high rate of price and wage increases although possibly not as high a rate as in seems inevitable in the first part of But beyond the early months the course of inflation is as yet undetermined Prices of oil and related products will not go on rising at the rate of late and early but will presumably reach some new high level from which they will be no more likely to rise than to fall. There is also a prospect of larger world food supplies. In general as we go through the year the course of prices will be less and less a reverberation of what happened in and increasingly the outcome of events and policies in The year also began with demand rising less rapidly than during most of and production possibly not rising at all. In the fourth quarter of total expenditures for the purchase of output rose at an annual rate of about ^ percent compared to about percent in the year ending in the third quarter. Real output rose at the rate of about percent after an increase of about 5/2 percent in the preceding year There seems little doubt that this sluggishness will continue in the early part of and that total output may decline. Automobile production is being cut back sharply partly because of the effect of high prices and shortages of gasoline on the demand for large cars. The recent weakness of housing starts and permits indicates declining residential construction during the first part of the year. The high prices for oil being paid to foreign suppliers will hold down expenditures for U.S. output. There will be some cases although one can not be sure how many in which production is held back by shortages of energy or energy-related materials Just as a high inflation rate seems predetermined for the early part of the year so does a fairly low rate of increase of production which might in fact for a while be negative. But the situation at the beginning of the year does not appear to presage a very long or severe slowdown. There are a number of factors tending to support the expansion of the economy including substantial planned increases of business fixed investment. How soon a revival will come and how strong it will be also depend on events and policies of GENERAL ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF THE ENERGY PROBLEM The nature of the problems with which policy has to contend in depends substantially on the energy situation on the volume of oil imports on their prices and on the policies adopted in the United States Total imports of oil expected in before measures were taken by some exporting countries beginning in October to curtail shipments and raise prices were about percent of expected petroleum consumption in This was about percent of expected energy consumption in since petroleum would have supplied about percent of total energy use. The countries participating in the embargo of the United States had been expected to supply directly and indirectly about percent of our petroleum use and percent of our energy use. This would have been the extent of the initial supply reduction if the embargo had been fully effective This curtailment of supply does of course lead to adaptations. Prices of oil imported into the United States are free from price control as are prices of oil produced by certain small ( stripper ) wells and of " new " oil produced by other wells in excess of their base period production These prices can be passed on in prices of refined products. Thus a shortage of oil in the United States raises the prices of oil in these categories and increases the supply both of imported oil and of domestic oil offsetting some of the initial effects of the curtailment. Also the higher prices reduce the quantity consumers and businesses want to buy. Therefore the whole initial curtailment does not appear as a gap between desired quantities and available quantities In time and despite the existence of the price controls prices might rise enough to clear the market and there would be no " shortage " in the sense of inability to buy petroleum products at the prevailing prices. The uncontrolled prices whether of imports of " new " oil or of oil from stripper wells would rise to a level which when averaged in with the controlled prices would equate the quantities demanded and supplied. Although prices of petroleum products in the United States rose very rapidly after October and this apparently served to cut down the desired consumption they had not risen enough by the end of January to eliminate shortages. The impact of the remaining shortages is being distributed through the economy by allocations and other controls by voluntary conservation measures and to some extent by a first-come-first-served process The Secretary of State has recently expressed the hope that the embargo on the export of oil to the United States from some Arab countries would soon be lifted. The effect of such action on the U.S. economy would depend upon the price and production policies of the oil-exporting countries. The higher their production levels and the lower the world price the smaller will be the current economic problems for the United States and for other importing countries. In any case it seems necessary to reckon with a significantly higher price for imported oil in than in although how much higher is uncertain. This conclusion would imply smaller U.S. imports than would otherwise have occurred but a larger dollar cost of imports. It is probably also reasonable to assume that the curtailment would increasingly be reflected in higher domestic prices rather than in shortages at the existing prices This combination of limited oil imports and higher prices will have four kinds of economic effects in the United States and in other oil-importing countries Limitation on capacity to produce. Beyond some point inadequacy in the supply of energy can make it impossible to produce certain products or high energy prices can make it impossible to produce certain products at costs at which they can be sold. However it does not appear that this point will be exceeded or that our capacity to produce will be significantly curtailed by the energy situation. Part of the U.S. energy supply is utilized directly for consumption particularly for home heating and for personal transportation. Some is used in industry for lighting or heating that may be convenient but is not necessary for production. In general it appeared when the embargo began that the initial curtailment of imports could be absorbed out of these " nonproductive " uses without impairing our capacity to produce. This would not have been entirely true because there would have been shortages of particular products and in particular places. But it did not appear that the output and employment loss resulting from inability to produce would be substantial although there would be other negative effects. This view has been fortified since it appears that the net curtailment of imports may be less than initially .eared. Maintenance of capacity to produce in the presence of import curtailment will depend on limiting consumption use of petroleum products especially the use of heating oil for homes and gasoline for personal transportation. This will cause inconvenience although curtailment on the scale foreseen would not cause hardship. Concentration of the available supply in the uses most essential for production and employment will be brought about in part by higher prices This can be and is supplemented by voluntary conservation measures and by mandatory allocations Restraint on the demand for output. The reduced availability and higher price of gasoline will curtail the demand for large automobiles for the services of motels and for other tourist services. The shortage of heating oil and gasoline will cut the demand for new houses. How serious these effects are will depend in part on the amount of the cut in oil supplies or on the rise in the price. One should note that the effect of a price rise can be as great as the effect of a shortage in diverting expenditures from oil-related products. All of these effects will also depend on how consumers react not only in restricting purchases of petroleum-related products but also in switching purchases to other things. The problem is compounded by uncertainties both about imports and about public policy which may cause a more negative reaction than the most probable facts would justify The real income loss due to costlier energy. The foregoing are the transitional problems created by the present energy situation. The initial loss of capacity to produce caused by the curtailment of energy supplies will in time be offset by shifts of production in directions that use less energy. The initial loss of demand for output associated with energy will in time be compensated for by a shift of consumers ' demands to other products and possibly by an increase in demand for American products by the oil-exporting countries. In addition to these transitional problems there will be a continuing effect on the real standard of living of the American people as a result of being cut off from low-cost sources of oil. That means we shall have to pay more of our own products or assets to foreigners in exchange for their oil that we shall have to devote more of our own resources to producing energy domestically and that we shall have to accept methods of production or forms of consumption we would not have chosen if more oil had been available at a lower price How much these costs will amount to is exceedingly difficult to estimate A clue to their magnitude is given by the fact that the increased cost of U.S oil imports due to the oil price rises of October and December would be less than percent of the gross national product ( GNP ) in with a volume of imports that would have occurred at the pre-October prices. This is probably an outside estimate of the costs in ( aside from the transitional costs already noted ) because there would be adaptations of various kinds. The amount is large and justifies a strenuous effort to reduce it by getting the foreign price down and by developing cheaper sources at home Whether the cost will continue to rise relative to GNP will depend on the costs of producing additional amounts of energy from new sources Balance of payments and other international consequences. All of the other oil-importing countries of the world will suffer the effects of the cut in supplies and the increase in prices of oil. In fact most of these countries will be more seriously affected than the United States because their imports of oil are larger relative to their total supply of energy and to their total GNP. The position in the Western European countries is expected to be qualitatively similar to that in the United States. The short-run depressing effect on their domestic demand as a result of the high import prices will be greater than the cut in their ability to produce caused by the oil shortage. For Japan the situation may be different and the effect on her ability to produce may be more severe. In any case there will be a marked slowdown and possibly an absolute decline in demand and output in most of the countries of the world with which we do business except for the oilexporting countries This outcome will influence the United States in a number of ways. It should help to retard the increases in prices of industrial raw materials just as the worldwide boom contributed to their rise. The increase in the value of the dollar in the last quarter of should also help to slow down the rise of dollar prices of internationally traded commodities. The net effects on trade are not clear. Oil prices will be lower here than elsewhere at least for a time because of the price control on a large part of our oil supply ; and this situation will tend to stimulate exports of products with a large oil component such as petrochemicals. On the other hand the reduction of income and activity abroad and the depreciation of foreign currencies will tend to cut our exports. This factor will probably be the dominant one although its net effect is likely to be small except for one reservation to be noted At present prices of oil the oil import bills of the industrialized countries will be so large that many if not all of them will have current account deficits that is their foreign expenditures for goods and services will exceed their foreign earnings. This will be true even after allowing for the added purchases that the oil-exporting countries may make from the industrialized countries. The oil-exporting countries will have large current account sur- pluses which in one form or another will be invested in financial or real assets in the industrialized countries This combination of transactions does not require any decline in the level of economic activity in the industrialized world aside from the transitional difficulties already noted or slowdown in the rate of growth. In fact there may be a stimulus to the rate of growth as the higher oil prices extract funds from consumption and return them to investment via the investment of the oil-exporting countries. However there could be severe repercussions if the financial aspects of these transactions are not well managed Several possibilities can be envisaged which could lead to cumulative recession. One possibility is that some of the industrialized countries might lose large amounts of monetary reserves or incur large liquid liabilities to the oil-exporting countries which would impel the industrialized countries to try to build up their reserves. Or industrialized countries having current account deficits might feel it important to correct those deficits even though their overall balances of payments are not in deficit. Some countries will have overall deficits and might try to correct that situation. In any event the single-country response is likely to be to try to export more and import less either by squeezing down the economy at home or by checking imports and spurring exports. That is the single-country response could well either create recession at home or export recession. If many countries are following this policy at once the compound result could be a large and unnecessary decline in the world economy GOALS FOR The goals for must be realistically connected with the conditions existing at the beginning of the year. As we have already explained we believe that the conditions existing at the beginning of the year make it extremely likely that inflation will continue at a high rate through the early part of A slow rate of economic expansion is also likely during this period and possibly a decline with rising unemployment. After some period probably after the first half of the year the course of the economy will be influenced more by policies still to be adopted. The idea of a " goal " is more relevant to this later period than to the months immediately at hand. For this later period three possible paths for the economy can be distinguished Total spending can accelerate strongly bringing production quicklyback to a full-employment level. This path would create new price pressures which would replace the diminishing pressures expected in energy and food and contribute to an acceleration of wage increases The contraction can continue with unemployment rising throughout the year. Anti-inflationary pressure would be strengthened along this path The economy can begin a moderate expansion one which will bring a halt to the rise in unemployment and yet resist an upsurge of inflation outside the food and fuel sectors and get the benefit of a much lower rate of further price increase in these two sectors. There would be an expectation that a significant reduction of price increases in food and fuel would be followed in time by a reduction elsewhere if the economic environment is not overheated. This would be accompanied by a gradual decline of the unemployment rate The third possible path is most consistent with attaining as well as maintaining the goals of the Employment Act. The first is a prescription for undiminished and probably accelerating inflation. The second exacts too high a price in unemployment Of course no one knows with certainty or precision the relations among output unemployment and prices along any of these paths. They only reflect general emphases which can be utilized as guides to policy. Moreover even if the desired path could be precisely described no one could precisely describe the policy that would achieve it. All of these usual uncertainties are heightened this year by the difficulty of foreseeing the effects of the radical change in the energy situation. This unusual degree of uncertainty makes it more important than ever that we be prepared with means for adapting policy if events seem to be moving outside a reasonable range of the roughly defined target path What is implied by the path that at present seems to us the best of the feasible ones for the economy given the inescapable effects of the energy shortage is an increase of about percent in the nominal value of GNP from calendar to to about $ billion. Of this rise about percent would be an increase in real output and about percent an increase of prices ( as measured by the GNP deflator ) Changes from calendar to are of course significantly influenced by what has already happened in ; and hence changes so expressed do not describe an expected path for though they are implied in any expected path. As for the expected path during this would leave real output approximately flat and perhaps declining for an interval in the first half of the year but would bring a rise by somewhat more than the normal trend rate in the second half. Inflation would be rapid in the early part of the year mainly as a consequence of energy and food prices and then subside to rates significantly below those experienced in Unemployment for the year would average a little above 5J/2 percent We would emphasize two aspects of this path. First it is at the same time our view of a feasible target and a prediction of what will be achieved if the planned policy is carried through. Second that the path is feasible and that it will be achieved by the planned policy are both uncertain to a significant degree. This means that the target or the policy may have to be changed as new information emerges although changes involve costs and should not be made unless the case for them is clear A description of the implications of this path for the main sectors of the economy appears at the end of this chapter POLICIES FOR ACHIEVING THE GOALS The general contour of the economy described for is consistent with the private forces now apparently at work. In the early months of the year consumers will make the move to spending a larger part of their income on an imported product namely oil because of the higher price. This will tend to reduce their spending for the purchase of other goods and services and will offset the rise of other categories of demand such as business investment and government spending. But the adjustment to spending more money on imported oil will be completed early in the year ; this drag on the expansion of the economy will then be removed and the expansive forces will become more effective. ( Expenditures for foreign oil will not decline but they will not be rising significantly. ) As the year progresses housing construction will rise in response to greater availability of credit and greater certainty about the distribution of fuel oil and gasoline ; and production of new automobiles will increase as the manufacturers improve their ability to turn out small cars. Meanwhile the period of maximum increase of energy prices and food prices should have passed The main functions of policy will be to keep the dip in the early part of the year from going too far and to assist the revival later in the year but to avoid stimulating too rapid a surge Fiscal policy. The budget proposed by the President will tend to restrain the decline of the economy during but would inject no fiscal stimulus to push the economy above its average rate of expansion If the economy were operating at about the same rate of utilization of the labor force in as in the size of the budget surplus would change very little between the years. Thus one can say approximately that if the economy were moving along its normal growth path the budget would not be tending to divert the economy from that path in either direction However if the economy operates as expected at a lower rate of activity relative to its potential in calendar than in calendar the budget will swing significantly toward deficit. This change will result chiefly from the lower level of receipts accruing to the Federal Government at lower levels of economic activity and partly from higher unemployment compensation payments. As a consequence private incomes after taxes rise relative to output thus sustaining demand and moderating the slowdown of the economy In calendar year unlike Federal receipts were swollen by exceptionally large net overwithholding of personal income tax estimated to amount to about $ billion. An estimate of the economic effect of the budget in and depends heavily on the impact attributed to this overwithholding. If the amount overwithheld was less like a personal tax than like personal saving accruing in the form of a government obligation fiscal policy moved in a restrictive direction from to Thus if the amount overwithheld is subtracted from recorded receipts there was a swing of O about $ billion from deficit to surplus between the years on the assumption of a constant rate of economic activity at full employment. Over $ billion of that swing would have been due to the higher rate of inflation in but the remaining $ billion would represent an independent fiscal policy force restraining even the normal rate of growth. Such restraint was appropriate given the inflationary condition of the time. Since we had in both a reduction of unemployment and an increase in the rate of inflation the actual swing from deficit to surplus was larger about $ billion or about $ billion if overwithholding is excluded from actual receipts If the overwithheld amount is treated like any other tax receipt little shift in the full-employment budget position appears between and However exclusion of the overwithholding from receipts seems to us to come closer to representing the economic effect of the budget and the fullemployment estimates in Table are calculated in that way. On this basis it appears that whereas the direction of fiscal policy was significantly restrictive from to it is fairly neutral from to offering support if the economy declines but otherwise not exerting any upward or downward push The foregoing observations relate to the balance of Federal receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts. These accounts are more useful for analysis of overall economic impact than the unified budget accounts stressed in the Budget Message primarily because they exclude certain expenditufes which do not enter directly into the stream of U.S. income or expenditure. The references to the behavior of the surplus or deficit at a constant rate of economic activity are to calculations of the surplus as it would be at the actual or forecast rate of inflation if the economy were operating at percent unemployment and at an annual growth rate of percent ( rather than the percent used in Council Reports of the past years ) The level of these surpluses depends on the unemployment rate chosen but the year-to-year changes in the surplus are not sensitive to the unemployment rate chosen if the chosen rate is approximately stable from year to year. Reference to a higher unemployment rate would reduce the levels of the surpluses but not have much effect on the year-to-year changes It is also useful to try to take the effect of changing inflation rates out of the change in the surplus because such a procedure gives a clearer picture of the budget changes that are autonomous that is not responses to economic fluctuations. An increase in the inflation rate will affect both receipts and expenditures but it will affect receipts much more promptly and hence increase the surplus. This increase in the surplus tends to restrain the expansion and thus the increase of the inflation rate. But it is also a symptom of not having prevented a rise of the inflation rate and so is evidence of antiinflationary policy only in a rather negative sense. Unfortunately the effect of the change in the inflation rate can be measured only very approximately Table shows the annual surpluses and changes according to four different methods of measurement TABLE Federal budget surplus or deficit under alternative assumptions national income accounts basis calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Full-employment budget surplus or deficit ( ) under alternative assumptions i Actual budget surplus or deficit ( ) Calendar year percent Variable unemployment unemployment percent unemployment standardized rates inflation rate Level : Change from previous year : $ billion in overwithholding excluded from receipts Change in surplus or deficit between succeeding years assumes that inflation rate is constant at rate of first year Assumes that unemployment rates of the civilian labor force are constant at their levels in each of four sex-age categories : Males and females years and males and females years and over. Instead of staying at percent the overall unemployment rate used to represent a constant rate of utilization of the labor force in this estimate rises to about percent by because the labor force was increasingly composed of groups ( females youths ) characteristically having higher unemployment rates than older males Excludes transfer of $ billion worth of rupees to the Indian Government expected in the first half of Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers In view of the uncertainties facing us it is extremely important to be prepared with fiscal measures to support or restrain the economy if it is clearly running outside the general track described here for The Administration is now in the process of preparing for support action. A decision to take such measures would have to be made with great caution however in view of the additional supply bottlenecks that might be caused by the energy shortage Greater protection for those unemployed because of the prospective conditions and greater assurance against an even more serious slowdown would have been provided if Congress had enacted the proposal submitted by the Administration last year to improve the unemployment compensation system. The President has again strongly urged the Congress to act promptly on these proposals ; he will also submit additional unemployment insurance amendments to extend the duration of benefits and expand coverage in labor market areas that have large increases in unemployment Monetary policy. Because of the lag which we believe exists between changes in money and changes in economic activity the influence of monetary policy on the economy during will largely result from the monetary expansion during the second half of and the first half of The monetary expansion in the second half of can be described by an increase in the narrowly defined money stock ( Ma ) of somewhat under percent and an increase in the broadly defined money stock ( M ) of about percent at annual rates. Continued growth in M at approximately this rate would be consistent with our expectations concerning the increase in money GNP during At present we expect money GNP to increase by about percent during the year. For more than a decade the proportionate increase of money GNP tended to be the same as that of M2 though in some years the deviations from this proportionality were substantial and halfyearly deviations were often quite large. Hence the foregoing conclusion seems reasonable barring the emergence of further evidence as yet unforeseen The prospect for trends in interest rates is particularly difficult to appraise at present. Inflationary expectations tend to raise money rates while the temporary slowdown of business activity is apt to have the contrary influence for a while even though business fixed investment is likely to rise at a rate well above that of GNP. Among the interest-reducing influences the prospective capital inflows resulting directly or indirectly from current account surpluses of the oil-exporting countries also need to be taken into account. All this relates to interest rates in general. Terms on which mortgage credit is available will be influenced by the success that depository institutions have in attracting new savings funds in competition with market alternatives and by the subsidization policies of the Administration with respect to this category of borrowers As will be explained in Chapter by steepening inflationary expectations an overgenerous increase in the money supply would steepen rather than moderate trends in money rates of interest Housing policy. The economic path described for implies a bottoming out of housing starts in the first quarter of at a level only slightly below the fourth quarter of followed by a rise beginning in the spring The Administration took a number of steps in September to cushion the decline then under way. In January a two-pronged action was taken to revive the mortgage market. The Department of Housing and Urban Development was authorized to purchase mortgages on up to housing units at % percent substantially below the prevailing market interest rate In addition the maximum interest rates on FHA-VA mortgages were lowered to 8I4 percent from 8/ percent thereby setting the pattern for reduced mortgage rates Managing the energy shortage in the United States. If the economy is to follow the general path we have outlined it will be essential that output not be seriously hampered by the shortage of energy. This stipulation means first that the total supply of fuels made available for industrial production including transportation related to it must be adequate to sustain the aggregate level of economic activity projected for the year. Second the supply must be distributed among users in a way that avoids bottlenecks How easily these two conditions can be met will depend upon the volume of oil imports. We believe that the volume of imports will be sufficient to permit their fulfillment but it would be imprudent to assume that they can be met without care in the distribution of energy among various uses The rise in prices of petroleum products which has been occurring helps to bring about the desired distribution. As the prices rise the less valuable uses which tend to be those which generate the least output and employment are foregone. At a higher price a factory which uses oil for space heating will cut down the temperature before it cuts down the use of oil in the production process. A higher price will cause a consumer to cut down the use of his car for pleasure driving rather than for getting to work. It is commonly said that the use of energy will be reduced relatively little by a price increase. That may or may not be correct. But even if the cut in energy use is " relatively little " compared to a price increase the price increases that have occurred or are in prospect are sufficiently large to have a substantial effect on the total use of energy and its distribution The oil price increases that have taken place under the controls program have been justified as a necessary means of increasing supply and maintaining orderly markets. Imported oil " new " oil and oil from small wells are exempt from control. Other oil is controlled and sells at prices considerably below those of uncontrolled oil but the control price has been raised on two occasions to keep the price spread from becoming too large. Although necessitated by supply considerations these price increases have played a useful role in the allocation of supply. To make sure that the price increases do not yield excessive profits that are not justified by their contribution to increasing supply the Administration has proposed an Emergency Windfall Profits Tax. This tax would take a large proportion up to percent of the additional revenue earned by producers of crude oil as a result of higher prices Other methods are being used to distribute supplies of oil in ways that will meet production requirements. The Federal Energy Office ( FEO ) has encouraged refineries to limit the production of gasoline in order to increase the production of other products more essential to industrial output. This enforces a cut in automobile driving although it does not solve the question of who gets the available gasoline. The FEO has taken steps to prepare for coupon rationing of gasoline although it is believed that a combination of increased supplies higher prices and conservation measures largely voluntary will make such rationing unnecessary The Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act of requires the establishment of a system of mandatory allocation of oil products and the FEO has now set up such a system. It specifies limits to the amounts of petroleum products that refineries or distributors can deliver to described classes of customers ( but stops short of individual consumers ) The limits are generally described in percentages of current requirements or base-period use The limits differ by class of user in accord with FEO 's estimate of the essentiality of the use to the productive process and to society. Such a system necessarily involves elaborate paperwork and a large degree of arbitrariness Confidence that the economy will not be seriously hampered rests upon the expectation that increased supply and higher prices will narrowly limit the shortages to be distributed by the allocation system A third method which seems to have been highly effective has been voluntary conservation. This has been especially useful in stretching out the supplies of gasoline and home heating oil but it has also helped to bring about a reduction in the nonproductive use of energy in industry The measures taken in recent months to deal with the energy shortage are too numerous to recount here. What further steps may be needed can not now be foreseen. It must be emphasized however that satisfactory progress through will depend upon a flexible use of prices allocations and voluntary measures to channel energy efficiently into industry Wage and price controls. When Phase IV controls were instituted in August the President announced that it would be our policy to work our way and feel our way out of controls. There would be no pre-set terminal date and we should avoid a disorderly transition but the determination would be to end the system of comprehensive controls. This policy has been followed in the last months. A number of industries have been decontrolled since Phase IV began and the pace of decontrol has been accelerating Experience under Phase IV has shown the wisdom of pressing on with the removal of controls. The controls have not recently been very effective in restraining inflation and the general uncertainty cast over the economic process by the actual or potential operations of a detailed control system endangers the healthy economic expansion we seek. The last point is very important. Too many business decisions for too long a period ahead are being influenced by puzzlement over the kinds of controls businesses will be subjected to. We badly need business investment and economic growth in the years ahead and continuation of general controls tends to interfere with that aim Just how fast the process of decontrol should properly go and what residue of controls will endure if any can not now be precisely told. But achievement of the desired reduction of inflation during the year does not in our opinion depend upon any significant influence from the controls International cooperation. The ability of the United States to get through the economic uncertainties of successfully would be enhanced by reasonable stability in the rest of the world especially in the industrialized countries that are the chief suppliers and customers of the United States. There are two main things the United States can do to further that stability First the United States can take the lead in an international effort to bring about a reliable international flow of oil at reasonable prices. Powerful moves by the United States and other industrialized countries to develop energy sources as potential alternatives to the oil now controlled by a few nations will be helpful in normalizing the flow of oil. The President has called the first of a series of international meetings on this subject to take place February Second the United States can participate in a common effort to assure that the effects of high oil prices on the balance of payments do not lead the industrialized countries into a round of competitive deflation depreciation or trade restriction. This effort should include consideration of possible ways to supplement the now existing means of providing temporary support to countries finding themselves in a critical financial condition as a result of greatly enlarged oil import costs GOALS BEYOND Concern with the stabilization problems of should not divert attention from those other problems whose consequences will come chiefly after but which need to be dealt with now and continuously. Most of these problems arise from the need to increase our ability to produce in total as well as in particular directions. This emphasis on ability to produce is essentially an emphasis on efficiency on managing our resources so that we get as much out of them as we can. It is neutral about what should be produced and even about how much should be produced only stressing the ability to produce more of what is wanted if it is wanted We think emphasis on ability to produce is important at this time because in the years ahead the desire of the American people for more output is likely to be especially strong and unusual obstacles may hinder fulfillment of this demand. The need to devote more resources to obtaining energy will be a drag on output. The country is almost certainly ending the period of large transfers of the labor force out of agriculture into other pursuits. By we will probably come to the end of a period in which the labor force grew much more rapidly than the population and thus helped to raise output per capita. Environmental considerations may tend to slow down the growth of output at least as output is usually measured For these reasons emphasis on the capacity to produce on efficiency and productivity is especially important now. Of course even in the field vaguely labeled " economic " the Nation always deals with a multiplicity of goals. For example the distribution of the national income among persons will always be a subject of concern. We hope that the information presented in Chapter will be illuminating in this connection. The Nation has other goals about the uses of the national output. One sees evidence for example of a great interest in devoting more of the national output to improvement of health and in achieving that aim more efficiently. The President will be submitting suggestions to this end. It seems most useful for us to concentrate here on the problem of production Many aspects of Government policy affecting capacity to produce are discussed in more detail in later chapters of this report. We present here only a brief survey of the field DEVELOPMENT OF LOW-COST ENERGY FOR THE FUTURE Throughout the 's the United States employed quantitative restrictions on petroleum imports to limit dependence on foreign sources of supply However the availability of imported petroleum at a price below the domestic price led to a weakening of the import restrictions and in to abandonment of the quota system altogether. As a result imports have provided a rapidly expanding share of the domestic market The energy crisis that occurred in late as a result of the embargo by some of the oil-exporting countries alerted the Nation to the risk of depending on imports for a commodity that is vital to our economic well-being and the supply of which is largely controlled by a few countries. Reductions in oil shipments to the United States and a sharp rise in the price of imported oil have caused substantial economic disruption. Had these events occurred later when the United States was projected to be even more dependent on imported petroleum the loss of jobs and the effect on incomes might have been far greater Oil imports may become more readily available and the price may decline However the possibility of a subsequent sharp price rise or supply curtailment makes it risky for the United States to remain heavily dependent on imports to supply domestic needs The Nation has the capability to become self-sufficient in energy production. This capability will however require substantial capital investment and large expenditure on research and development. The private sector will be willing to make the needed investment only if there is a reasonable assurance that returns will be adequate to justify the commitment of resources to long-term investments In response to this situation the President has announced Project Independence a program to develop the capability for self-sufficiency in energy production by The choice of policies to implement Project Independence should be made largely on economic grounds. Because energy can be expected to cost more in the 's than it did in important changes in production methods in the composition of output and in consumption will occur. These changes will develop most rapidly and with the least cost to society if relative prices are allowed to allocate resources and to influence production decisions. There are many uncertainties regarding which of the new energy technologies will prove to be economic. By relying on the market mechanism to guide production decisions we can avoid becoming locked into production methods and energy sources that prove to be uneconomic A major component of Project Independence is a program of Governmentfunded research and development to accelerate the development of technologies that will ensure an adequate supply of low-cost energy for the future Although the private sector will continue to undertake most of the energy research and development there is a need for a more active Government role. In part this is because the returns from expenditure on research and development will be heavily influenced by Federal policies regarding en- vironmental control leasing of mineral rights and import restrictions. In addition the development of new energy technologies to some extent involves expanding our knowledge of fundamental processes. In such cases although the research and development provides a large gain to the economy as a whole there may be little opportunity for any one firm to derive a large enough part of this gain to warrant undertaking the research. Moreover private research and development is usually oriented toward projects with a relatively quick payoff whereas much of the needed expenditure must be devoted to the development of energy sources that may not be competitive for some time SAVING AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT To keep output per worker rising rapidly when the labor force is also rising rapidly requires a high rate of investment in productive facilities Our total investment requirements in the years ahead will be greatly increased by the need to invest in energy development and environmental improvements These energy and environmental investments do not raise productivity as conventionally measured though the former may prevent a decline in productivity if energy shortages would otherwise continue and the latter may also prevent an ultimate decline in productivity. Both types of investment thus represent part of the increased resource costs imposed on energy-using or environment-using industries in one case by adverse supply developments and in the other by social choice. Environmental benefits enhance economic well-being and increased reliance on domestic sources of energy adds to security of production. Still one can probably say the American people expect rapidly rising output of the ordinary marketable kind ; and this expectation will require rapidly rising total investment to accommodate rising energy and environmental investment along with increasing investments of other kinds Part of total investment is provided through the Federal budget in the form of direct expenditures for capital purposes loans to private businesses and individuals or grants and loans to States and localities. The budget for fiscal includes $ billion for such outlays excluding defense and excluding expenditures for education training health and research and development. The largest single item is expenditures for transportation primarily highways followed by expenditures for public works These direct investments in the Federal budget make a useful contribution to economic growth if they are wisely selected and well managed. Such direct investments have numerous advocates in the Federal budget-making process. But attention needs to be called to another way in which the Federal budget could contribute to investment and growth although it has few advocates : running a budget surplus or at least avoiding a budget deficit except under appropriate conditions If the Federal Government runs a deficit and borrows under conditions of strong private investment demand its borrowing absorbs funds which would otherwise have been invested in private projects. Unless all of that deficit is used to finance direct Government investment which is unlikely the deficit depresses total investment. On the other hand if the Government runs a surplus in these circumstances it will repay some of its debt and make more funds available for private investment unless the surplus is generated by taxes all of which come out of private saving an unlikely condition When there is a great deal of slack in the economy a budget deficit will help to support the level of economic activity needed to supply both the incentive to invest and the savings for investment. However when productive resources are fully utilized the smaller the Federal deficit is or the larger the Federal surplus the higher private investment is likely to be. This fact partly explains the principle adopted by the Administration that expenditures should not exceed and at times may properly be less than the receipts that would be collected at full employment Government policy affects incentives for private investment in total and in particular sectors in a number of ways including policies relating to taxes international trade and international financial policy as well as credit guarantees subsidies and so on. All of these involve well-known conflicts of objectives and difficulties of measuring costs and benefits. We may now be running into a problem which is new at least in magnitude and potentially very serious : the uncertainty created for private investment and all private long-term commitments by Government economic controls that are unprecedented in scope and unpredictable in operation. Taken together the price and wage controls the controls connected with the energy shortage and the environmental regulations add up to a massive entry of Government into the affairs of almost every business in the country. The management of these controls involves a great many close or arbitrary decisions to be made in many instances by a very few people. They could go either way and the private businessman who must invest in the light of these controls can not tell which way they will go These uncertainties could become a major obstacle to new private investment even though we do not now see good evidence of its having already happened. Concern on this score is not a conclusive argument against any particular control although it is a strong argument for avoiding controls And it does argue for as much stability as can be achieved in the management of the controls that are inescapable THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM In his Economic Report the President said : Because our expanding and dynamic economy must have strong and innovative financial institutions if our national savings are to be utilized effectively I shall appoint a commission to study our financial structure and make recommendations to me for needed changes After studying the findings of this commission ( the Hunt Commission ) the President on August sent to Congress a series of recommendations. In them a more efficient financial system is envisioned in which finan- cial institutions can operate with greater freedom and less imposed specialization. By fostering more competition among financial institutions the proposed measures would improve the efficiency of our financial system in channeling funds from savers to borrowers. Savings would earn the highest rate of return the competitive market structure could allow and the savings would be put to the most productive use. Under such a system interest rates would play a greater role in determining the volume and the distribution of funds. Social projects deserving priorities such as low- and moderateincome housing would be taken care of with subsidies instead of regulations Among the recommendations interest rate ceilings on deposits would be phased out over a period of 5/2 years. Federally chartered thrift institutions would be authorized to offer third party payment plans including negotiable orders of withdrawal ( NOW 's ) and credit cards to individuals and corporations ; but they would also be given expanded lending powers in making consumer and real estate loans and in acquiring high-grade private debt securities. National banks would likewise be able to offer NOW accounts and make real estate loans with fewer restrictions. Interest ceilings on Government-backed mortgages would be removed and a mortgage interest tax credit of up to ^ percent to financial institutions and up to l/i percent to individuals supplying mortgage funds would be made available The President 's recommendations if enacted by Congress would strengthen the financial markets in general and mortgage markets in particular. The expanded lending and borrowing powers would increase the flow of funds into financial institutions. Further the mortgage tax credit would reduce the dependence of the mortgage market on thrift institutions by encouraging other types of financial institutions as well as individuals to invest in mortgages. The resulting mortgage market would be less vulnerable to a credit squeeze than it has been and the burden of monetary restraint would be more evenly distributed throughout the economy On another financial matter the time may be at hand when a move in the direction of greater uniformity of reserve requirements among depository institutions is warranted. Varying reserve arrangements among State and federally supervised banks have resulted in removing an increasing proportion of the money supply from the direct influence of Federal Reserve requirements and have made short-term shifts of deposits among member and nonmember institutions a source of uncertainty in the implementation of monetary policy. Care must be taken that any change in the reserve structure of the Nation 's banks should not work to the disadvantage of smaller institutions or change the balance among supervisory authorities ; but within these constraints it now appears desirable that deposits which form the money supply should be subject to direct influence by the Federal Reserve regardless of the source of supervision of the institutions that hold them. The Federal Reserve has recently submitted its own proposals in this field TRANSPORTATION REFORM Last year the Congress passed and on January the President signed the Regional Rail Reorganization Act which is a pragmatic attempt to deal with the pervasive insolvency of railroads in the heavily industrialized Midwest and Northeast. Several of the eight principal bankrupt railroads had threatened liquidation and such a bill was needed because the risk of even a very short period of suspended service was too great to be tolerated If the services of the Northeast 's railroads are so vital to the rest of the economy one must ask why so many of them were in such a weakened financial condition. Factors more general and basic than those that normally cause bankruptcy are responsible Poor management and unrealistically rigid labor contracts are popular explanations of the railroads ' inability to adapt to changing technology and a changing economy. These proximate causes largely reflect however a more fundamental cause inefficient and intransigent governmental regulation Governmental regulation of the railroads can be traced to two sources The public wanted the Government to protect them from the industry in a time of near monopoly and the members of the industry wanted the Government to protect them from each other. This " protection " has been expensive for both the railroads and the public. The elaboration of regulations intended to provide this protection has created a complex set of specifications for the behavior of firms that has tended to ossify with time. As a result railroad companies have increasingly given up control of fundamental management decisions to the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) in return for the policing of industry competition by the agency. Moreover railroad management 's attention began to focus more on the rules that delimited its discretion than upon the underlying economic realities in the markets in which they operated. As these realities changed railroad management found itself increasingly inept at adjusting the result being an increasing incidence of bankruptcy The Transportation Improvement Act The Transportation Improvement Act of proposed by the Administration is an important first step toward solving some of the more general problems of the railroad industry. It is also an imperative step toward a longterm solution of the problem of the bankrupt railroad ; because the viability of the rail system that will emerge from the wreck of the Penn Central will depend in an important way upon successful regulatory reform. Among the more important reforms facilitated by the bill would be liberalization and rationalization of procedures for the " abandonment " of unprofitable lines In the railroads were required by the ICC to maintain service on miles about percent of the total of lightly traveled track for which revenues were less than operating costs To cover these losses railroads must charge higher rates on profitable routes. This subsidization distorts resource use and interferes with the effi- ciency of the entire transportation system and hence the entire economy as well as increasing the financial problems of the rail industry. Requiring railroads to continue to operate short and uneconomic branch lines diverts traffic that could be carried more efficiently by truck ; and conversely the higher rates on longer hauls result in a diversion to trucks of freight that could be moved more efficiently by rail. Since trucks use considerably more fuel ( and emit more pollutants ) than trains per ton-mile of freight carried the magnitude of this inefficiency grows directly with the increasing relative scarcity of energy supplies The proposed act will also facilitate the substitution of truck transportation for rail services on abandoned lines by more or less automatically authorizing truck service between any point on the abandoned line and connecting rail service points Need for Further Reform Although enactment of this bill will add to the efficiency of the rail industry several basic problems remain on the agenda for transportation reform in the coming year. The longer-term viability of the Nation 's railroads will require substantial investments in improved technology and in improvement and diversification of types of freight service as well as investments to rehabilitate deteriorating physical facilities It is vital however that a comprehensive evaluation of the regulatory and institutional structure of both the railroads and the entire surface transportation industry be completed before such investments are made. Many aspects of modern railroad operation are not determined by either technological or profitability considerations. They are adaptations to obsolete regulatory policies and labor practices. Investment in conventional railroad technology as it exists today may inhibit productivity and actually reinforce the resistance to the institutional reforms that will be required for the development of a more rational and efficient surface transportation system in the future Changes in corporate structure may also be desirable. Costs of transferring freight from one railroad to another significantly reduce the savings that rails enjoy relative to trucks on long-haul shipments. This would imply that end-to-end mergers of railroads might be important mechanisms for reducing the real cost of rail transportation. Yet formidable administrative barriers must be surmounted by companies attempting end-to-end mergers under current regulatory practices The Administration 's concern with the efficiency of the surface transportation system is not limited to stopping the spreading insolvency that infects the railroad industry. It will be difficult to exploit fully the opportunities for increasing productivity in the railroad industry unless major changes take place concurrently in the trucking industry The regulation of trucks in interstate common carriage that began in the midst of the Great Depression has also evolved into a web of regulatory constraints. Restrictions on entry into market areas limitations on the type of goods carried and mandated " gateways " creating required routes which may be so circular as to be bizarre have resulted in an industry burdened with regulatory inefficiency. Partially loaded trucks often required to return empty even when alternative cargoes are available are common. Such inefficiency is a result of regulatory policy. There are no technological reasons why the motor freight industry could not operate as an essentially competitive sector of the economy A comprehensive analysis of the trucking industry is now under way and will provide a basis for the design of a comprehensive set of regulatory reform proposals to be completed by the fall of EFFICIENT INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE Economic growth is significantly enhanced by an openness to foreign economies which permits a relatively free international exchange of goods and capital based on economic incentive. International trade makes goods available that might otherwise be lacking or only available at much higher costs. It can also make available to domestic producers ideas about new products new product designs or new methods of production. For producers it can be an added incentive to adopt more efficient methods of production We have been reminded in recent months that in some circumstances there can be a danger both political and economic in excessive dependence on foreign supplies. The United States must guard itself against this danger by unilateral or multilateral action. However if this objective is realistically defined it will be found not to limit greatly the scope for beneficial expansion of international trade Despite a fairly extensive removal of trade barriers in the past years substantial barriers to international trade and investment remain in effect The inefficient location of productive facilities because of these barriers constitutes a loss of economic welfare to the country as a whole. Efforts to negotiate a reduction of the remaining trade barriers are therefore important toward improving the efficiency of the U.S. economy. The trade legislation now before Congress would give the President authority to negotiate a substantial reduction of such barriers Negotiations in the trade area also have to deal with the economic interdependence that results from trade. Abrupt economic shifts emanating from abroad can from time to time create a temporary economic dislocation at home which needs to be moderated or offset by government measures. Since such measures will have further repercussions abroad governments need to agree on some basic rules and procedures that they can follow when their interests conflict. Multilateral negotiations are designed to improve some of the current rules and procedures as well as to reduce existing trade barriers An international monetary system is a prerequisite for the efficient exchange of goods and capital. Without such a system international exchange is confined to barter. To function efficiently the international monetary sys- tem has to provide sufficient quantities of commonly accepted means of payment and a procedure for adjusting the relationship between one currency and another. It also has to provide a set of rules on such questions as the conversion of one currency into another restrictions on the conversion of currencies transfers of liquid funds from one country to another as well as a set of procedures for resolving differences in national approaches to such problems. The current negotiations to reform the international monetary system are designed to improve the existing rules and procedures SUPPLEMENT Prospects for Earlier in this chapter we noted that would be a year of little output growth and considerable inflation but that in both respects the second half of the year should be better than the first. The energy crisis has clouded near-term prospects much more than usual. There is great uncertainty not only about the overall GNP change and its distribution between price and real volume but also about the components of demand. It seems fairly likely that this year 's percent increase in nominal GNP should reflect slower rates of increase compared to last year in consumption gross private domestic investment and net exports and a faster rate in combined government purchases. The specific changes are much less certain but the Council presents the following projections of individual demand components underlying this year 's overall total Business Fixed Investment The Council expects nonresidential fixed investment to show a rise of about percent from to It is likely to be the major source of strength in demand this year. Despite the small rise in production in the final quarter of the condition of shortages that prevailed in many industries earlier in continued through the end of the year. Capacity utilization was still very high especially in the basic materials industries Delivery times were still long. Aside from the automobile industry inventories were rather low relative to output and sales. All of these were indicative of tight supply conditions that constituted a strong stimulus for business to invest in new plant and equipment in the coming year This is not to say that the character of investment demand will be the same as in or The slowdown of the rise in aggregate demand during and the leveling in profits are likely to bring a smaller rise in new investment initiatives than in the preceding years. Even so the large volume of new investment under way assures a sizable increase in real expenditures in Unfilled order backlogs in capital goods industries at the end of December were some percent greater than they had been a year earlier In early the Commerce Department released a survey which showed that businessmen were planning a rise of percent in capital expenditures in the coming year. The rise was particularly large for manufacturing percent and planned increases within manufacturing were above average ( percent ) for materials-producing industries. The Commerce Department survey is broadly consistent with a McGraw-Hill survey which was run about months earlier projecting an overall rise of percent from to Neither of these surveys sheds any light on the effect of the energy crisis on investment plans ; and because of variations in sample coverage and for other reasons the difference in results between the two surveys is not considered significant. The Council believes that on balance the energy crisis may result in some reduction in business purchases of cars and trucks but aside from this the negative and positive effects of the energy crisis on investment will be roughly offsetting. Some industries directly affected by the crisis have already cut back investment ( airlines for example ) while some firms in other industries may be holding back on commitments until they understand the implications that the current crisis holds for future fuel supplies- On the other hand the crisis is stimulating capital outlays to support the search for new energy sources in this country and conversions to other types of fuel will entail new capital expenditures Inventory Investment Inventory investment is likely to be a little higher this year than in perhaps by $ billion. In the final quarter of there was a very large increase in inventory accumulation a good part of which represented a rise of retail stocks of new cars. Even so total nonfarm stocks relative to total output measured in real terms at the end of were low gauged by postWorld War II experience. The first half of this year should see a working off of unwanted automobile stocks at the same time that other industries continue to accumulate inventories in an effort to restore more normal relationships between stocks and output Residential Construction Housing starts in the final quarter of appeared to be reflecting the effects of the stringency in mortgage markets last summer and possibly temporary effects arising out of the energy crisis. Very late in the year there were reports that builders were uncertain about the impact of reduced fuel supplies on new construction while potential buyers of homes in outlying areas were hesitant because of uncertainty about the availability of gasoline for extended commuting. But this and the extent to which homeowners were making new expenditures for better insulation of their homes can not be considered hard information. While there is no assurance about improved energy supplies the coming months should at least dispel the present uncertainty and permit those builders and those consumers who can buy and rent new homes to make decisions A more fundamental factor concerns financial conditions. Net inflows into savings and loan associations have risen since late summer and thrift institutions now have more funds available for mortgage lending. On the basis of past experience this improvement in the availability of mortgage funds should be reflected in a turnaround in starts this spring. Recent actions taken by the Federal Government should also help spur the recovery. The reduction in FHA and VA mortgage rates in January should help make these programs more attractive to home purchasers and increased purchases of mortgages by GNMA should increase the supply of mortgage funds for these programs The underlying demand for housing as measured by the need to provide shelter for new households and for the replacement of houses removed from the housing stock remains strong. However the inventory of unsold homes at the start of the year is likely to act temporarily as a brake on new starts and dampen the increase after this spring. For all of the Council foresees starts of approximately \ '2/z million private units which would represent a decline of almost percent from the total. Outlays are expected to decline by percent Government Purchases Federal purchases of goods and services after rising very little from to are expected to increase about percent in the coming year with increases in both defense and nondefense outlays. State and local purchases further supported by the revenue sharing program are expected to rise by percent which is close to the increase of the preceding year Net Exports Prior to the energy crisis it was expected that net exports would show a further improvement from to The effect of the devaluation of the dollar and the continued strength of foreign demand were expected to stimulate exports. The slower growth of output in the United States was expected to slow the growth in imports. Thus a further moderate improvement over the high rate of net exports that prevailed in the second half of appeared to be a reasonable prospect The oil crisis has drastically modified this outlook. For the time being at least foreign countries are expecting much slower real growth than they anticipated previously. While exports will be greater than in they will not rise as much as they would have without the crisis. The main factor affecting imports is the huge increase in prices of imported oil. Cutbacks in the physical volume of crude oil and refined products will be much more than offset by the rise in price. The full effect of the price rise should be felt by the second quarter. In nominal terms the net exports are expected to fall close to zero for as a whole O Consumer Spending Consumer expenditures are likely to increase about as much as GNP in Spending should be rather sluggish in the first half but should show a marked improvement in the second Consumers had already shown a pronounced reaction to the energy crisis in late when they reduced their purchases of domestically produced cars from an annual rate of million units in the third quarter to about million units in the fourth. The decrease was much more than had been anticipated by forecasters prior to the energy crisis and the fact that large car purchases were weak while long delivery times were required for small car purchases pointed up the special influence of the crisis on auto demand. It is not clear whether the cutback by consumers had run its course by early January when dealer sales of domestic cars were running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about 5/3 million units. As small car supplies improve through the year consumers should come into the market in increasing numbers although the pickup in car purchases is not likely to be appreciable until this summer. Another reason for the improvement in consumer spending from the first to the second half of is that the major downward adjustment of demand resulting from reduced gasoline supplies and higher prices is likely to be completed in the first half of this year Prior to the energy crisis some slowdown in the growth of consumer spending had been expected in the first half of because of the earlier shift in fiscal and monetary policy and the independent effect of the housing decline. Offsetting these influences is the stimulation from sharp increases in Federal transfer payments. These include the percent social security increase scheduled for this April and the further percent increase in July ; the rise in payments due to the federalization of adult welfare programs ; increased payments for food stamps and increased retirement benefits for Federal workers and veterans. All told Federal transfer payments to persons as measured in the national accounts are scheduled to rise by $ billion ( annual rate ) from the second half of to the first half of As an offset the increase in the taxable wage base this January from $ to $ will reduce personal income by $ billion as calculated in the national income accounts. In fact this rise will be felt by those consumers whose wages exceed $ only in the second half of the calendar year as employers make deductions from employees ' earnings for a longer period than under the old taxable base. Although the net fiscal stimulus will have run its course by midyear the pickup elsewhere in the economy in the second half should serve to increase consumer incomes and spending CHAPTER Developments and Policy in FEW FACTS STAND OUT about the American economy in and the story of the year is mainly the story of the relation among them : A From calendar to calendar real output rose about percent ; but from the end of to the end of it rose only percent From calendar to calendar prices of this output rose about percent ; but from the end of to the end of prices rose percent On both bases of comparison expenditures for the purchase of output rose by about percent The explanation of the large increase in expenditures for the purchase of output in involves the following factors although the relative weight to be given to each and which ones were active and which permissive are unclear and in dispute : Total output approached a ceiling early in the year so that the price rise accelerated and demand for output was stimulated in anticipation of future shortages and price increases During the money supply grew percent as narrowly defined and percent as broadly defined. In the corresponding figures were percent and percent The shift to more restrictive fiscal policy turned out to be insufficient to prevent an excessive rise in demand in view of the other forces at work Foreign demand for American output increased substantially These factors interacted and multiplied in various ways. The rise of prices boosted inflationary expectations which either directly or through an effect on interest rates made people willing to spend more relative to their money holdings. Rising expenditures generated more incomes and in turn more spending. Limited production of food great foreign demand for it and later in the year the embargo on oil had particularly sharp effects on the prices of food and energy. Different models of economic behavior would arrange these factors differently but probably all models would invoke these factors in one way or another Chart Changes in GNP Real GNP GNP Price Deflator and the Unemployment Rate PERCENT CHANGE FROM PRECEDING QUARTERJ/ UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 1/ _ ! / SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 2/ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The whole process depended at least for its magnitude on the fact that in at an earlier stage than had been anticipated supply limitations made it impossible to obtain further rapid increases of production If we could have increased output more readily in response to the strong demand prices would have risen less and the additional spur to demand resulting from the rising prices could have been avoided. The rise of output during especially after the first quarter was limited by a slow growth of productivity while the labor force was growing quite fast. The slow growth of productivity in turn resulted from shortages of certain basic materials used for further production retardation in the flow of labor out of agriculture an increase in the proportion of less experienced workers in the labor force and supply difficulties in agriculture. At the end of the year energy shortages may have been hurting productivity although given the limited information now available this is not entirely clear and does not in any case bulk large in the statistics for as a whole The foregoing remarks and much of the remainder of this chapter are meant to explain what was unexpected and disappointing about the economy in notably the inflation. This question holds the most interest and perhaps the most lessons for the future. Worth emphasizing however is that in terms of the objectives of the Employment Act " maximum employment production and purchasing power " was a successful year Total employment was at a record high as was the proportion of the working-age population employed. Production was also higher than ever before and close to its potential. The purchasing power of the American people measured by consumers ' real income after taxes per capita also reached a record level and was well above the average DEMAND AND OUTPUT IN The year started out on a very expansive note. Closing figures for showed that from the third to the fourth quarter real GNP had increased at an annual rate of percent and nominal GNP at a rate of percent. These were followed by still larger increases in the first quarter ( Chart ) The real increases were unsustainable in terms of the economy 's potential to produce and the nominal increases were undesirable from the point of view of stabilization policy The slowdown that policy had aimed for finally came in the spring. In the second and third quarters of the deceleration of the rise was moderate for aggregate demand but substantial for total output. Against a background of strong and rising demand by business and foreigners the slower rise in total expenditures took the form of some softening in automobile demand from extremely high levels reached early in the year and a weakening in housing. All of this had its impact on production but the production rise was also held down by shortages of many basic materials and limitations on capacity in a number of industries During the fourth quarter the downturn in housing became more pronounced and the adverse effects from the energy crisis began to be evident A marked slump in automobile sales led to a build-up of inventories in dealers ' hands and to cutbacks in production. It was clear from the pattern of sales that the fear of a gasoline shortage was the dominant influence on fourth quarter sales since throughout the period demand for small cars increased while demand for large cars declined TABLE Changes in gross national product in current and constant dollars to IPercentJ to Component to to to to CURRENT DOLLARS Percent change : Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Gross private domestic investment Business fixed investment Residential structures Government purchases Federal purchases State and local purchases. Total GNP Addendum : Final sales Domestic final sales. Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services. CONSTANT ( ) DOLLARS Percent change : Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Gross private domestic investment Business fixed investment Residential structures Total GNP_ Government purchases Federal purchases State and local purchases. Addendum : Final sales Domestic final sales Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services. i Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis The percent increase in nominal GNP fron calendar to calendar was the largest annual rise in years. It featured a dramatic shift from deficit to surplus in net exports as well as unusually strong demand by consumers especially for durable goods ; by business for new plant and equipment ; and by State and local governments. There is also reason to believe that inventory demand was strong last year but that supply conditions did not permit this demand to be satisfied. Federal purchases and housing rose less than average and decreased in real terms ( Table ) Somewhat over half of the rise in demand from to was matched by increased physical volume the percent increase coming quite close to the rise and exceeding the long-term average of about percent ( Table ) The inflation component of the rise in money GNP accelerated significantly from the percent rate of and the percent average of the past years NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED INVESTMENT Last year 's rise in nonresidential investment extended the upturn that began in after a year of declining real outlays. The investment expansion gathered strength in late when rising production increased capacity requirements and accelerated the rise in internal funds. The liberalized depreciation regulations and investment tax credit of late helped to bolster the rise in cash flow. The exceptionally large increases in output during late and early coinciding with similar production increases abroad put severe pressure on domestic capacity in several industries especially those producing basic materials. In view of these pressures it is not surprising that manufacturing firms with a percent rise dominated last year 's increase in plant and equipment outlays TABLE Changes in manufacturing plant and equipment outlays and value of starts to Percent change Industry Total outlays Materials-producing industries3 Primary metals.._ Paper Chemical Petroleum refining.. Rubber Textile. Stone clay and glass Allother Total starts .._ Preliminary. Expenditures include anticipated outlays for fourth quarter For starts fourth quarter was assumed by the Council of Economic Advisers to be equal to average of second and third quarters of As published by the Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. The two groups " materials-producing " and " all other " will not add up to the Commerce total because nonmanufacturing petroleum outlays ordinarily included in petroleum in this particular survey have been excluded by the Council of Economic Advisers from each group Includes lumber not shown separately * Less than percent Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( except as noted ) A number of points may be noted about recent changes in manufacturing plant and equipment outlays. First 's large increase reflects in part the sharp rise in new starts in ( Table ) Second the acceleration of the rise in outlays as compared to the year before was most pronounced in materials-producing industries. Third the rise in manufacturing outlays in real terms since has been far below the previous postwar average. For materials-producing industries real outlays rose percent per annum from through compared to a rise of percent per annum from through ( Table ) TABLE Changes in manufacturing real plant and equipment outlays to Percent change ( annual rate ) Period Materials producing industries * to to to to to All others manufacturing industries to Consists of primary metals paper chemicals petroleum refining rubber textiles stone clay and glass and lumber Preliminary Note. Based on expenditures in plant and equipment survey deflated by the implicit price deflator for nonresidential fixed investment Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers INVENTORIES Inventory investment was quite low in the first quarters of contrary to the expectations of the Council and of most forecasters. Additions to inventories were only slightly higher in than in and gauged by the postwar ratio of stocks to output inventories appeared low during the year. Two main explanations have been put forth to account for this behavior. The first is that businessmen were cautious in their inventory policy last year partly because of their experience during the recession and partly because they expected that the rapid upsurge in demand and output in late and early could not be sustained. A second possibility to which the Council attaches greater weight is that the rise in demand was so strong and the limits to raising production so numerous that businessmen were unable to build up stocks to any significant extent until the end of the year The slowdown of the rise in final sales in the last quarter of the year ( a decrease in real terms ) was accompanied by a sharp rise in inventory accumulation. Much of this reflected the backing up of automobile inventories in the hands of dealers since producers did not make an immediate adjustment to the pronounced decline in sales. Apart from automobiles the increase in inventory accumulation in real terms was not especially large HOUSING In early there were indications that the 3-year expansion in housing starts was coming to an end. Sales of single-family homes had grown little after the summer of ; and vacancy rates of rental housing while not high had been edging up. During the first half of the inflow of savings into thrift institutions showed a pronounced decline compared to and lenders consequently reduced the volume of their mortgage commitments. The situation became acute in July and August when institutions experienced a net outflow of funds although that was reversed late in the year. A further discussion of mortgage markets appears below From the first to the third quarter starts fell from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of million units to million. In the final quarter however the summer stringency in mortgage markets was reflected in a precipitous decline in starts which dropped to an annual rate of million units. Starts for as a whole not counting mobile homes were some percent below the total Despite the record volume of completions the rise in housing vacancies from to remained moderate : percentage point for rental units and percentage point for homeowner units. Although both of these are up from the troughs reached in and they are low by the standards of the 's mainly because household formation and losses from the housing inventory ( due to demolitions and other factors ) have remained very high CONSUMER SPENDING Consumer demand rose sharply from to under the influence of higher incomes. Rising wage and salary payments in the private sector and striking gains in incomes of farm proprietors played major roles in the * percent rise in personal income the largest since Transfer payments were also up substantially for the year as a whole mainly because of the percent increase in social security benefits that became effective in the final quarter of although that influence was diminished by the rise in social security taxes starting in January Under ordinary circumstances disposable income ( after tax ) should have risen less than personal income but taxes rose less than usual because of the refund early in of some $ billion in personal income taxes overwithheld in ; this figure also reflects smaller than usual final settlements on tax liabilities. The refund contributed about percentage point to the % percent increase in disposable income The percent rise in consumer spending was accompanied by little change in the saving rate for the year as a whole. In and when the economy was sluggish and the recovery weak the rate had been very high the percent annual average for each year being the highest since just after the end of World War II. The vigorous recovery seems to have been a decisive factor in the decline in the saving rate to percent in However decisions by consumers to spend a still larger fraction of their disposable income do not appear to have played a major part in last year 's upsurge in consumer expenditures ( Table ) TABLE Disposition of disposable personal income [ Percent of disposable personal income ] Current dollars Disposition of income average Personal consumption expenditures : Food Durable goods Automobiles. All other expenditures Total expenditures Plus : Transfers and interest Equals : Total outlays Plus : Saving Equals : Disposable income Constant ( ) dollars Personal consumption expenditures : Food2 Durable goods Automobiles. All other expenditures Total expenditures * Preliminary Excludes alcoholic bever ? ges Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis The influence on consumer spending of the overwithholding of Federal income taxes in and their subsequent refunding in remains uncertain. When taxes were overwithheld in it was feared that the overwithholding might have an adverse effect on consumption. Perhaps it did but if so this effect was swamped by decisions of consumers to reduce their saving rate. The Council 's position last year was that the overwithholding was viewed as temporary by consumers and that in accordance with the permanent income hypothesis it affected saving rather than spending At the start of the Administration expected that consumers would begin to reduce their withholdings to some extent in order to eliminate the overwithholding that had started a year earlier. This expectation did not materialize. In effect consumers seem to have changed their pattern of paying income tax liabilities for a given year. That is they overpay in the year of liability and prefer to receive refunds the following year giving the Government substantial interest-free loans Last year 's refunds were not accompanied by a rise in the saving rate but the exact manner in which the refunds affected expenditures is not clear Refunds by the Internal Revenue Service did not become very large until the second quarter of However the upsurge in consumer spending came in the first quarter and spending increases then subsided. If the refunds were important in the spending rise of early the anticipation by consumers of refunds must have contributed to the bulge which was pronounced in durable goods Despite last year 's large price rise real personal consumption expenditures for were up some * percent over This may be compared to the percent real rise in and an average rise of percent in the postWorld War II years. Real spending in all major categories increased except for food expenditures which declined by about 2/2 percent In aggregate real consumption gains after the first quarter were comparatively small and the large increases in expenditures after early were absorbed mainly in higher prices. Several factors seem to have been at work here. Even before the fourth quarter there was some softening in auto demand from the exceptionally high levels of sales ( millon unit annual rate ) reached in the first quarter although reports were common in the spring and early summer that shortages of parts were holding back production and sales of automobiles. A leveling out in real purchases of durable goods other than autos after an exceptional rise early in the year may have been related to the decrease in housing. Real food consumption also declined after the first quarter because of the reduction in domestic output the increase in exports higher prices and the shift to lower-cost foods. Whether the extraordinary increases in food prices also had an adverse effect on other types of spending taken as a whole is not clear. The saving rate did not change much. The question is complicated by the fact that the higher food prices were paid largely to American farmers whose additional purchases of nonfood items could partly offset any reduction in such expenditures by the rest of the population. In aggregate real consumer outlays for all personal consumption except durables and food rose at an annual rate of percent from the first to the fourth quarter of NET EXPORTS A major element in the big expansion of demand during was the change in our net export position. In the fourth quarter of the United States was a net importer of goods and services at the annual rate of $ billion. In the fourth quarter of net exports were at the annual rate of $ billion. This swing of $ billion was equal to percent of the increase in spending during It exceeded the acceleration in total spending from to ; that is if net exports are excluded the rise in total spending is changed to percent in and percent in Not all of the increase of net exports may have been a net addition to total spending since the financing of the net exports may have reduced some domestic spending. On the other hand the direct effect of the increase in net exports would have a multiplied effect on total spending because the initial effect would increase incomes in the United States and raise consumption The increase in net exports resulted from three developments. First there was a boom in the rest of the industrial world far exceeding expectations ( Chart ) Second low food supplies in the rest of the world boosted the Chart Changes in Real GNP PERCENT UNITED STATES m i w I : D P OEC EUf \ c> E I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT volume and the prices of farm exports from the United States. Third the depreciation of the U.S. dollar helped to increase exports from the United States and to restrain the growth of imports THE LABOR MARKET With aggregate output up substantially for the second year in a row the demand for labor remained strong. Civilian employment increased by million persons in the course of the year while the civilian labor force grew by million. The percent rise in employment was the largest December- to-December percentage increase since Unemployment declined through the first quarters of the year and then edged up THE LABOR FORGE The civilian labor force expanded sharply during and for the entire year was million above the average level in This percent increase followed a gain of similar proportions and substantially exceeded the average rise of percent a year in the preceding decade The civilian labor force can be augmented in three ways : ( ) Through reductions in the Armed Forces ; ( ) through population increases in the working-age groups ; and ( ) through increases in the proportion of the population seeking work. By reductions in the Armed Forces had ceased to be a major factor in enlarging the civilian labor force. For the year as a whole the Armed Forces averaged about less than in a marked contrast to the reductions of which occurred in both and The percent increase in the working-age population was in line with the long-term trend. The main factor accounting for the larger than average increase in the civilian labor force in was the sharp rise in the participation rate. In the fourth quarter of the year a record percent of the civilian working-age population participated in the labor force a large increase from the percent participation rate a year earlier. In and the movement toward increased labor force participation was reinforced by the large expansion in demand The rise in participation was most pronounced for women from ages to In percent of women in this age group were either at work or looking for a job compared to percent in and only percent as recently as The long-term upward movement in the participation rate for young women has several causes. There has been a trend toward smaller families and toward starting them later. In addition mothers with preschool children have increased their work outside the home. The continued strong expansion of the service industries which typically employ a large percentage of women the relative increase in university training of young women and the broadening of all women 's employment opportunities have contributed to this trend Men in the to age group also sharply increased their participation in the civilian labor force for the second year in a row following years of essentially declining participation rates. One reason for these declines was the absorption into the Armed Forces of many young men who would otherwise have been part of the civilian labor force. In addition selective service legislation which provided exemption from the draft for those continuing their education induced many others to stay in school. Recently the growth in college enrollments has slackened and a number of young men who might otherwise have continued their schooling are instead entering the labor force either directly after high school or after a year or two of specialized training Teenagers have also displayed an increased tendency to join the labor force. A large proportion of teenagers in the labor force are in school holding or seeking part-time jobs. During the past few years a wider availability of part-time jobs has contributed to the upward trend in the labor force participation of younger workers. The tight labor market of accelerated this rise as it did in and EMPLOYMENT AND HOURS Last year 's increase in the demand for labor took the form of a large increase in employment and little change in the average length of the workweek. The failure of weekly hours to rise is not an unusual cyclical development for an advanced stage of a business expansion. In the early phases of a business cycle upswing employers prefer to lengthen hours rather than hire new employees because the latter course of action is often more costly and employers are uncertain about the duration of the expansion Part-time workers are consequently put on full-time schedules and fulltime workers are switched increasingly to overtime. There are limits to this kind of switching however because overtime involves premium pay ; at some point it becomes more profitable to add additional workers or an additional shift when that option is available Another factor that served to hold down average weekly hours in was the behavior of labor turnover. Average weekly hours are total manhours worked during the week divided by the number of persons on the payroll. Labor turnover was quite high during the year because increased job availability led many workers to switch their jobs. As some employees quit and others are hired to take their place an increased proportion of those listed on the payroll during the survey week have put in less than a full workweek UNEMPLOYMENT The overall unemployment rate averaged percent in well below the percent average of Unemployment declined for almost all demographic occupational or industry groups ( Table ) Last year we described " maximum employment " which is the goal specified in the Employment Act as " a condition in which persons who want work and seek it realistically on reasonable terms can find employment. " We believe that condition was approximately met in even though the aver- TABLE Unemployment rates for selected groups selected years [ Percent ] Group All civilian workers White-collar workers Professional and technical workers Managers and administrators except f a r m Sales workers Clerical workers Blue-collar workers.. Craft and kindred workers Operatives Nonfarm laborers RACE White Negro and other races AGE-SEX Men years and over Women years and over Both sexes years OCCUPATION Service workers Farm workers. _ INDUSTRY Nonagricultural private wage and salary workers _ Government workers Agricultural wage and salary workers Construction Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade. Finance and service industries Note. Rates by occupation for refer to persons years of age and older. Data for later years are for years of age and older Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics age unemployment rate was percent rather than the percent which conventionally defines full employment. There is no single statistic which can signal the achievement of the condition which we seek. But the combination of evidence for is strongly suggestive. During the year the rise in total employment was extraordinarily large and the proportion of the population over the age of employed was at a postwar high A condition of " maximum employment " in overall terms will imply different rates of unemployment for different groups of the population. For example under conditions of abundant employment opportunities suppose that young men leave their jobs twice a year on the average and spend on the average weeks each time searching for the job they prefer In that case young men will have on the average an unemployment rate of ^ percent that is weeks of unemployment divided by weeks in the labor force. Suppose that percent of the employed adult men quit their jobs each year and spend on the average weeks seeking a new one The unemployment rate for adult males would then be about percent. If the labor force consisted of an equal number of young men and adult men the average unemployment rate would be % percent. But if it consisted of five times as many adults as youths the average rate would be 32/3 percent This illustrates how changes in the composition of the labor force can greatly change the overall unemployment rate that is associated with a constant condition of maximum employment for each group of the labor force TABLE Unemployment rates by sex and age selected years [ Percent ) Sex and age All civilian workers : Actual Standardized for age and sex Males : years years years years and over Females : years years years years and over The standardized rate was computed by assuming that the age-sex composition of the labor force remained unchanged from to Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers One way of seeing how labor force composition affects the aggregate unemployment rate is to weight the actual unemployment rates for each agesex group by the composition of the labor force at a specific time. If each age-sex group shown in Table is weighted according to its importance in the labor force in when unemployment averaged percent one finds that the overall unemployment rate in would also have averaged percent rather than the percent actually experienced. This wide disTABLE Composition of the civilian labor force selected years [ Percent ] Adult women years years years and over. Adult men years years years and over. Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Both sexes years. Total civilian labor force Sex and age crepancy reflects the large increase in the proportion of the labor force made up of women and young workers of both sexes two groups whose unemployment rates are substantially higher than the national average. The higher than average unemployment rates for women and for teenagers are closely related to their labor force participation patterns. In addition to their jobs people in these groups have responsibilities in household management or schooling which tend to weaken their attachment to the labor force. Since a new entry or a reentry into the labor force is generally followed by a period of searching and hence unemployment these groups have higher unemployment rates almost by definition. Even among persons in their early twenties there are many who have not yet developed an attachment to a specific occupation and who thus change their jobs frequently Teenagers persons in the to age group and women or older accounted for only percent of the civilian labor force in By they accounted for percent ( Table ) The gap between the actual unemployment rate and the fixed-weight unemployment rate follows this changing proportion closely. The difference between the two rates was percentage point in point in and point in A number of other aspects of the employment situation suggest that if we were not at " maximum employment " in we were at least very close to it ( Table ) The average duration of unemployment declined and the proportion of the unemployed who were without jobs for weeks or less was high indicating a large turnover among the unemployed and relatively short durations of search for work. Only percent of the unemployed had lost their last job which was nearly the same as the proportion in when the overall unemployment rate was percent. Aside TABLE Aspects of labor utilization selected years Unemployment rate ( percent ) Period Total Adult males Job losers as percent of total unemployment Average monthly labor turnover rate in manufacturing ( per employees ) Quits Layoffs New hires ) Ratio of help-wanted ads to nonagricultural employment Average weekly overtime hours in manufacturing ) ) ) ) C ) ] ) ) C ) ) L.I Not available Preliminary 311-month average Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and The Conference Board O from job losers the remainder of the unemployed had either left their last job voluntarily newly entered the labor force or reentered it after a period of absence. The proportion of employees in manufacturing who quit was high an indication of much voluntary turnover and confidence about finding other jobs. The proportion of employees laid off was similarly low. Available measures showed job vacancies were plentiful PRODUCTIVITY AND POTENTIAL OUTPUT Although the rise of employment during was exceptionally high the rise of output was just about average. Consequently the rise of output per worker was significantly less than average. Hours of work per worker did not decline as they had been doing on the average for a long time. Total hours of work rose even faster relative to their long-term trend than employment ; and output per man-hour commonly called productivity lagged significantly below its trend rate of increase. The failure of productivity to rise more rapidly and therefore of output to rise more rapidly was partly a reflection of last year 's excess demand. It also contributed to excess demand and to the inflation of We have no good measures of productivity in the government sector This sector is arbitrarily considered to have no productivity growth when total real output and its rate of increase are calculated though changes in the importance of government relative to private sector output can affect the trend of total productivity. It is possible to say more however about productivity in the private sector of the economy In the past years ( ) output per man-hour in the private economy rose at an annual rate of percent whereas in the private nonfarm economy it rose at an annual rate of percent. The private total rose faster than the nonfarm partly because productivity rose faster in the farm sector than in the nonfarm sector and partly because of the continuing shift of workers from agriculture to the nonagricultural sector. This shift raises average productivity because productivity in agriculture is lower ev ^ n though it is rising more rapidly Recently however productivity has been rising less in the total private economy than in the private nonfarm economy. Productivity in agriculture declined between and instead of rising more than in the nonfarm sector. Moreover man-hours in agriculture as measured in the productivity series fell less than usual last year and although the rise in nonagricultural man-hours was large the shift in the farm-nonfarm proportion was not as big as usual. These two factors together depressed the rise of total private productivity below the rise in private nonfarm productivity. Productivity in the nonfarm sector rose very strongly through and the first quarter of Thereafter it essentially leveled out for the remainder of the year leaving the increase between and at percent and much less during the year Productivity growth has a cyclical pattern tending to be greatest in the period of most rapid expansion then to slow down as output nears its peak and during the early period of contraction but to revive before the recession ends Some decline in the rate of productivity growth in was anticipated as the economy passed beyond its period of most rapid expansion. The degree of the slowdown was unexpectedly great however considering that output at the beginning of the year was still more than percent below its conventionally estimated potential. A number of relevant factors were at work : Many industries had trouble achieving large output gains because it was hard to obtain raw and intermediate materials such as chemicals steel paper and copper. Capacity utilization in basic materials-producing industries was pushed to a postwar high as a consequence of surging demand after several years in which additions to capacity had been low. Capacity utilization in fabricating industries was not so high. Estimates of capacity utilization in manufacturing vary but in any case output was limited by the lack of materials ( Table ) The shortage of some materials was aggravated by large exports which resulted from the foreign boom the depreciation of the dollar and the maintenance in the United States of price ceilings below world price levels The shortages of basic materials apparently did not prevent a large rise of manufacturing output and of productivity in manufacturing We say " apparently " because the manufacturing figures are derived in a different way from that used for the nonfarm output figures and the two may not be consistent. Nevertheless the basic materials shortages may have prevented a still further rise of output and employment in manufacturing ; and it may have diverted a higher proportion of the enlarged number of workers into nonmanufacturing industries where productivity was lower and where the influx of workers depressed productivity further. As noted earlier inventory accumulation was low most of last year and a larger rise in manufacturing output might have permitted more normal ratios of stocks to sales The work force consisted to an unusual degree of new entrants to the labor force and reentrants chiefly women and young people all of whom on the average tend to work in less productive occupations than adult males with work experience An unusually high rate of turnover of workers occurred during A large number of people quit each month and a large number of people were newly hired. This meant that a high proportion of the people in each job category were new to that work if not to the labor force and required training and experience before they became normally productive. Furthermore this would give employers an incentive to maintain a somewhat larger work force than they would otherwise require as assurance against the departure of experienced workers Another factor that may have acted to restrain the rise in output per man-hour was the behavior of average weekly hours. As noted before weekly hours in the ; private nonfarm sector remained virtually level throughout the year. Increases in man-hours resulting from increased hours rather than from increased employment will usually lead to a rise in output per man-hour since a smaller proportion of total manhours is lost to start-up and shut-down routines. In percent of the increase in man-hours resulted from a longer workweek. In however only percent of the increase in man-hours in manufacturing was attributable to longer working hours TABLE Aspects of capacity utilization selected years Capacity utilization ( percent ) Period FRB manufacturing Total Primary Advanced processing processing FRB major materials Wharton manufacturing Percent of manufacturers needing more capacity ) ( l ) ) ) ) ) Ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in durable goods manufacturing Percent of companies reporting Slower delivery of materials days or longer for commitments for materials ( Not available Preliminary Average of first quarters * Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( FRB ) Department of Commerce and Wharton School of Finance Our experience in raises the question whether we were at " potential " even though output was on the average for the year ^ percent below the commonly measured figure of " potential " output. Being at potential does not mean that output can not be raised further. In although employment was still rising rapidly output increased slowly and the rate of productivity increase sagged and actually fell in the second and fourth quarters A more rapid rise in output would probably have required an even more rapid increase of labor input if it had been available and would have depressed labor productivity further The conventional measurements of potential assume that the labor force and productivity rise and that weekly hours of work decline along an esti- mated smooth trend from a period in which the unemployment rate was about percent. A recent calculation by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( Monthly Labor Review December ) using these elements leads us to the estimate that potential was growing by percent per annum after if we assume that output was at potential in the second quarter of On this basis actual output was about percent below potential in What the experience of suggests however is that potential does not grow year by year at a constant rate. It is a simplification to assume that the labor force hours of work the stock of capital the availability of supplies from abroad and other determinants of potential move smoothly and continuously Reliance on a reasonable simplification of this kind is inevitable for inferring the level of potential for those future years about which we have as yet no detailed evidence. But for the years that are past and probably also for a period immediately ahead we know more and should be able to do better than read the level of potential off the smooth trend. Looking at it in this way it seems reasonable to say that the conditions peculiar to held " actual potential " below the trend without at the same time saying that in the future the actual potential will always be below the trend derived from past data THE BEHAVIOR OF PRICES During prices rose more rapidly than at any time since the Korean war. From December to December the consumer price index ( CPI ) rose percent and the wholesale price index percent. The comprehensive GNP deflator rose percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Its percent annual rate of increase in the fourth quarter of last year was far above the rise projected by the Administration a year ago There is no simple explanation for this price behavior which was the most extraordinary in almost a generation and which confounded the Council and most other economists alike. The simultaneous upsurge in demand in the United States and in foreign countries the shortfall in agricultural production of and early the decline in the international exchange value of the dollar the unexpected capacity problems in materials industries the increases in petroleum prices late in the year as a result of the Arab oil embargo the shifting character of domestic price controls all of these tell part of the story of last year 's inflation. Chapter deals with the Economic Stabilization Program and Chapter with the problems of energy and agriculture. The present section touches briefly on some of the broad measures of prices and wages chiefly in the context of the national income accounts Price behavior in the private sector of the economy as measured by the deflator for private GNP shows the same broad pattern as the overall GNP Chart Changes in Selected Price Measures PERCENT CHANGE FROM PRECEDING YEAR _ PRIVATE NONFARM GNP PRICE DEFLATOR PRIVATE GNP PRICE DEFLATOR VTA ^ I I CPI-ALL ITEMS I P I 1I I I CPI-ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD I i 11m _ WPI-ALI. COMMODITIES WPI-INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES Q o I I i I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR deflator. The rate during was substantially above the high rates during and but the differences between and are greatly narrowed when attention is focused on the private nonfarm deflator alone ( Table ) Similarly because farm and food prices have greater weights in the wholesale and consumer price indexes the latter show larger increases from to than the private nonfarm deflator ( Chart ) TABLE Changes in gross national product price deflators selected periods to [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private GNP Total GNP Period Private nonfarm GNP Nonfinancial corporations to average1 IV to IV to IV to IV to IV to IV IV IV IV IV1 Preliminary Estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( except as noted ) Table brings together changes during and for the major indexes and some of their components. The acceleration in the advance of prices is evident throughout the indexes but the sharp advances in prices of farm products food and energy products dominate the extraordinary price behavior of last year The role of import prices is also noteworthy. The price deflator for imports rose percent during If these rising import prices were merely passed through dollar for dollar to final purchasers in the United States they would have accounted for about one-fourth of the rise in prices paid by U.S. purchasers in The farm deflator rose percent from the fourth quarter of to the corresponding quarter of reflecting exceptional increases in the first quarters of the year. The great increase in U.S. farm and food prices began in as a reaction to the reduced world output caused by adverse weather in several parts of the world. The single most important shortfall occurred in the Soviet Union and led that country to enter world markets for extremely large quantities of food and feed grains. Poor weather in other countries also contributed to the tightening of world food markets and the United States as the major source of additional supplies was faced with a huge increase in demand The sharp increase in demand continued in Rising incomes in this country contributed to an increase in the demand for food especially during the first part of the year. International events again added to the demand pressures on U.S. food supplies. Two devaluations of the dollar in a 15month period followed by further depreciation in the dollar exchange rate after February added to the export demand for U.S. food commodities as TABLE Changes in selected price measures 1971IV to 1973IV [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Price measure IV to IV IV to IV II IV III Implicit GNP price deflator : Total G N P Private nonfarm GNP Farm GNP ? Consumer price index : All items Food Nonfood items Energy * Other nonfood Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Energy s Other industrials Changes from preceding quarter Includes general government not shown separately Preliminary * Includes gasoline and motor oil fuel oil and coal and gas and electricity a Includes fuels and related products and power Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) .and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) did the widespread and strong economic expansion abroad. Exports of agricultural commodities rose sharply from $ billion during to $ billion in a development which was instrumental in the sharp increase in U.S. farm commodity prices Last year saw a continuation of the major changes in agricultural policy that were initiated during to further the expansion of supplies and thus restrain price increases. Farm and food product prices nevertheless reached new highs during the year. Wholesale farm product prices in December although percent below the August peak were percent above their level a year earlier while retail food prices were percent higher. Although the expansion in acreage lifted gross farm-food production the production of livestock products declined slightly and with exports higher there was a percent reduction in food supplies reaching consumers. Disruptions in the pattern of supplies occasioned by the controls created serious shortages during the third quarter of the year COMPENSATION AND UNIT LABOR COSTS The slowdown in productivity growth during was accompanied by a quickening of the rate of increase in compensation per man-hour. As a result unit labor costs rose sharply and contributed to substantial price increases in the private nonfarm economy ( Chart ) Nevertheless preliminary data suggest that these price increases fell short of the increase of unit Chart Productivity Compensation and Unit Labor Costs in the Private Nonfarm Economy INDEX IV = RATIO SCALE COMPENSATION PER MAN-HOUR UNIT LABOR COSTS j L NOTE.-DATA RELATE TO ALL PERSONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR labor costs in the same sector. This is true even though real compensation per man-hour money compensation deflated by the consumer price index is likely to have suffered a small decline instead of having risen as it usually does Wage rate adjustments under major collective bargaining agreements were substantially lower in than in For the first year of the contract increases averaged percent down from percent in ; the slowdown for wages and benefits combined was a little smaller. ( See Chapter for further treatment of wage rates. ) Wage changes under such bargaining agreements are limited in scope because only one-fourth of all workers are unionized and only one-half of these are covered by large contracts. A useful indicator of wage rate behavior is the Labor Department 's index of adjusted average hourly earnings which is applicable to all private nonfarm industries. The index holds constant overtime hours in manufacturing and industry mix but it does not cover fringe benefits or compensation of employees other than production workers and it is sensitive to the occupational composition of the work force within industries which tends to be related to age and sex From to the adjusted earnings index rose percent essentially the same increase as from to Although lastv year 's increase was less than that of the index has shown a good measure of stability during the past years ( Table ) Monthly data suggest some step-up in the rate of increase in the second half of although within the year the figures tend to be rather erratic. However compensation per man-hour in the private nonfarm sector increased by percent in the largest increase in more than years. This acceleration was attributable mainly to a large rise in what is labeled benefits in Table the major part of which in came from the increase in employers ' social security taxes in the first quarter TABLE Components of percent change in compensation per man-hour in the private sector nonfarm [ Percent ] Production workers Period Hourly earnings1 Overtime in manufacturing Industry shifts Employees other than production workers Benefits all employees Compensation per man-hour all employees Change from preceding year : ! Adjusted for overtime in manufacturing and interindustry shifts Preliminary Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics From to labor costs per unit of output ( unit labor costs ) rose by percent or much more than the percent rise in The acceleration in the increase of unit labor costs resulted partly from rising hourly labor costs and partly from a reduced rate of increase in productivity Nonfinancial Corporations Table brings together for nonfinancial corporations the components of annual price change over the past few years. Although it constitutes a convenient set of accounts for examining prices it does not permit one to draw inferences regarding causation. However the previous remarks about factors underlying changes in productivity and hourly compensation would also be applicable here. The reader should keep in mind that the price deflators are not the equivalent of prices charged by corporations. The deflators apply only to the value added in production by nonfinancial corporations and not to the cost of goods and services purchased by corporations T A B L E Changes in prices costs and profits per unit of output for nonfinancial corporations to [ Percent change ] t o t o Item to Percent change per unit of output : Prices Compensation per man-hour Output per man-hour Employee compensation.. I0 Profits Percent change in output. Other costs Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes l Net interest Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) The deflator for corporate output rose percent from to after a percent rise in the preceding year. Rising unit labor costs and profits plus inventory valuation adjustment account for all of last year 's price rise Nonlabor costs per unit which make up about 22/2 percent of price showed little overall change ; this was essentially the pattern of change from to The faster rise in unit labor costs last year in comparison with the year before reflected an acceleration of the rise in compensation per manhour and a somewhat smaller increase in output per man-hour. Profits per unit rose quite sharply for the third straight year but they still remained below the average level from through The percent rise in profits per unit of output and the percent rise in output yielded a percent rise in aggregate profits of nonfinancial corporations the largest since Profits of domestic financial corporations rose somewhat faster and profits originating abroad rose still more. The latter consist of earnings of foreign branches and affiliates remitted to U.S parent corporations. Part of the increase in profits originating abroad was attributable directly to the depreciation of the dollar The profits mentioned thus far refer to profits inclusive of the inventory valuation adjustment ( IVA ) If this adjustment is excluded the increase in reported or book profits was considerably greater : percent rather than percent for nonfinancial corporations. In the IVA resulted in a downward adjustment of $ billion in book profits ; last year the corresponding downward adjustment was $ billion The IVA has been an integral part of the national income and product accounts since they were first established. The adjustment is made because the profits that companies report are strongly affected by the accounting methods they use. Most companies rely on the first-in-first-out method. Under this system when prices of purchased goods are rising the prices at which purchases are charged to costs will ordinarily be less than the prices of goods in ending inventories. The effect is to reduce the cost of goods sold and to raise profits. The amount by which profits are inflated under such accounting procedures is analogous to capital gains resulting from inflation which are not included in the calculation of national income. In the national accounts this correction is applied to the valuation of inventory change on the product side and affects proprietors ' income and profits on the income side Although the share of profits plus IVA as a percentage of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations rose for the third year in a row the share was still lower than in any year from through ( Table ) Last year 's increase in the profit share was matched by a decrease in all costs except employee compensation : indirect business taxes capital consumption allowances and net interest. The last two have shown a strong secular increase ; and as indicated below they are partly responsible for the decrease in the profit share Over the postwar years depreciation laws and regulations have undergone many changes in the direction of liberalization that have influenced the level of profits. Holding constant these methods of calculating depreciation would still leave the profits share low in comparison to the years from to For example according to a special analysis of the Commerce Department if one used historical costs for the valuation of assets service lives of assets equal to percent of the Treasury Department 's Bulletin F and the double declining balance method of depreciation the ratio of corporate profits to output would be raised by percentage point whereas for the period it would be essentially unchanged A further allowance for interest a return on capital whose importance has risen over the postwar years would narrow the difference between and the average even more but would still leave the profit ratio lower by percentage points. ( Estimates for are those of the Council. ) Most companies use historical costs for calculating depreciation and for the most part the Commerce Department accepts in the national accounts the depreciation reported for tax purposes. The current value of output should reflect current prices and costs of production should reflect current costs. If depreciation is standardized with replacement rather than historical costs last year 's profit share would be reduced by percentage points. In terms of depreciation calculated with replacement costs the spread in profits between and the average is considerably greater than the spread that reflects the use of historical costs The share accounted for by employee compensation which as a rule has moved countercyclical ^ was unchanged from and was exceeded only in Employee compensation consists of wages and salaries as well as of supplements most of which are made up of employers ' contributions for social insurance and for private pension and welfare funds. If all supplements to wages and salaries are excluded from employee compensation the wage and salary share appears to have declined each year since and to be well below the postwar average of percent. The percent share accounted for by supplements was far above the average of percent TABLE Distribution of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations [ Percent ] Compensation of employees Period All other costs Total Total Wages and salaries Total Capital consumption allowances Profits Indirect business taxes i Net interest ( Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis Changes in Real Income In an evaluation of the year it is important to know whether the net effect of economic developments resulted in an increase or decrease in the economic well-being of the people. There are many different aspects to economic well-being some of which are difficult or impossible to measure Even with measurable dimensions of welfare such as income subjective reasons lead people to apply different weights to increases in income obtained by different recipients. There is no one statistic that is universally accepted as a measure of economic well-being Two measures of changes in income that receive particular attention are real per capita disposable personal income ( DPI ) and real net spendable weekly earnings for a worker with dependents. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of real per capita DPI increased by percent whereas the real net spendable weekly earnings series declined by percent Real per capita DPI as published by the Commerce Department refers to personal income less Federal and State income taxes ; this is deflated by the deflator for personal consumption expenditures and the result is divided by the population. Personal income which is net of deductions for personal contributions for social insurance includes income in cash and kind ; transfer payments as well as wage and other income earned in current production ; and imputed income. Disposable personal income was somewhat low in because of the overwithholding of taxes which were subsequently refunded in The real net spendable weekly earnings series of the Labor Department reflects earnings of production workers in the private nonfarm economy. The average hourly earnings of all private nonfarm production and nonsupervisory workers listed on payrolls are multiplied by the average weekly hours of these workers to obtain average weekly earnings. The payroll and Federal income tax liability is computed on the assumption that these earnings are realized through the year and that the worker is married has three dependents and no other income. The weekly tax liability ( which excludes State income taxes and which was unaffected by the overwithholding of Federal incomes taxes ) is subtracted from the weekly earnings data to obtain net weekly earnings which are then deflated by the consumer price index to obtain real net weekly spendable earnings. The Labor Department makes similar calculations for single persons As noted above from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of the change in per capita real DPI exceeded that of real net spendable weekly earnings by percentage points. About percent of this difference is explained by differential movements of after-tax income of the two series The disposable personal income series rose percent compared to a rise of percent in the net earnings of all production workers. Slightly more than half of the aggregate difference occurred because the number of production and nonsupervisory workers on private nonfarm payrolls grew faster than the total population : percent for the former and only percent for the latter. The remaining difference is due to the different price deflators : the deflator for personal consumption expenditures rose percent during the period while the CPI rose percent The consumer price index which is used to deflate the spendable earnings series reflects weights as of whereas the DPI series uses current expenditure weights. One consequence is that food whose relative importance in consumer budgets has tended to decrease over time has a heavier weight in the CPI than in the deflator. Also the personal consumption expenditures deflator excludes and the CPI includes mortgage interest which rose very rapidly last year. On the other hand an alternative PCE deflator using fixed rather than current weights rose almost / percent more than the regular PCE deflator during The spendable weekly earnings series as a measure of well-being may have a downward bias in periods of strongly rising employment. When economic opportunities are abundant many married women students and retirees enter the labor force. On the average these groups have less training are likely to earn less than the average hourly wage and are more likely to work less than a full workweek. Both factors will tend to depress the average weekly earnings of those employed although each worker has gained in economic well-being. There is also a tendency for multiple jobholdings to increase in periods of strong demand which would have a similar effect. In addition the spendable earnings series treats each worker as a family head when in fact the number of employed persons per family may rise especially in a period when total employment is rising rapidly as in FISCAL POLICY IN After supporting the expansion of general business activity in fiscal policy moved toward restraint in This was accomplished by the successful control of expenditures. Deferrals cutbacks or terminations of nonessential programs helped keep Federal outlays at more than $ billion below the $ billion target for fiscal presented in the January budget. Receipts on the other hand rose more than was anticipated partly because of unexpectedly high rates of inflation. With outlays moderately lower and receipts considerably higher than proiected the unified budget deficit for fiscal turned out to be $ billion rather than the $ billion projected a year ago In January the Administration presented a budget of $ billion in receipts and $ billion in outlays for fiscal Since then the estimate of receipts has been raised to $ billion and projected outlays have been raised to $ 274/ billion the result being an estimated deficit of $ 4/2 billion in the unified budget. On the full-employment basis however a surplus of $ billion is estimated for fiscal compared to an approximate balance projected a year ago. In fiscal the budget showed a full-employment deficit of about $ billion FEDERAL EXPENDITURES On the national income accounts ( NIA ) basis actual Federal expenditures rose from $ billion in calendar to $ billion in calendar ( Table ) The increase of percent was smaller than the IO/2 percent rise from to Last year was the first time since that Federal expenditures grew less rapidly than GNP About $ billion of the growth in expenditures from calendar to calendar was due to the percent increase in benefits from old age survivors and disability insurance that went into effect in October and to the liberalization of retirement and entitlement provisions at the start of Federal purchases of goods and services rose much less last year than from to All of last year 's rise in purchases is accounted for by pay increases for civilian and military employees. A percent increase in the wages and salaries of Federal employees took effect in January and was followed by a percent rise in October but the simultaneous reduction in Federal employment ( including the Armed Forces ) caused Federal payrolls to rise by only percent. The other half of total Federal purchases of goods and services purchases from the private sector changed little after a percent rise the year before Grants-in-aid to State and local governments rose by $ 3j/i billion in when general revenue sharing had its first full year of operation. The general revenue sharing program enacted in provides from $ to $ billion of grants-in-aid each year through calendar About $ billion has been distributed to more than State and local governments from December through December About half of this amount had been authorized for The initial planned-use reports filed by most of the recipient units of government indicate that approximately half of them would spend shared revenues in such a way as to relieve tax pressures TABLE Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income accounts basis calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure category Federal Government receipts Personal tax and nontax payments Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Federal Government expenditures Purchases of goods and services Defense Other Transfer payments Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises- Surplus or deficit ( ) _ January projected percent changes applied to revised actual data Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget 32v It is interesting to note that after rising by percent from to the increase in personal tax and nontax receipts of State and local governments was halved from to even though increases in personal income were slightly larger in the latter period. General revenue sharing may well have contributed to this change The new program has also allowed a number of long delayed but high priority projects for capital improvement and construction by State and local governments. A 3-year decline in real public construction outlays stopped last year. More recently general revenue sharing funds have been relied upon more and more to meet the current operating costs of human resource and economic development programs primarily in public education public safety and health as well as in environmental protection conservation and public transportation. In sum the financial stability vitality and independence of State and local governments has been increased noticeably by the general revenue sharing program FEDERAL RECEIPTS Federal receipts ( NIA ) grew from $ billion in calendar to $ billion in calendar ( Table ) The percent increase was twice the rate of growth of expenditures. Little more than one-fourth of this increase can be attributed to a change in tax rates or in tax structure. For the most part receipts grew automatically because of the increase in the various tax bases provided by the real growth of GNP and by inflation Compared to the January NIA estimates personal tax and nontax receipts turned out to be higher in partly because the accelerated inflation affected personal incomes and partly because individuals permitted their Federal income taxes to be overwithheld at the same rate as they had in The projection of NIA receipts at the start of last year assumed that individuals would reduce their withheld taxes in order to bring about a closer balance between withholdings and tax liabilities The estimated reduction of $ billion did not materialize. Corporate profits tax accruals were more than $ billion higher than had been anticipated at the start of the year. The rise in these taxes was due largely to the sharp increase in book profits produced by unexpectedly high rates of price inflation The only major discretionary change affecting receipts occurred in social security ( OASDHI ) taxes. Social security includes old age survivors disability hospital and supplementary medical insurance and accounts for most of the Federal receipts included in contributions for social insurance At the start of the combined rate for employers and employees was raised from percent to percent of earnings. Simultaneously the maximum amount of annual earnings subject to the tax was increased from $ to $ These two measures together raised OASDHI tax receipts by $ billion and thus accounted for over one-quarter of the $ billion rise in total Federal receipts from to Including the automatic O effect of covered wage and employment growth total OASDHI receipts rose by about $ billion By comparison in the combined payroll tax rate was percent and the maximum amount of earnings subject to the tax was $ From to social security taxes and contributions rose by percent compared to a rise of percent in employee compensation and an increase of about percent in the consumer price index. In contributions for social security represented percent of Federal receipts and OASDHI benefits accounted for percent of Federal expenditures In these ratios had risen to and percent respectively Rapid growth in the importance of payroll taxes in relation to total taxes lowers the elasticity of Federal receipts with respect to income. The average annual earnings of all covered employees were about $ in Those workers whose annual earnings exceeded the maximum of $ did not pay more tax when their earnings grew. The periodic increases that have been made in the tax ceiling on covered earnings mitigate the regressive effects of the payroll tax and provide for increased benefits The latest rise to $ occurred January BALANCES OF THE FEDERAL BUDGET As the economy moved towards full utilization of resources from to the actual Federal budget balance ( NIA ) rose from a deficit of $ billion to a slight surplus. At the same time the full-employment budget balance increased about one-third as much as the actual balance or by $ billion. The smaller rise in the full-employment balance reflects the fact that the actual real rate of growth from to exceeded the growth rate of potential GNP which is used to calculate full-employment revenues The calculations in this report are based on potential growth rates of percent annually in constant dollars The traditional calculation of the full-employment budget involves adjusting actual Federal expenditures for those changes in unemployment benefits ( normally reductions ) which would be expected if the economy were operating at percent unemployment. Apart from this adjustment full-employment expenditures are assumed to be equal to actual expenditures. To estimate Federal receipts at full employment one must project the shares in full-employment income of taxable personal income corporate profits and wages and salaries. Retrospectively personal tax and nontax receipts at full employment are then calculated as are corporate profits taxes and contributions for social insurance by applying the respective average tax rates observed each quarter to the corresponding tax bases in potential GNP measured in current dollars. Total potential GNP is used as the tax base for indirect taxes. Prospective calculations also take into account changes in tax laws scheduled for future years as well as a gradual rise in the average tax rate on personal incomes a rise produced by the growth of incomes subject to progressive rates of taxation Comparisons between and show that the full-employment balance increased by $ billion. On a quarterly basis however the increase was uneven ; the large rise in social security benefits ahead of taxes in the fourth quarter of and the phase-in of revenue sharing contributed to the full-employment deficit for that year. Furthermore if the $ billion of overwithholding of individual income taxes that started in and has persisted since is included in full-employment receipts as it is in actual receipts the change amounts to only $ billion instead of $ billion. In overwithheld taxes were about $ billion but in refunds of overwithheld taxes were offset by overwithholding of taxes The limitations of the traditional measures of potential output were discussed earlier in this chapter. Despite these limitations the full-employment surplus calculation based on the traditional concept of the potential GNP that is consistent with percent unemployment is useful in the long run for evaluating changes in fiscal policy. At a constant price level changes in the balance at full employment whatever consistent definition of full employment one may choose reflect changes in full-employment expenditures discretionary changes in tax receipts that is those produced by changes in tax laws and changes in tax receipts along the full-employment path of output under given tax laws. When prices rise over time changes in the full-employment budget surplus can also be produced automatically. As explained in the next section this is particularly likely to occur in the short run when unexpected increases in the rate of inflation raise receipts more than expenditures INFLATION AND THE FEDERAL BUDGET AT FULL EMPLOYMENT The increase in the Federal full-employment budget surplus from calendar to is reduced further if one takes account of the high rates of inflation that materialized in At the start of that year the price level measured by the implicit GNP price deflator was expected to continue to rise by about percent during the year as it had during In fact it rose by about percent from the fourth quarter of Thus for the year as a whole the level of the deflator was percent above the level that had been assumed in budget planning In the short run Federal receipts respond much more promptly than Federal expenditures to an unexpected increase in the rate of inflation. The bases for most taxes are raised automatically but less than half of total expenditures will respond within a few months to an increase in the rate of inflation. Thus for each additional percent rise in the price level fullemployment receipts increase by about percent but expenditures grow by perhaps only percent in the short run. With the magnitudes of calendar a price level that is percent higher on the average for the year raises full-employment receipts by around $ billion more than expenditures leaving the full-employment surplus shown in Table higher by that amount for the year than it would have been if the rate of inflation had not grown Since these apparent stabilization effects of the budget were called forth by an unexpectedly high rate of inflation higher than in the past they can not be attributed to the fiscal policies intended at the start of the year. Rather they may be regarded as part of the automatic stabilizing component of fiscal policy. Before one can infer changes in discretionary fiscal policies by comparing the full-employment balances of and the fullemployment budget surplus for should first be adjusted for the rise in the rate of inflation from to even though the adjustment cited above is only a first approximation T A B L E Actual and full-employment Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income accounts basis calendar years [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Federal Government Calendar year Receipts Actual : Expenditures State and local government Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Combined surplus or deficit ( ) : II III IV : II Ill Full-employment : : II Ill IV : II III Preliminary Over-withholding of personal income taxes is not included in full-employment receipts Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers THE STATE AND LOCAL AND THE COMBINED BUDGET BALANCES As shown in the preceding table the actual balance of State and local government receipts and expenditures grew rapidly from $ billion in calendar to $ billion in Last year 's surplus amounted to almost percent of total receipts Relationships among Federal transfers to State and local governments and the budget surpluses and tax efforts of these units have grown closer since general revenue sharing was introduced in October For instance of the $ billion received for the third entitlement period under general revenue sharing in April and July it is estimated that almost half is being spent to reduce taxes or prevent an increase in taxes. With State and local spending rising at a somewhat accelerated rate of percent from to the surplus of State and local governments declined progressively during This decline is somewhat more pronounced if one estimates the fullemployment budget surplus for State and local governments. Here essentially the same procedure is used as in estimating the Federal budget. Only a few differences arise. Full-employment receipts from contributions for social insurance are assumed to be equal to the actual social insurance contributions received by State and local governments since these programs cover only State and local employees and therefore do not fluctuate cyclically. Full-employment expenditures are assumed to be equal to actual expenditures since unemployment benefits enter the national accounts only as Federal expenditures The difference between these full-employment receipts and expenditures yields the crude estimate of the full-employment budget balance of State and local governments used in this report for the analysis of fiscal policy. More refined estimates might take into account that some State and local expenditures vary automatically with cyclical conditions. There is also some evidence that tax rates tend to be raised when the gap between actual GNP and potential GNP widens. The average tax rates at full employment may therefore deviate systematically from the actual tax rates contrary to the assumption made in estimating full-employment receipts. Nevertheless the State and local budget calculated in this way does give a better estimate of the stance of overall fiscal policy than the actual budget The full-employment budget balance of State and local governments can be added to the comparable balance of the Federal Government to obtain a rough indicator of the combined fiscal policy changes generated by all layers of government. The result shows that although State and local governments reduced their full-employment budget surplus in the combined budget surplus still rose by $ billion from $ billion in to $ billion in on a national income accounts basis. If increases in the fullemployment budget surplus produced by an unexpected rise in rates of inflation are not regarded as " discretionary " but as part of the automatic stabilizers particularly at the Federal level the increase in the full-employment surpus for all levels of government combined would be reduced to about $ billion. However if overwithholding is included in Federal receipts for the full-employment surplus shows a decline from to As indicated in Chapter the Council believes that overwithholding should be omitted from the calculation of full-employment receipts. Viewed in this manner therefore the full-employment surpus on a combined governmental basis indicates a shift toward restraint from to but the shift is less than in the Federal budget alone MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS For more than a decade money GNP has tended to grow in a higher proportion than the narrowly defined money supply ( Mi ) but in the same proportion as both the broadly defined money supply ( M ) and privately held liquid assets as defined in Table However even with reasonable allowances for lags with a 2-quarter lag of the growth of GNP behind the growth of M and of privately held liquid assets deviations from these relationships of proportionality have been large in some years. A reduction in the rate of growth of these aggregates tends to have a moderating effect on the growth of money GNP even if for some purposes the short-run deviations from long-run relations are uncomfortably large TABLE Changes in aggregate monetary measures and gross national product to [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Mi ( currency plus demand deposits ) Half year : First half Second half M2 ( Mi plus time deposits Private liquid asset holdings Adjusted credit proxy3 GNP : First half Second half : First half Second half : First half Second half_ : First half Second half : First half Second half * _ _ _ _._ Time deposits at commercial banks other than large certificates of deposit Holdings of private nonfinancial investors : Currency demand deposits time deposits ( including CD 's ) and savings accounts in commercial banks and thrift institutions U.S. Government securities ( savings bonds and short-term ) and commercial paper Consists of member bank deposits bank-related commercial paper Eurodollar borrowings of U.S. banks and certain nondeposit items * Preliminary es Note. Half year changes are based on data for last quarter in each half year t year would yield f th t Using data for the last month of each half y ld i l d for the two halves of and percent respechl d tf tively for Mi and and percent for M2 Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Appraising the effect of a change in the money supply on money rates of interest particularly appraising its effects in the longer run is a matter of some complexity because money rates depend not only on the " real " yield of the available physical resources measured as if the general price level remained constant but also on the inflation premium which lenders insist on receiving and borrowers are willing to pay. The immediate effect produced by a high rate of increase in the money stock is to increase the supply of credit ; but such a policy also tends to increase the expected rate of inflation and thus to raise the demand for credit. However both the demand and the supply also depend significantly on real factors which would make for positive yields from investment even if these were estimated on the basis of an unchanging general price level Because the demand for credit continued to rise rapidly in upward pressures on interest rates were strong and rates at year-end were well above their levels at the start of the year ( Chart ) From December to December the Treasury bill rate rose from to percent the prime commercial paper rate from to percent and the rate on longterm bonds of the Federal Government from about to percent ; the FHA mortgage yield from loans on new homes climbed from about to percent. Until late August the stock market declined then it rose until October without fully recovering the earlier loss. After October stock prices fell again leaving a substantial net decline for the year as a whole It is hard to tell to what extent the reduction in the market value of stock equities was caused by rising interest rates and to what extent by the rising uncertainty about profits an attitude at least partly occasioned by the energy crisis late in the year Monetary Policy Monetary policy in applied somewhat more restraint than the year before since it was aiming for a gradual return to a sustainable rate of growth in demand and output. According to preliminary estimates from the fourth quarter of to that of Mi grew by percent M by percent and the stock of privately held liquid assets by percent For the preceding year these figures had been and percent respectively. By the last quarter of the current growth of money GNP was reduced to about percent at an annual rate from an percent rate in the fourth quarter of a percent rate in the first quarter of and rates of and percent in the second and third quarters of the year As market interest rates rose deposits at commercial banks became less attractive than alternative open market assets a financial market condition reminiscent of Contrary to the practice however when ceilings on large certificates of deposit ( CD 's ) were set below open market interest rates a move causing outflows of funds from commercial banks measures were taken to ensure that commercial banks could compete for funds in the open market. The ceilings on large CD 's ( $ and over ) maturing in less than days had been removed in and the restrictions on large CD 's maturing in days or more were lifted in May In addition the Federal Reserve Board in conjunction with other Federal regulatory agencies increased the maximum interest payable on time and savings deposits in July. Ceilings on CD 's with maturities of at least years and minimum denominations of $ but not more than $ were eliminated at the same time. In November however Congress passed legis- lation requiring ceilings on all CD 's of less than $ The volume of large CD 's increased from $ billion in January to $ billion in August a sharp contrast to the sizable decline in chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER ANNUM SHORT-TERM FEDERAL FUNDS I u r \ 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New Issues ) A \ H ^ / \ V _rrj'/ r " C/ I i i i i I i h i n i i i i i i i i I i I I I i LONG-TERM NEW HOME MORTGAGES ( FHLBB ) CORPORATE Aaa BONDS % U.S. GOVERNMENT BONDS HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION However steps were taken to keep credit expansion within bounds. The supply of reserves through open market operations was kept at a level where commercial banks had to borrow heavily from the Federal Reserve discount window to acquire additional reserves. The Federal funds rate a good barometer of money market conditions rose to about percent in September from about / percent at the beginning of the year Marginal reserve requirements on large CD 's and on bank-related commercial paper were also raised from to percent in May to increase the effective cost of raising funds. As loans financed through large CD 's continued to accelerate these marginal reserve requirements were raised again in September this time to percent. The new regulation meant an additional $ million in required reserves for the banking system. Commercial banks raised the prime lending rate to a record percent in response to the higher effective cost of large CD 's and strong credit demand. The volume of large CD 's outstanding declined from $ billion in August to about $ billion in December. The rapid rise of business loans at commercial banks came to an end. As a result there occurred in September and October a significant rise in business borrowing by means of the placement of commercial paper by dealers in the market Recognizing these developments the Federal Reserve Board lowered the marginal reserve requirement on large CD 's and bank-related commercial paper from to percent in December. The move lowered the effective cost to banks of obtaining additional funds through the sale of large CD 's and bank-related commercial paper and prevented short-term interest rates from rising even higher Long-Term Financing Long-term financing by corporations was lighter in than in but showed a substantial increase in the final quarter ( Table ) The reduction was partly a reflection of the large rise in internally generated funds. In the first quarters of corporate profits after taxes plus capital consumption allowances were on average percent greater than the annual average for Along with rising long-term rates this contributed to the decline in bond market activity while declining stock prices made financing through equity issues less attractive With the rise in profits slowing down after midyear and with requirements for new capacity continuing to increase scheduled new bond offerings rose substantially in the fourth quarter. These upward pressures on interest rates were counterbalanced when investors attempted to reshuffle their portfolios in favor of longer-term securities in response to declining shortterm rates Mortgage Markets During the first quarters of the sharp increase in short-term open market rates and the gap between those rates and yields on most types of TABLE Offerings of new security issues [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate securities Period Bonds and notes Total State and local government securities Stocks II III IV : II III IV : i Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and The Bond Buyer savings deposits decreased the net inflow of funds into thrift institutions. The tightness in mortgage markets was less severe than in and In conditions in credit markets were relatively easy and net savings flows into thrift institutions were large ( Table ) The rate of this net inflow moderated during the first half of but it still remained substantial partly because of unusually large tax refunds. Mortgage repayment flows were also ample. Mortgage loan commitments outstanding at all savings and loan associations reached a record $ billion in May. As short-term open market rates increased sharply net savings inflows into thrift institutions excluding interest credited were reduced and for the duration of the third quarter they turned into net outflows. Savings and loan associations decreased new commitments borrowed heavily from the Federal Home Loan Banks ( FHLB ) and sold liquid assets in order to meet existing commitments. Inclusion of interest credited into the net savings flow would still yield a negative figure for the third quarter though with seasonal adjustment the sharp diminution from earlier quarters would then leave the net third-quarter flow positive The progressive reduction of net savings flows to the thrift institutions tightened conditions in mortgage markets and induced Federal regulatory agencies to take steps to revive this market. In July maximum interest rates payable on time and savings deposits by thrift institutions were adjusted upward. Also the Federal Home Loan Bank Board lowered liquidity requirements at member institutions freeing additional funds for mortgage lending. Ceilings on FHA-VA mortgages were raised from to 8JJ/2 percent in two steps in order to attract more funds to Government-backed mortgages Assistance to Mortgage Markets Mortgage markets received substantial support from federally sponsored housing agencies in These agencies channeled funds from the open market to mortgage markets and thus eased the availability of mortgage credit. In addition the President announced measures to help the mortgage and housing sector in both the short and long run Federal Home Loan Bank advances outstanding to member savings and loan associations reached $ billion in December compared to $ billion at the end of The $ billion net increase may be compared with a rise of $ billion during TABLE Net savingsflowsat thrift institutions [ Billions of dollars not seasonally adjusted ] Period Net savings flows i II III IV II III IV2 New deposits less withdrawals. Excludes interest credited Estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Note. Thrift institutions consist of mutual savings banks and federally insured savings and loan associations Sources : National Association of Mutual Savings Banks and Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( except as noted ) The Federal National Mortgage Association the largest financial intermediary serving mortgage markets bought $ billion worth of mortgages during an increase of $ billion over The President announced a series of legislative and administrative proposals in September in order to ease the tight mortgage market conditions existing at the time. First the Federal Home Loan Banks were authorized to make forward commitments up to $ billion at a predetermined rate of interest to member savings and loan associations. Second the Government National Mortgage Association was authorized to reactivate the Tandem Plan and offer to buy up to $ billion of mortgages from various types of financial institutions. Third Congress was requested to raise the maximum amount of a mortgage loan insurable by the Federal Housing Administration a step which would make Government-backed loans available to a larger number of home buyers who can not obtain conventional mortgage loans. The President also sent to the Gongresss several recommendations designed to make it easier for home buyers to obtain mortgages in the future CHAPTER Inflation Control Under the Economic Stabilization Act Public Law the Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of as amended requires that the Economic Report of the President include a section " describing the actions taken under this title during the preceding year and giving his assessment of the progress attained in achieving the purposes of this title. " This chapter is intended to fulfill that requirement. There is however no intent to represent the description of the control regulations contained herein as legally binding interpretations P RICE AND WAGE CONTROLS administered by the Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) under authority of the Economic Stabilization Act remained in effect throughout but underwent several substantial modifications. After the move to Phase III early in the year the changes were in the direction of greater stringency. They reflected the strain placed on the program when economic forces caused a sharp acceleration of inflation beginning early in the year and when this in turn generated public and political demand for changes in the nature of controls. However the extent to which these changes could contain the inflation in was limited by the serious risks of disrupting markets and adversely affecting supply THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION PROGRAM IN As began economic conditions seemed propitious for a substantial modification in the Phase II system of controls. The rate of inflation had been moderate in The consumer price index ( CPI ) rose percent during the year ( Table ) Wage increases had moderated from their very high rates of early a sign that expectations of future price increases had diminished. Industrial price increases had slowed to a percent annual rate in the last half of 3Tij $ $ fiscal and monetary policy supplemented by the controls program had approximately achieved their interim goals by the end of as TABLE Measures of price and wage change during the Economic Stabilization Program [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Freeze and Phase II Aug. to Jan. Price or wage measure Phase III Jan. to June Second freeze and Phase IV June to Dec. Calendar year during which controls were in effect throughout Dec.1971 to Dec. Dec. to Dec. PRICES Consumer price index : 'Food All items less food Commodities less food Services Personal consumption expenditures deflator * All items Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Finished goods consumer and producer Crude and intermediate materials3 WAGES Average hourly earnings private nonfarm economy s Average hourly compensation : Total private economy ! Nonfarm l Average hourly earnings private economy16 nonfarm Percent changes based on quarterly data : III to IV ( col. ) IV to II ( col. ) II to IV ( col. ) IV to IV ( col. ) and IV to IV ( col. ) Includes a small number of items not shown separately Excludes foods but includes a small number of items not in the industrial commodity index * Average hourly earnings are for production workers or nonsupervisory employees and average hourly compensation for all employees Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and interindustry shifts Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers With excess capacity declining at the end of there was a clear possibility that continuation of the Phase II controls program would interfere increasingly with production productivity and investment decisions and raise administrative costs especially if the economy continued to expand as expected PHASE III ( January to June ) Against this backdrop it was decided to modify the price and wage controls program to make it more consistent with the further reduction in excess capacity foreseen at the time and also move toward the Administration 's goal of eventually ending the controls. The new regimen of controls known as Phase III involved some basic changes in the regulations ( Table ) ( A more detailed presentation of the regulations of Phase III the subsequent freeze and Phase IV can be found in the Quarterly Reports of the Cost of Living Council. ) To reduce the mounting delays and costs entailed in submitting requests for price increases having them reviewed and seeking detailed interpretations of increasingly complex rules the basic principles of regulation developed during Phase II were to be self-administered in Phase III. The prenotification requirement was dropped in most sectors of the economy. Report-filing requirements were maintained only for the largest economic units. The Price Commission and Pay Board were absorbed into the staff of the Cost of Living Council ; and this staff together with the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) enforcement staff was reduced The Cost of Living Council retained authority and subsequently used it to impose specific mandatory regulations where restraint seemed lacking but in most sectors of the economy the system was not mandatory without further action by the CLC An important reason for the change to a self-administered program was the need for flexibility in administering the standards for wage and price behavior. Phase II had in fact provided important instances of flexibility but the changed economic conditions suggested that even more was needed. In one of its first public pronouncements on February the newly formed Labor-Management Advisory Committee to the CLC made the point that no single standard or wage settlement can be expected to apply throughout the economy at any one time. This aspect of Phase III was important in the decision of leaders of labor many of whom had earlier withdrawn from participation in the program to join the Phase III effort The profit margin regulations were also modified in Phase III. The basis for calculating the profit margin limitation was changed to increase the number of fiscal years from which a firm could choose the years they used in calculating their base. To permit firms to benefit from productivity increases if they practiced price restraint the profit margin limit was waived if a firm 's average price increase was no more than percent in a year. A third change was to permit price increases " necessary for efficient allocation of resources or to maintain adequate levels of supply. " Price changes were thus allowed in instances where economic growth led to exceptional demand pressures in particular markets and the alternative was shortages The Construction Industry Stabilization Committee and the Committee on Interest and Dividends were continued and new committees were established in the field of health care. Special criteria were established for public utilities making the program voluntary and ending the requirement that regulatory agencies obtain from the CLC certification that their actions accorded with Phase III controls Special steps were also taken to counter problems emerging in the food sector. Increases in farm product prices had led to a percent annual T A B L E Regulations of the controls program Phases II,Ill and IV Phase II Nov. to Jan. Program Phase I I I Jan. to June Phase IV Aug. to date General Standards : Price increase limitations.. Percentage pass-through of allowable cost increases since last price increase or Jan. adjusted for productivity and volume offsets. Term limit pricing option available Self-administered standards of Phase II In most manufacturing and service industries dollar for dollar pass-through of allowable cost increase since last fiscal quarter ending prior to Jan. Profit margin limitations... Not to exceed margins of the best of fiscal years before Aug. Not applicable if prices were not increased above base level or if firms " purified " themselves Not to exceed margins of the best fiscal years completed after Aug. No limitation if average price increase does not exceed percent Same years as Phase I I I except that a firm that has not charged a price for any item above its base price or adjusted freeze price whichever is higher is not subject to the limitation Wage increase limitations.. General standard of percent. Exceptions made to correct gross inequities and for workers whose pay had increased less than percent a year for the last years Workers earning less than $ per hour were exempt. Increases in qualified fringe benefits permitted raising standard to percent Prenotification : General Phase II standard self-administered Some special limitations More flexibility with respect to specific cases Workers earning less than $ per hour were exempted after May Self-administered standards of Phase I I I Executive compensation limited Prices Prenotification required for all firms with annual sales above $ million days before implementation approval required After May pre- Same as Phase II except that prenotified price innotification required for creases may be impleall firms with sales above mented in days unless $ million whose price CLC requires otherwise increase has exceeded a weighted average of percent Wages For all increases of wages for units of or more ; for all increases above the standard regardless of the number of workers involved None None Quarterly for firms with sales over $ million Quarterly for firms with sales over $ million Quarterly for firms with sales over $ million Wages. Pay adjustments below standard for units greater than persons Pay adjustments for units greater than persons As Phase III Special areas Health insurance rent construction public utilities Health food public utilities construction petroleum Health food petroleum construction insurance executive and variable compensation Raw agricultural commodities import prices export prices firms with or fewer employees Same as Phase plus rents. Same as Phase III plus manufactured feeds cement public utilities lumber copper scrap long-term coal contracts automobiles fertilizers nonferrous metals except aluminum and copper mobile homes and semiconductors Reporting : Prices.. _ Exemptions to price standards _ In some of these sectors wages were also exempted Source : Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) rate of advance in grocery store food prices in the second half of and substantial increases were in prospect for early This development was a major threat to the moderate price behavior that had been achieved as was obvious by comparison with nonfood prices in the CPI which had slowed to a percent annual rate of increase in the last months of Specific mandatory controls were therefore retained on wages and prices in food processing and distribution in Phase III a number of additional actions to expand supply were taken and special committees were established to help coordinate activities that would moderate the increases in food prices. Prices of raw agricultural products continued to be exempt from controls By the spring it was clear that three specific assumptions underlying forecasts for had gone awry. In the first quarter of retail food prices propelled by sharply higher farm prices were already percent above the first quarter of substantially higher than the average percent increase for the first half of over the first half of that had been forecast by the Department of Agriculture in October The official year-over-year forecast had been revised by February to percent ; by May an earlier expectation that food prices would level off after midyear began to appear less certain The second assumption concerned economic expansion in early both in the United States and abroad which turned out to be much more robust than had been anticipated. In December after consultation with member countries the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) forecast that combined real GNP for its seven largest member countries including the United States would grow at an annual rate of 6/ percent from the second half of to the first half of By July before second quarter data were complete the OECD had revised the estimate upward to * percent considerably above the growth rate of potential output. The unexpected boom was widespread ; the actual rate of growth exceeded earlier forecasts in all but one of the countries. At no time since the early 's had such strong expansion occurred simultaneously in the larger member countries of the OECD and much more pressure was placed on capacity than had been anticipated. ( For a view of the effect that rapid expansion had on inflation in OECD countries see Table ) The rate of expansion in the United States from the second half of to the first half of was fairly close to that predicted by the Administration but the rise in output in the first quarter of the year was steeper than expected. Production in some industries was pushed to its limit sooner than had been anticipated and unexpected shortages also occurred in others The third change in the economic outlook concerned the large decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. The realignment of exchange rates on February resulted in a decline in the value of the dollar of about percent with respect to our major trading partners. From March when TABLE Changes in consumer prices in OECD countries selected periods [ Percent change annual rates ] Average to Price item and country Dec. to Dec. Dec. to Sept. All items : United States Other OECD countries : Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom All other OECD countries. Food : United States Other OECD countries : Canada Japan __ France Germany Italy United Kingdom All other OECD countries. Nonfood items : United States Other OECD countries : Canada____ Japan France _ Germany Itajy United Kingdom All other OECD countries. i Seasonally adjusted. Latest date for which comparable data are available Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics other major countries ceased to support fixed exchange rates to July it depreciated about percent more. In a setting of rapidly rising demand and output here and abroad the extent to which these exchange rate changes and those that had previously occurred in the months after the Smithsonian Agreement in December affected prices in the United States was substantial Prices of imported commodities and products which were exempt from controls at first sale into U.S. commerce rose as a direct result of the dollar depreciation. U.S. exports were drawn out of the country at a faster rate than before because they were less expensive in foreign currencies. The increased export demand raised domestic prices of commodities like raw agricultural products that were exempt from controls. In a growing number of cases products that remained under price controls were also drawn out of the country because prices of internationally traded goods had risen markedly and controls prevented U.S. prices from rising to world market levels In the first few months of Phase III the observed increases in the consumer price index and wholesale price index ( WPI ) showed that inflation was accelerating for some important raw commodities important not only O to the economy but also in the sense that consumers ' attention focused on them. Retail meat prices rose percent a month in February and March as a result of a percent increase in livestock prices from November to March Shortages of crude oil pushed up retail fuel oil prices percent during the winter and a rise of percent in prices of lumber and wood products was reflected in the prices of new houses and indirectly influenced the prices of existing houses As a result of the acceleration of inflation pressures mounted to tighten controls. While Phase II controls were in effect public opinion polls indicated that the popularity of a return to a price freeze diminished reaching a point in the last quarter of at which only about a fourth of the population supported such an action. According to the polls however by February percent of the population wanted a return to a price freeze and these pressures for stricter controls were reflected within the Congress. One effect of this sentiment among the public and the Congress may have been to encourage price increases in anticipation of a freeze The Administration was sensitive to the growing pressures from consumers and Congress and was also concerned that the acceleration of inflation would undo the gains achieved by slowing the private nonfarm wage rate increases as measured by average hourly earnings adjusted for interindustry shifts and overtime in manufacturing from a peak annual rate of percent for the third quarter of to percent for the first quarter of The situation posed a dilemma for policy makers however because the major source of inflation was in commodity markets in which controls have only limited usefulness. The problems of hides and lumber that were encountered during Phase II had made this apparent. The most effective way to slow price increases for raw commodities is to increase their supply Numerous actions detailed in Table were taken by means of agricultural programs foreign trade policy instruments and stockpile policies to expand supplies of lumber agricultural products metals and petroleum products. While some of these policies increased supply quickly others required more time to take effect and had little immediate impact on the rate of inflation PHASE III IS TIGHTENED The Administration recognized that controls were unlikely to be effective in holding down prices of those consumer goods that are derived almost directly from crude commodities. Nonetheless in the face of mounting pressure selected changes in the administration of controls were instituted in order to assure labor and consumers that everything possible was being done to contain price increases. Thus on March cost justification was required of major producers of crude oil and petroleum products who sought price increases yielding more than a percent yearly addition to their revenues ; for increases greater than percent prenotification was required This deterred price increases which would otherwise have been useful TABLE Supply-increasing actions of the Federal Government during Commodity Action Date of action January Direct subsidies ended for farm product exports Mandatory wheat acreage set-asides suspended for crop Grain to be sold from Government CCC reserves Loans terminated on farm-stored grain Review of Federal marketing orders initiated to encourage additional supply of fruits and vegetables Livestock grazing permitted on set-aside acreages Cabinet-level CLC Committee on Food established CLC public Food Advisory Committee established Feed grain acreage set-asides reduced for crop March March Dairy price supports increased to mandatory minimums Feed grain set-aside acreage further reduced April5 April April Food Interagency Task Force established to coordinate grain transportation policies Rice acreage allotments increased for crop Cheese import quotas increased January May Import quotas increased on dry milk June Temporary export restrictions imposed on oilseed crops July Temporary export restrictions extended to categories of agricultural commodities including edible oils animal fats and livestock protein feed Exports of food under P.L. reduced to minimum levels Import quotas further increased on dry milk Wheat and feed grain set-asides suspended for crops July July July August Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act signed establishing target price system to support farm incomes Import quotas increased further for nonfat dry milk August October October November l _ November Butter import quotas increased Sugar import quotas increased December December 21_ Metals. Agricultural production and food processing given high priority in propane allocation program Fertilizer price decontrolled by CLC ; export monitoring system established Loans on crop wheat called for January delivery Meat import quotas suspended for April President requests authority to sell excess stockpile items ; sales of tin aluminum lead zinc magnesium rubber cobalt manganese ore made throughout the year Reporting requirements imposed for ferrous scrap exports May July April Japan agreed voluntarily to reduce imports of U.S. softwood logs in second half of May Lumber. Licensing requirements set up for ferrous scrap exports Japan agreed voluntarily to limit imports of U.S. ferrous scrap in second half of More efficient use of railroad cars as result of ICC changes in rail rates for lumber shipments Increased sales of timber by Forest Service from national forests May Petroleum April Mandatory Oil Import Program quotas and tariffs suspended by Presidential order Unlimited imports of crude oil and petroleum products permitted subject to license fees on imports above former quota levels August Phase IV regulations removed ceiling price from " new " crude oil November Ceiling price removed from crude oil from stripper wells Source : Council of Economic Advisers in encouraging additional supplies from domestic sources and signaling the rising costs of petroleum products to consumers Meat prices were also singled out for additional control. Meats account for about one-fourth of the consumer food budget. Consumer complaints about high meat prices had become widespread ; there was concern that they would add to inflationary expectations and accelerate wage demands. On March ceilings on prices of red meats at all levels of processing and distribution were imposed limiting prices to the highest price level that had prevailed in the preceding days for at least percent of the sales of each meat item Farm prices of livestock were not controlled directly but it was expected that beyond some limit livestock price increases would squeeze margins of processors and retailers and thereby constrain what they could pay for livestock. It was recognized that the ceilings while not binding at the time would probably become so for a couple of months in the summer and thus create distortions but after that meat prices were expected to drop below the ceilings. The ceilings were not expected to interfere in any basic way with incentives to expand production because it was thought that livestock prices were and would remain sufficiently high in relation to production costs In the late winter and spring prices of industrial commodities which had been increasing by about one-third of percent per month in began rising by somewhat more than percent per month. These large increases reflected the impact of spiraling basic commodity prices here and abroad stemming from the rapid expansion that occurred simultaneously in major countries and the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. This development signaled the building up of cost pressures particularly for purchasers of industrial materials which in turn accelerated a rise in finished goods prices. To slow down the pass-through of these cost pressures prenotification requirements were reinstated on May for large firms that proposed weighted average price increases percent above price levels either authorized or in effect on January THE FREEZE ( June to August ) The disappointingly high rate of inflation in the first months of continued to arouse public dissatisfaction and few signs appeared that the inflation would slow significantly in the second half of the year. Congress and the Administration were urged to take stronger actions to contain inflation. In the circumstances it seemed necessary to establish a more stringent controls system than Phase III but one flexible enough to respond to economic developments. This would be better than being forced into one so comprehensive rigid and permanent that it would have adverse effects on the economy On June the President announced a freeze on prices to be followed by a new set of Phase IV controls. The freeze was to last no more than days ending just as soon as new controls could be put in place. Most prices but not wages were prevented from rising above their June levels Dividends and interest rates remained subject to voluntary controls. Rents and raw agricultural products at the first sale were also excluded from the action More instances of price increases turned up during the freeze than in the one begun in August partly because of the extreme upward pressures on farm and some major nonfarm commodity prices. Bad weather had reduced worldwide supplies of farm commodities in Rapidly rising incomes both in the United States and abroad and increased foreign purchasing power resulting from the dollar devaluation lifted demand and produced the largest increase in farm commodity prices since World War I Little could be done through the use of direct controls to stop the price surge without interfering with production and inducing additional exports The meat price ceilings imposed on March began to interfere with livestock production under these circumstances. Increases in livestock feeding costs arising from the sharp increases in feed costs between midspring and midsummer could not be passed on to packers who were subject to ceilings and consequently some livestock producers limited their expansion or cut back production Further negative effects on food production resulted from the extension of ceilings in the June freeze action to all food prices except those of farm products at the point of first sale. Feed grain and oilseed prices remained high stimulated by strong foreign demand. Like meat processors and distributors processors of other food products requiring these grains and oilseeds either as feeds or as inputs for further processing were caught between rising costs and frozen prices. Poultry and egg producers began to cut back production although not to the extent believed by consumers Grain millers were especially hard hit by the rapid rise in prices of wheat Ganners of processed fruits and vegetables also faced cost problems. Their selling prices were based on growers ' prices a year earlier but short supplies had subsequently pushed these prices upward. The well-publicized grocery store shortages during the freeze exemplified the developments in the food industry which hastened the move to Phase IV PHASE IV ( August to date ) Plans for a fourth phase of the controls program were prepared and either implemented or published for comment a month after the beginning of the freeze. On July Stage A of the Phase IV food regulations was implemented because especially quick action was required in this sector The new regulations permitted the dollar for dollar pass-through of all farm price increases and decreases except those for cattle as the beef price ceilings remained in effect until September On July plans for Phase IV were announced and the health industry was returned to Phase III control. The final regulations were announced August and put into effect on August for the wholesale retail manufacturing and service sectors The regulations adopted in Phase IV were designed to serve a number of ends. The main object of course was to slow the rate of inflation. It would be achieved in part by postponing some price increases in the expectation that monetary and fiscal policy would slow the rate of growth of demand and perhaps make them unnecessary. It had to be acknowledged however that holding prices down could have undesirable effects among them the spurring of domestic inflation by encouraging exports and discouraging the investment needed to ensure adequate supply in the long run. Plans for decontrol were also needed to serve the ultimate goal of return to a free market economy The considerations gave rise to a Phase IV system that was stricter than that of Phase II though it contained some regulations developed earlier to deal with specific circumstances in particular industries. Phase IV was stricter than Phase II in three ways Price increases in manufacturing and service industries were limited to the dollar and cents amount of allowable cost increases with no add-on permitted to maintain percentage markups Only cost increases since the last fiscal quarter of could be used to justify price increases. This rule wiped out some cost justification that had been built up earlier in the controls period In Phase IV new base prices were established to which actual prices could rise without cost justification ; in some industry sectors these new base prices were below those of Phase II Special regulations were drawn up for the insurance and petroleum industries. Phase B of the food regulations took effect September New regulations for the health industry were issued on January The major aspects of Phase IV are summarized in Table and discussed in more detail in the Quarterly Reports of the Cost of Living Council Phase IV also incorporated a new strategy for achieving a return to free markets : decontrol of selected industries in appropriate cases. Lumber copper scrap public utilities and coal sold to utilities under long-term contracts were decontrolled at the outset. In the administration of Phase IV each request for price and wage increases is reviewed individually. In suitable cases decontrol has been made contingent on agreements by the firms to expand output or capacity or to limit exports. In these and other instances exemptions have been subject to a requirement that the firms furnish Government agencies with data on their prices exports and investment in new facilities Likely candidates for decontrol have been industries producing basic commodities for which there was excess demand since low domestic prices promoted an unwanted rise in exports as well as reducing supplies and providing less incentive to expand production. Thus fertilizers and most nonferrous metals have been decontrolled during Phase IV In some sectors where there had not been a build-up of cost pressures decontrol would not lead to a spurt in prices. No advantages would be gained by applying controls in these cases. Thus rents which are difficult to regulate for administrative reasons were exempt from Phase IV controls as they had been in Phase III and lumber was decontrolled for similar reasons. Partly for the same reason both wages and prices were decontrolled in the auto industry after a new wage contract for auto workers had been signed and after three of the four automobile companies agreed not to raise prices of model year cars beyond those already approved by the CLC unless economic conditions changed drastically Prices were decontrolled in other industries : cement for example where expanded capacity was needed and a long lead time is required for construction and where there was some assurance of moderate price performance Areas that were decontrolled are still subject to periodic review to make certain that wage and price behavior remains acceptable and that firms are complying with agreements made at the time of decontrol THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTROLS The most obvious question to ask about the controls program is whether it has helped to hold down the rate of inflation. As last year 's Report noted the answer to such a question is by no means obvious. A year ago looking back at one could say that the rate of inflation had been lower during the controls program than earlier. Yet this was only a superficial answer. The real question was whether the inflation had been less than it would have been without the controls. Some argued that the rate of inflation had been declining before the controls were instituted. A continuation of the decline they said did not indicate the effectiveness of the controls but rather their ineffectiveness. This view was also superficial because no one could be sure that the inflation rate would have continued to decline without the controls Last year 's Report concluded that the controls had probably restrained inflation up to the end of The fact of the controls plus their initial success had reduced inflationary expectations held down total spending restrained the tendency to boost wages and prices and permitted output to rise more rapidly than it would otherwise have done. This interpretation seemed at least to accord with the facts of and The facts of are of course quite different. Price increases for raw commodities were extremely rapid. Farm prices rose at their fastest rate since and resulted in retail food price increases that accounted for percent of the rise in the CPI during Another percent of the rise in the index was accounted for by higher prices of energy purchased directly by consumers. The large rise in industrial materials prices also contributed to the rise in retail prices. As a result the rate of inflation did not diminish but increased ; it outstripped the rate of the earlier period of controls as well as the rate of earlier periods without controls. But again one should ask what would have happened without controls in ? Would prices have risen even more than they actually did ? The answer will never be known with certainty. Still it is more difficult in than in to believe that controls have had a significant effect in reducing the rate of inflation. The reason is not simply that the inflation rate was more than twice as high in It is partly that the scenarios on which it is usually argued that a controls system might restrain inflation do not seem plausible for Two different theories of controls might be envisioned Equilibrium system. The controls might either so restrain demand or increase output as to bring demand and supply into balance at a lower price level than would otherwise have prevailed. On the demand side this might occur as a result of dampening inflationary expectations. On the supply side because they know that controls preclude paying higher wages and charging higher prices businesses may try to employ more workers and produce more than they would if wages and prices were uncontrolled and they could achieve larger profits by producing less. Workers may accept the controlled wage and be willing to work at it even though they would not have been willing to work at it if they had been free to bargain for more Disequilibrium system. This course would imply that programs of control create shortages because at controlled prices below market-clearing equilibrium prices buyers want more than producers are willing to supply The controls system was not designed to create or deal with a shortage situation. From the beginning of and indeed throughout most of about half the prices and wages in the economy were uncontrolled including farm prices import and export prices prices and wages in small business and wages below $ per hour ( below $ per hour after May ) If controls held down prices and created shortages in controlled sectors so that people could not spend money there abundant opportunities existed for spending money in the uncontrolled sectors where prices could rise. Moreover and this is most important many of the controlled sectors either processed or distributed products from the uncontrolled sectors. The controlled prices were margins over the uncontrolled prices. If the margins were held down enough to create a " shortage " which producers tried to fill their action would pull up the prices of the uncontrolled materials and raise the final price until there was no shortage. This appears to have happened in the food sector during the first half of and may have contributed to the price increases for imported crude nonfood commodities In any case the machinery of the system was not prepared to withstand acute shortages. That is there was no enforcement apparatus capable of resisting the price pressures that widespread shortages would have created Instead the policy tried to correct shortages either by expanding supply or in acute cases by allowing prices to rise There were of course some shortages ; but at the consumer level they were not very evident except temporarily with meat and at the end of the year with gasoline and fuel oil. They did not cast serious doubt on the proposition that consumer prices were high enough to clear the market ; in other words people who wanted to buy things at those prices could find them If the proposition is true then whether controls restrained the rate of inflation boils dowrn to whether it can be demonstrated that they either re- strained the rate of spending or increased the rate of production. There can be no doubt that the controls program restrained price increases in many cases. But the question of course is whether holding down these prices served to hold down prices on the average or only diverted the inflationary pressure from these particular prices to others. This question returns us to the effect controls may have had on total spending It is possible that when specific prices were held down as they clearly were consumers did not transfer their spending elsewhere but reduced their total spending. This might not show up as higher savings because the lower expenditures would also mean lower incomes to someone. It might show up in a lower ratio of spending and income to the money supply or even in a lower money supply if at a lower price level the Federal Reserve felt less need to permit monetary expansion. However as Chapter pointed out spending increased by an exceptionally large amount in In fact the increase was exceptional even when the current and preceding behavior of fiscal and monetary policy is taken into account. Last year was not one in which the rise of spending was inexplicably slow and the controls could have provided a plausible explanation for the slowness. On the contrary if the controls were holding down spending its high rate of increase would be very hard to explain. The route by which controls are sometimes thought to hold down spending is through inflationary expectations. If controls make people confident that inflation will be moderate they are less inclined to spend their money. To some extent this happened in But before long in people 's confidence that the controls would assure price stability fell to a low point. Polls give much evidence of this sentiment as well as of the spreading expectation of more inflation The supply side of the equation is more uncertain. Controls that held prices down may also have induced businesses to produce and sell more since they did not have the alternative of profiting by raising prices. However the increase of output during was about the same as the average annual increase in the past. Employment rose much more than the average ; and output per worker productivity rose much less than the average. It is improbable that the controls system did anything to raise productivity. Its effect is more likely to have been in the other direction. The controls also held down U.S. prices relative to export prices which were uncontrolled and they encouraged export of some basic materials which if used for further production in the United States would have increased output. To an unknown extent this increment to exports was offset by additional imports particularly of industrial materials prices of which were not controlled So this leaves the question of whether output was increased because the controls program contributed to the rise of employment by holding down wage rates ; that is with the given increase in spending there would be as a result of controls more real demand for labor more employment more output and lower prices. But this chain depends on the first link namely that the controls held down wages. The controls program undoubtedly restrained wage increases in many cases construction wages being an exceptionally important and well-documented instance. But whether they did in fact hold down the overall wage level is hard to tell At the beginning of the Administration and a few others believed that the year would be one of only moderate wage increases compared to those of the recent past. This view was based on the fact that wages had gained substantially over the cost of living in and that wages in different industries seemed in good balance. When consumer prices began to rise rapidly early in the question arose whether this moderate expectation would be upset or whether the controls program would prevent such a development The wage picture is not clear because the measures of wage rates do not always agree and no single ideal measure exists. Wage increases in new union contracts were lower in than in ( Table ) When fringe benefits are included the contract increases were also lower than those of but not by so wide a margin ; fringe benefits rose faster than wages However the index of hourly earnings adjusted for overtime in manufacturing and for interindustry shifts rose a little more during than during ( Table ) This index reflects not only new wage decisions but also the effects of old decisions and their implementation. It also reflects the so-called wage drift as individual workers are reclassified but it does not reflect the relatively more rapid rise of fringe benefits TABLE First year wage rate changes in collective bargaining agreements covering workers or more Percent of workers affected Type of wage rate action i All industries All wage actions No wage jncrease. Increase in v ages. Manufacturing Under percent and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent.. and under percent. percent and over Not specified Mean adjustment ( percent ) Median adjustment ( percent ) Number of workers ( thousands ) * Percent of estimated average hourly earnings excluding overtime Preli -inary Less than percent Note. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The most comprehensive measure we have of what it costs an employer to purchase an hour of labor is the estimate of labor compensation per hour. This measure covers not only wages but also fringes including the employers ' share of social security contributions. Compensation per manhour of employees and the self-employed in the private nonfarm sector of the economy rose at a more rapid rate during than during percent in compared to percent in partly because of the big increase in social security contributions. This rise in compensation occurred while the rate of productivity increase was declining so that unit labor costs accelerated considerably from an increase of percent during to an increase of percent during Prices of course also rose more rapidly in than in Nevertheless whereas unit labor costs in the private nonfarm economy rose about as much as nonfarm prices during they rose more than nonfarm prices during This suggests but only suggests that labor compensation was not being held down to an unusual degree if one considers the factors which affect employers ' desire to hire labor that is the productivity of labor and the price of the product Analysis of the probable behavior of wages in relation to a longer list of variables including the condition of the labor markets also makes it seem probable that wages rose as much as might have been expected without controls. If so one might also conclude that the controls over wages did not raise employment and output and so restrain inflation in the demand conditions of Despite the uncertainty about whether controls had affected inflation in no uncertainty exists about another and possibly more relevant proposition. The controls did not prevent a rate of inflation which was large compared to our past history to the previous year to our expectations for and to the goals of the program. This fact need not be interpreted as a criticism of the way the program was designed and managed or as implying a lack of cooperation by labor or business. It simply means that the situation the program ran into was more than it could successfully contend with Effectiveness During Phase III The shift from Phase II to Phase III coincided closely with the acceleration of inflation from its moderate pace. Phase III was perceived bymany largely because of the fact that it was self-administered as a signal that controls had come to an end. This is reflected in survey findings that the sharp rise in consumer spending early in was partly due to expectations that price increases would accelerate. One would naturally like very much to know whether or not this shift released an inflation which had been kept in check by Phase II and which could have remained in check if Phase II had been continued. Table throws light on this question. It classifies the items in the consumer price index into three categories : ( ) Items exempt from control in Phases II and I I I ; ( ) items subject to similar regulations in both phases ; and ( ) items for which the administration of Phase II rules was substantially relaxed in the transition to Phase III The increase of the inflation rate between Phases II and III was a little TABLE Behavior of items in consumer price index during Phases II and HI classified by type of control applicable Relative importance December ( percent of all items ) Percent change annual rates1 Percent contribution to change Phase W Phase III Nov. Jan. to to Jan. June Phase II Phase III Nov. Jan.1973 to to Jan. June Item and control status A. Items exempt from Phases II and III B. Items subject to similar regulations in Phases II and I I I : Food Public utilities a Medical care services Mortgage interest rates C. Items for which Phase II controls abolished or made self-administered : * Residential rents Nonfood commodities Services All items Total A B Total C Addendum : C excluding gasoline motor and fuel oil and coal Seasonally adjusted where possible. Major exceptions are property taxes services and residential rents Major items are houses used cars and State and local taxes and user charges Though the Phase II requirement for certification was dropped in Phase I I I the basic regulations continued in force * Excludes components included in A and B above and does not take into account the small business exemption Note. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers greater for the first two categories for which the rules did not change than for the third category for which the rules were relaxed. Consequently the first two categories contributed a little more to the inflation of Phase III than they did to the inflation of Phase II. Thus little evidence can be found that consumer prices rose exceptionally fast in the areas in which the administration of controls was relaxed in Phase III This is also largely the case even with respect to the rapid increases in the WPI. Agricultural prices were not controlled under Phase II so the shift to Phase III presumably had no effect on them. Much of the increase in prices of raw industrial commodities occurred in industries which had profit margins below their permitted ceilings and in some important instances those whose product prices at the beginning of were below Phase II ceilings. There was considerable room for profit margin expansion in industries like steel primary nonferrous metals and petroleum. Only a tightening of Phase II rules could have eliminated this gap ; but given worldwide demand and the devaluation of the dollar such tightening might only have led to a further expansion of exports * * * * * * * During in all phases of the controls there was a marked shift of relative prices. Prices of raw agricultural products and of industrial materials rose very much more than prices of finished goods and services Undoubtedly this shift would have happened in without a controls program. The worldwide lag in agricultural production for which demand is quite price inelastic would have caused a relative rise of agricultural prices Industrial raw materials prices generally rise relative to the prices of finished goods in a boom and in the boom affecting the world as a whole was exceptionally strong. Raw agricultural products were exempt from control and some industrial raw materials were also exempt because they were imported. The controls particularly the profit margin limitation held down specific prices and may have compressed the prices representing the value added in processing and distribution thereby diverting demand to the uncontrolled commodities. ( Chart shows changes in the relationship between materials prices and those of finished goods at the wholesale and retail level. ) Extension of controls to these uncontrolled items would have meant more exports less farm output lower imports of industrial raw materials less total output and if not higher prices at least more shortages One of the most constructive aspects of the Economic Stabilization Program and one of the most valuable effects of the effort to control prices directly was that it led the Federal Government to redouble its efforts to find ways of increasing supplies in many areas ( Table ) As prices skyrocketed in many sectors chiefly food but also lumber and other basic materials and it became apparent that price controls would be ineffective if not harmful attention turned to dealing with the real problem which was inadequacy of supply. In many cases it was discovered that the Federal Government was itself partly responsible for the limitation of supply The leading example is agriculture. The President concerned with short supplies and rising prices has brought about a dramatic change in agricultural policy during the past years. The results have been striking : the elimination of many restrictions on agricultural production in the United States ; a greater willingness to receive agricultural imports ; removal of the subsidies to agricultural exports ; and reductions of Government-owned stockpiles of farm products. These changes more than anything that was done or could be done with direct price controls are the Government 's effective contribution to more stable food prices. Less spectacular but still important steps were taken to increase lumber production from the national forests and to sell excess Government stockpiles of industrial raw materials In any appraisal of the part the controls program played in checking inflation up to the end of or subsequently one of the most obvious benefits must be the mobilized effort to increase supply and remove Government-imposed impediments to supply FAIRNESS OF CONTROLS A major challenge in the development and administration of controls is the assurance of equity. Whenever the Government has as strong a hand in the distribution of real incomes as it does in a price-wage controls program many will complain of unfairness. It is rare for anyone to think that he has received his just deserts and this is especially true where Government Chart Changes in Related Wholesale and Consumer Prices PERCENT CHANGE DURING PERIOD V/X WPI CRUDE AND INTERMEDIATE MATERIALS EXCLUDING FOODS | WPI CONSUMER FINISHED GOODS EXCLUDING FOODS CPI NONFOOD COMMODITIES TO AVERAGE WPI FARM PRODUCTS WPI CONSUMER FINISHED FOODS CPI FOOD TO AVERAGE * R I S E EXAGGERATED BY INCREASE IN REFINED PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICES WHICH ARE BASED ON SPOT MARKET QUOTATIONS NOT REPRESENTATIVE OF TOTAL MARKET IN SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS is concerned. Some may very well have been adversely affected by controls just as others may suffer from the implementation of various other policies There is no strong objective evidence however that the controls operated in a biased manner in As should be clear from the preceding discussion the effect of the controls on relative incomes or relative prices is hard to define. We know what happened during the year but not how much of it was due to the controls Several developments in the distribution of income are relevant to the issue of fairness in the economy 's performance during Since controls first went into effect the share of national income produced in the private sector and going to workers employed there has declined slightly edging down from percent in the second quarter of to percent in the third quarter of Almost all of this decrease occurred during and was offset by a rise in the profit share of national income and the income of farm proprietors The implication of the relatively unchanged labor share during is that if workers bought a bundle of goods and services consisting only of those they produced excluding imports of course and weighted in the same proportion as this output they would have continued to command the same share of national output as they had done previously. And since output grew during the year even on a per man-hour basis an unchanged labor share means that workers before tax changes in received more goods per hour of work The most dramatic event in the distribution of income in was the extraordinary rise of farm income. In the year ending in the third quarter of the income of farm proprietors increased by percent whereas the total national income rose by percent. Net income per farm rose percent percent in constant dollars. The large rise placed farm proprietors in a favorable position despite controls imposed on meat prices on March Cash receipts from livestock products rose to record highs but rises in production costs offset a major part of the increase. Nevertheless the higher receipts from farm marketings led to record incomes and an improved relative position for farm families EFFECT OF CONTROLS ON COMPONENTS OF OUTPUT Throughout considerable attention was drawn to shortages of goods particularly in the manufacturing sector of the economy. Purchasing agents ' reports that they could not obtain materials became widespread. High demand throughout the economy was the reason most frequently cited for such shortages. In some cases shortages also arose from a diversion of domestically produced supply to export markets particularly for such materials as chemicals metals and lumber. Many shortages of fertilizers and petrochemicals for example were traceable to the limited supply of crude oil and natural gas. A complex set of factors can be blamed for this situation ; the controls program intensified the problem but was not the only cause Except for meat and petroleum products shortages of industrial materials did not carry over noticeably to consumer markets. One reason is that firms were able to substitute to some extent more plentiful materials for scarce ones in the production process especially in finished durable goods and in the use of packaging materials. Inventories also helped to offset shortages of materials ; inventories of some products would probably have been higher if materials supplies had been greater Flexibility in the administration of the controls program enabling administrators to exempt some markets decontrol others and allow exceptions to the general rules regarding price increases helped prevent shortages from becoming more pervasive and acute. Attention was also given to cases in which controls without limiting current output might discourage the investment needed to supply future output. The need to stimulate investment was for example an important consideration in decontrolling the cement industry and allowing a price increase by the paper industry Despite constant reminders by the Administration that it regarded controls as temporary there was always the danger that the program might result in significant deferral or cancellation of investment plans. Probably the controls introduced an element of uncertainty that affected long-run planning. But the CLC did move to decontrol in important instances where it was shown that controls threatened to limit investment. And many investment plans with long lead times were undoubtedly undertaken on the likelihood that controls would be abolished by the time the new capacity came on stream In the agricultural sector the ceilings on meat prices contributed to subsequent reductions in livestock production. That the controls program to some extent limited the quantity of output and the investment required to produce future output is not surprising. Even the anticipation of a controls program can have this effect if producers raise prices establish new marketing channels or divert investment from the United States to other countries SUMMARY We repeat what was said at the outset : the effect of the controls program on the rate of inflation in can not be known with certainty either today or ever Controls could have worked in many ways and economists ' knowledge of the quantitative relationships determining prices is not so precise as to rule out the possibility that inflation might have been even greater in without controls. We think it would not have been much greater however since with the controls the rate of spending was high relative to the money supply and output was low relative to the labor supply Still no one can disprove the thesis that the controls had a significant effect although makes it a hard thesis to believe. Doubts of this kind should come as no surprise. There is much prior evidence that price and wage controls of the kind tolerated during peacetime in free societies can not significantly restrain inflation under the supply and demand conditions experienced in The effectiveness of controls obviously can not be judged by alone The operation of the controls during and bringing about a good balance in the structure of wages may have helped to avoid a repetition in of the kind of wage spiral the country was experiencing before August On the other hand if controls did hold down prices during the possibility remains that these prices will catch up in or later O CHAPTER Energy and Agriculture F OR THE BASIC RESOURCE INDUSTRIES was an unusually eventful year. Prices in all major categories of these industries agriculture energy timber and minerals and metals rose sharply even in relation to the rising average level of prices. In some cases additional supplies could not be obtained even at the higher prices. These conditions reflected a worldwide state of affairs The growing scarcity of resources in was a significant departure from the long-term trend. Since World War II prices of basic resources have increased much less than prices generally. Wholesale prices of crude materials for instance increased only percent from to compared to a percent increase in wholesale prices of finished goods. During the same period the consumer price index rose percent and the GNP deflator for the private economy percent. Prices of basic resources thus declined by a considerable amount relative to prices in the entire economy throughout most of the postwar period This downward trend of relative prices began to be reversed in and in it changed significantly. Some have interpreted this reversal as an early indication that along with the rest of the world we are entering a new era of increased scarcity of basic resources during which prices for these materials will rise faster than prices for other products. Others have attributed the reversal to the coincidence of essentially temporary factors Neither generalization can be conclusively supported at this time With the exception of energy basic resource demands and prices tend to exhibit strong fluctuations. The demand for timber rises when housing construction accelerates and housing construction is highly cyclical. The demand for minerals and metals is tied closely to the cycle of economic activity and the agricultural sector is influenced heavily by weather conditions and its own production cycles. Thus the unusual price pressures on basic resources in are to a significant extent explained by an exceptional combination of economic fluctuations that impinged upon all basic resource industries in the context of high total demand and output The reduction in oil exports by several Arab nations focused attention upon a severe shortage of energy resources. But in recent years the market demand for energy has been growing faster than our capacity to produce it at the existing price. While the oil cutbacks created obvious new shortterm problems for the economy they also precipitated what was emerging as a serious long-run problem It would be naive to assume that so fundamental a question as whether or not we are entering a new era of scarcity for basic resources can be answered adequately on the basis of the limited information now available The question is nevertheless important for the following reasons Basic resource industries utilize many minerals and metals that ultimately will be exhausted. Because the opportunities to correct faulty public policy and private decisions affecting exhaustible resources are also limited a high value to society accrues from accurate information on future demands and supplies Public policy has played a particularly important role in the evolution of basic resource industries. Specific policies in varying degrees inhibited the capacity for adaptability that is inherent in the operation of the market system. During periods of sudden and substantial change in world patterns of production and demand these industries may therefore experience particularly difficult problems of adjustment Most basic resource industries involve commodities that are traded very extensively in international markets. The volatility of these markets the commonly strong cyclical nature of the domestic industry and the rapidly expanding consumption in foreign countries can combine in such a way as to create significant political and economic tensions between nations. As international markets expand and nations become more economically interdependent such tensions could become more serious The production processes in many basic resource industries interact with the environment in an important and complex way that has in the past resulted in abuse of the environment. Public policy to protect the environment in turn interacts with and in an ultimate sense may well determine the appropriate public policy toward basic resource industries The following sections of this chapter seek to separate the enduring from the transitory factors that shape the Nation 's energy and agricultural industries. This is a risky business. In the past the initial stages of new trends have often been dismissed by wise men as unusual even unique events ; and many an authoritative forecast of an imminent new trend has proved to be based upon random episodes ENERGY Energy prices have been generally lower in the United States than in other developed countries. Abundant supplies of coal petroleum and natu- ral gas have contributed to the low market prices of these fuels. This situation coupled with relatively plentiful capital and advanced technology permitted rapid growth in conversion of fossil fuels to electric power. In addition a generous depletion allowance and low excise tax rates have helped keep down consumer prices of energy Low prices and a high rate of economic growth have encouraged domestic consumption of energy to expand. From to U.S. gross consumption of energy increased at an annual rate of percent ( Table ) In the United States consumed about one-third of the world 's production of energy. Tables and show the distribution of U.S energy use by sector and by source. Americans have often been accused of wasting energy but the low prices prevailing until provided little reason to economize in its use. Because the price of labor was rising relative to the prices of capital and energy it paid both in industry and in the home to substitute capital and energy for labor TABLE Gross consumption of energy in natural units selected years Total ( quadrillions of Btu 's ) Year Natural gas ( trillions of cubic feet ) Petroleum * ( millions of barrels per day ) Coal ( millions of tons ) Hydropower ( billions of kilowatthours ) Nuclear power ( billions of kilowatthours ) Includes petroleum products refined and processed from crude oil including still gas liquefied refining gas and natural gas liquids Includes anthracite bituminous and lignite coals Preliminary Note. Data relate to annual totals unless indicated otherwise Source : Department of the Interior Bureau of Mines TABLE Consumption of energy by user sector and source [ Quadrillions of Btu 's ] Consumption of energy1 Source Total Industrial Transportation Household and commercial Total consumption. Petroleums Natural gas CoaM Electric power. Preliminary Includes petroleum products refined and processed from crude oil including still gas liquefied refining gas and natural gas liquids Includes anthracite bituminous and lignite coals Less than quadrillions Note. While in quadrillion Btu 's were used for generating electricity the electricity so generated represented only quadrillion Btu 's. This accounts for the difference between quadrillion Btu 's of gross energy consumption in Table and quadrillion Btu 's of consumption by user sector Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of the Interior Bureau of Mines TABLE Use of energy inputs for electric power [ Quadrillions of Btu 's ] Total uses i Energy input Total uses Petroleum Natural gas Coal Hydropower Nuclear power i Preliminary Source : Department of the Interior Bureau of Mines Wholesale energy prices in the United States were quite stable relative to other wholesale prices during the 's. But toward the close of the decade the price of coal began to move upward and in petroleum prices increased sharply ( Table ) Consumer prices of energy actually were declining from to relative to other consumer prices. For instance the relative price of gasoline and motor oil fell percent between and but began to increase steeply near the end of ( Chart ) Chart Consumer Prices of Gasoline and Motor Oil = ANNUALLY MONTHLY / r i GASOLINE AND MOTOR OIL PRICES RELATIVE TO V ALL CONSUMER PRICES ( CPI ) ^ ^ ^ " ^ " / s " ' \ N GASOLINE A N D MOTOR A/ ^ ^ * OIL PRICES ( CPI ) I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I I I TABLE * Wholesale prices all industrial commodities and selectedfuels selected periods [ = ] Periods Coal Crude petroleum Gas fuels Electric power ) ) All industrial commodities _ December : * Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics During the United States also experienced threats of shortages of petroleum and natural gas and in some areas of the country electric power brownouts and blackouts. Shortages of petroleum intensified late in the year following an October decision by several Arab nations to cut back crude oil production and to curtail shipments to the United States. By the end of our once abundant and secure energy supplies seemed to be seriously threatened ; and what appeared earlier in the year as a problem turned into a crisis. To conserve scarce petroleum a variety of restrictions previously unknown to peacetime America had to be adopted. They focused attention on the dependence of the economy on energy the importance that oil imports have assumed and the vulnerability of the economy to arbitrary acts by foreign states The energy crisis has its roots in events dating back a decade or more To understand the present situation it is necessary to examine the factors that have influenced energy supply and use in the United States Natural Gas Since the Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) has regulated the wellhead price of all natural gas sold to interstate pipeline companies. The FPC maintained prices at approximately the same level throughout the 's. In response to increased exploration costs and constant prices producers cut back on exploration so that the ratio of reserves to annual production declined rapidly from over in to in At the same time the use of natural gas was expanding rapidly. With a growing gap between production and desired consumption producers called for deregulation to permit higher prices and to stimulate exploration Beginning in the regulated price was permitted to rise. The natural gas shortage continued to intensify however as demand received an additional stimulus from environmental limitations imposed on the use of highsulfur coal and high-sulfur oil. The FPC estimated that in the shortage reached to percent of demand at the prevailing price. To restrict con- sumption to available supplies the industry has been forced to curtail deliveries under both firm and interruptible contracts. In addition many gas distributors have been unable to add new customers. Recently arrangements were made to import liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) at a price several times the domestic price for natural gas. Because the gas price has been maintained below the market-clearing level a heavier burden has been placed on other fuels mainly oil Petroleum In the Mandatory Oil Import Program was adopted to limit dependence upon foreign sources of supply. This program was partly a response to the curtailment of Middle East oil exports during the Suez Crisis of Under the program quotas were imposed on imports of oil especially crude oil. These quotas increased the profitability of domestic production and led to additional drilling. The major oil-producing States had earlier established a maximum efficient rate of recovery ( MER ) for oil fields and had limited production to some percentage of MER. This prorationing together with import quotas served to support the domestic price above the price of imports. In addition prorationing resulted in excess capacity in crude oil production in the form of production below MER After the only major new discoveries of petroleum in the United States were on the North Slope of Alaska and on the Outer Continental Shelf. In the " lower " States the ratio of proved reserves of crude oil to annual production declined throughout the 's. Excess crude oil production capacity also declined as allowable rates of recovery were raised by the State regulatory agencies. This permitted output to increase rapidly during the 's. But after the increases in production failed to keep pace with the growing domestic demand. As an alternative to raising the supported price which would have stimulated domestic production and restrained demand exceptions were made to the existing quotas to permit a greater level of petroleum imports. Finally in April the system of import quotas was abandoned altogether in favor of a flexible import fee. This fee is currently set at a low level to encourage importation Beginning in the late 's the expansion of domestic refinery capacity failed to keep up with the growing demand for oil products. Frequent exceptions to oil import quotas and the continuing review of the Mandatory Oil Import Program gave rise to uncertainties about whether future policy would encourage importation of crude oil or of refined products. In the face of this uncertainty few new domestic refineries were built. In some cases domestic refinery construction may also have been discouraged by the difficulty of finding a site that would not arouse community objections for environmental and other reasons. In addition the income tax credit to companies for income taxes paid to foreign governments may have increased the incentive to build refineries outside the United States The use of petroleum products in the United States increased by percent from to Much of this increase occurred in the transporta- tion sector which in accounted for percent of the Nation 's total petroleum use. A low excise tax has made the retail price of gasoline lower in the United States than in most other developed countries. The low gasoline price and a rapid growth in incomes have contributed to large increases in the number of motor vehicles on the road and in the total mileage driven and thus to the rapidly growing demand for gasoline. Gasoline consumption has also been increased by the trend toward heavier automobiles with air conditioners and automatic transmissions and by the use of emissions control devices. This expansion in demand for petroleum products was underestimated as was the need for additional refinery capacity to meet that demand with the result that the United States became heavily dependent on imports of refined products Imports of crude oil and refined products rose from percent of domestic consumption in to percent in prior to the embargo. For the first months of the U.S. share of total world oil imports amounted to percent. This increased U.S. dependence on imports coincided with and probably contributed to a general tightening of the world petroleum market In the mid-1960 's the governments of the oil-exporting countries gradually began to assume a greater measure of control over crude oil production and pricing decisions. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) which was formed in began to function effectively as a cartel in the 's. Excess capacity in crude oil production had begun to disappear in the United States Canada and Venezuela thereby strengthening the market power of the Middle Eastern nations. This market power was further increased by the rapid growth in demand for petroleum. For example from to oil consumption grew at an annual rate of percent in Western Europe and percent in Japan. When it became apparent that the United States would also have to expand its oil imports the exporting countries working through OPEC were in a strong position to raise prices and thus to realize monopoly profits Coal Although coal is our most plentiful energy resource its use in the United States has not expanded since Enactment of the Coal Mine Health and Safety Act in together with a host of labor problems caused a large rise in the cost of underground mining and a decline in output. The reduction in output together with increased transportation rates led to the rise in the price of coal referred to earlier. The higher price coupled with the development of improved equipment spurred an expansion in surface mining. But the price rise encouraged many industries and utilities to switch to other fuels. Environmental regulations imposed at both the Federal and State levels prevented the use of high-sulfur coal in some areas and accelerated the substitution of other fuels. Because of the unavailability of natural gas most of the burden has fallen on oil Electric Power Until recently it was widely expected that nuclear power would be a major factor in meeting the increased demand for electricity in the early 's but construction of nuclear reactors has fallen far behind schedule Technical problems in their design and construction have been partly to blame but there have also been unexpected delays associated with the siting of new power plants. To some extent both the construction delays and the siting delays are attributable to time-consuming litigation resulting from increased public concern about nuclear hazards and thermal pollution of water by these reactors Meanwhile the demand for electricity has continued to grow rapidly. So far the increased demand has been met largely by the use of fossil-fuel power plants but in some regions the new construction of these plants has been insufficient to meet demand at existing prices. To some extent this situation may have come about because the delays in the construction and use of nuclear reactors were largely unforeseen. There is also evidence that some electric utilities underestimated the rate at which demand would rise ; the rapid growth in the number of electrical appliances was not fully anticipated. At present however an even more serious problem for the electric utilities than the shortage of power plants is the shortage of natural gas and residual fuel oil together with environmental restrictions on the use of coal THE ENERGY CRISIS The energy crisis originated in a large number of circumstances none of which was sufficient in itself to disrupt the economy seriously. Their convergence in however touched off a dramatic change in the domestic energy supply-demand balance During most of the 's the United States retained the capability to become rapidly self-sufficient in energy production but this capability quickly disappeared in the last part of the decade. The natural gas price was kept below the market-clearing price thereby creating a shortage and leading to an increased demand for oil. The demand for oil was further increased by environmental restrictions on the use of high-sulfur coal as well as by delays in the construction of nuclear reactors. Domestic refinery capacity was unable to meet the rapid expansion in demand for petroleum products Although the domestic price of crude oil was supported above the price of imports the price was not sufficiently high to discourage a rapid growth in demand or to encourage an adequate expansion in domestic production Preventing a rapidly growing dependence on oil imports would have required maintaining a higher domestic price. Because the enormous oil reserves in the Persian Gulf area were expected to be available to us at a very low price a decision wras made to permit exceptions to the limitations on imports of petroleum products rather than allowing further increases in the domestic crude oil price. Partly because of this increased reliance by the United States on oil imports OPEC could more confidently reduce crude oil output and raise the price Near the close of the Federal Energy Office projected that the reduction of oil imports into the United States during the first quarter of would result in a deficit of million barrels per day or percent of total U.S. petroleum consumption. The deficit was projected to increase to percent by the fourth quarter if the import curtailment continued. This projection does not adjust for the effects of higher prices on domestic demand and production. In addition the projection assumes that there will be no leakage in the embargo and no increases in oil imports from countries not participating in the embargo. For these reasons the projected deficit overstates the amount by which petroleum use must be reduced through nonprice conservation measures RECOVERY FROM THE CRISIS The disruption generated by the unexpected reduction of oil imports has both a supply and a demand aspect. On the supply side the country has abundant energy resources for the long run although at costs that are substantially above past levels. But in the short run there are constraints on the rate at which exploitation of these resources can be accelerated. Some increased oil and natural gas production can be obtained from existing fields but large increases require development of new fields. There is a long gestation period for new investment in most energy-producing industries. New oil and gas fields do not begin to produce for at least a year and are not fully developed for several years. Pipelines refineries and nuclear reactors all take time to build. As a result the economy has less flexibility to expand energy production in the short run than over a longer period There is a comparable short-run inflexibility on the demand side. Most energy is used as a production input in conjunction with some item of capital equipment : for example in a furnace to produce heat and in an automobile to produce passenger miles. To a large extent equipment design determines the energy requirements per unit of output. In some cases there is scope for reducing energy use per unit of output but usually only to a limited extent. By increasing load factors in airline flights for instance the same number of passenger miles can be obtained with less jet fuel although the inconvenience may be greater. In other cases as in the use of clothes dryers or air conditioners the energy-output ratio can not be changed The Nation 's capital stock was built during a period when energy prices were low and were expected to remain so. In view of the prices that are likely during the next few years much of the capital stock is inappropriately designed. To obtain a major reduction in energy use without a decrease in output we must replace the stock of capital with machines and equipment that use energy more efficiently A distinction should be made however between industrial output and household output. The latter refers to the services provided by the use of consumer durables. There is considerable scope for conserving energy by reducing household output : for example lowering thermostat settings and driving fewer miles. Unlike reductions in industrial output these measures generate little unemployment and for this reason they play an important role in the Administration 's energy conservation program. During cutting back on energy used in the household will be the best available means of conserving energy without paying a high price in increased unemployment or reduced incomes Pricing Policy Because of these inflexibilities with respect to energy production and use market equilibration of demand and domestic supply in the short run would require very large price increases at least for a year or two. Even though price increases would gradually stimulate additional production at higher cost profits would also increase especially before the additional production is forthcoming and this raises problems of equity If price increases are not allowed however there will be insufficient incentives for consumers to reduce demand and for producers to expand reserves and output. Substantial excess demand would then result requiring an extensive system of controls allocations and rationing. Because of serious data limitations it is impossible to design these measures so as to ensure that resources are efficiently used. Heavy reliance on such measures is likely to lead to an inefficient use not simply of energy resources but of all resources and thus might delay our recovery from the crisis. One has reason therefore to question the efficacy of such controls for more than a very brief period In addition holding prices down is likely to create expectations that prices will rise in the future thus further discouraging increases in production and sales. Because fossil fuels are exhaustible resources sales made today are at the expense of earnings in the future. If the rate of appreciation of the value of a resource is expected to exceed the rate of return on alternative investments there is little incentive to sell. A greater return could be earned by holding back production and building up inventories than by immediate sale It has been argued that the domestic output of natural gas has been held down during the past few years partly because of expectations that large price increases would be permitted These considerations argue for letting energy prices rise so that markets will clear and for initiating a tax to limit windfall profits. In this way the price system is permitted to play an important role in guiding production decisions and encouraging consumers to conserve energy With respect to the price of domestically produced crude oil a distinction has been made between " old oil " and " new oil " the latter referring to all oil produced on a property in excess of output in the same month of To stimulate increases in production the ceiling price has been removed from new oil production. The ceiling price on old oil was raised to $ per barrel late in to reduce the widening gap between prices of old oil and prices of imported and new crude. As required by the TransAlaska Pipeline Authorization Act there is no price ceiling on oil produced from stripper wells that is those producing less than barrels per day To limit windfall profits the President recommended that Congress enact an Emergency Windfall Profits Tax. The proposed measure taxes increases in crude oil prices at rates graduated up to percent on all sales of domestic crude oil at prices higher than base prices determined by reference to the December ceiling set by the Cost of Living Council ; the same price would apply in the case of uncontrolled oil. The tax which would be phased out over years is designed to eliminate significant windfall profits resulting from short-term increases in crude oil prices but to give producers enough incentive to invest in the expansion of crude oil output in the future Sound natural gas policy calls for more competitive pricing. The Administration has asked Congress to pass legislation deregulating prices on new interstate natural gas contracts. The Administration 's proposal would permit the price to rise in stages toward the long-run market-clearing level Prompt steps in this direction are desirable as a means of avoiding the natural gas shortages that have recently occurred. Deregulating the interstate price will increase reserves and production and will permit users who depend on interstate pipelines for supplies to compete with intrastate users Many electric utilities and industries now buy intrastate gas at a price above the regulated interstate rate. When the interstate price rises more gas will flow in interstate commerce where in many cases it will substitute for oil Natural gas would thus be available where the need is most critical. Deregulation will also result in a greater output of natural gas liquids a prime feedstock used by the petrochemical industry Prospects for Increasing Domestic Production Production of petroleum and of associated natural gas can be increased within a year by expanding output from existing oil fields. Part of this increase will result from the use of secondary and tertiary recovery methods An additional increase can come from maintaining the production of stripper wells that would otherwise be abandoned. Some stripper wells can be reworked to yield a greater rate of flow In most wells in the United States were producing at percent of the MER. In most States the law does not permit production in excess of the MER which is in principle the maximum rate at which oil can be extracted without seriously reducing the total amount of the resource that can ultimately be recovered from the field. But the MER is an imprecise figure. In many instances total output would be reduced by only a small amount if production went beyond the MER for or years Moreover the MER should reflect economic as well as technological factors. The economically efficient rate of production is a function of market prices both present and future. An increase in the value of oil today relative to the expected future value should lead to a more rapid rate of recovery today. In some cases therefore it would be in the national interest to adjust the MER 's upward Progressively larger increases in the production of petroleum and associated natural gas can be expected after Increases in the price paid for the so-called new oil will stimulate exploration mainly offshore and an expansion in production. It is likely that offshore production of crude oil will begin to rise by The Prudhoe Bay fields in Alaska are expected to begin producing by or and to yield up to million barrels of oil per day by to be delivered via the new trans-Alaska pipeline which received final congressional authorization in December It is expected that another pipeline will be completed by to ship associated natural gas from the Prudhoe Bay fields to the " lower " States. In addition major new refinery construction and expansion plans have been announced In natural gas exploration increased sharply in response to increases in the wellhead price and a stepped-up rate of offshore leasing. The annual total of gas well completions in that year surpassed by to percent the all-time high reached in This high level of drilling is expected to be maintained in and will lead to a build-up of reserves. Production is likely to begin to rise in and to increase more rapidly in the following years particularly if higher prices are permitted Energy Conservation Higher producer prices for oil and natural gas will not only stimulate additional production but also dampen energy use and lead to a shift to coal in the industrial commercial and electric power sectors. An acceleration of the rate of construction of nuclear reactors and coal-fired power plants might lead to some substitution of electric power for oil and gas in the residential and commercial sectors Because the real prices of all fuels and electric power will be higher than in the past there will be a substitution of other productive inputs for energy inputs both in industry and in the household. Americans can be expected to drive cars that are smaller and have more efficient engines ; to improve the insulation in their homes ; and to pay greater attention to the energy requirements of appliances when making a purchase. In some parts of the country it will become economic to install solar space-conditioning systems that substitute energy from the sun for more conventional kinds There will also be shifts in the composition of output away from energyintensive goods and services toward those that use less energy These effects will restore the balance between domestic demand and production. The system of controls and allocations that was instituted at the close of to deal with the crisis will become increasingly less important and it will be possible and desirable for energy resources to be allocated principally by the market system LONG-TERM PROSPECTS The price of imported oil is now probably far above the long-run cost of supplying the entire U.S. market from domestic production. Because of OPEG 's monopoly power it is possible that the world price will remain above the long-run domestic cost for some time. The probability of this occurrence would be significantly increased if the United States were to continue to depend heavily on imports. Even if the world price were to decline moreover there would be a risk of a subsequent sudden sharp price rise or a cutoff of supply These prospects argue for an accelerated development of domestic energy resources. The United States has sufficient energy resources to last for centuries even if demand continues to grow as rapidly as in the past. The Nation has untapped oil and natural gas resources on the Outer Continental Shelf Synthetic hydrocarbon liquids and gas can be obtained from our vast shale and coal resources. Nuclear power may still play the role once expected of it and the development of the breeder reactor will greatly expand the power that can be ultimately obtained from domestic uranium resources. New technologies that are being developed may eventually permit an economic use of geothermal solar and fusion power However large capital investments are required to expand domestic energy production. The private sector will be willing to undertake this investment only if there is a reasonable assurance that the price will remain sufficiently high to provide an adequate rate of return. As long as domestic producers face the possibility of a significant decline in their price the domestic investment required to expand production will be held back The risk to the domestic energy industry comes from the very low cost of producing oil in many OPEC countries. Although OPEC is now able to charge a price that is many times the cost of production there is always the chance that OPEC countries will lower their prices substantially. Such a price reduction might result from a deliberate decision by producing countries to undercut U.S. energy producers or from a breakdown of the cartel A decision regarding energy self-sufficiency in petroleum production is complicated by the important effect that U.S. policy may have on the price of oil imports. A U.S. policy oriented toward one price level is likely to help bring about a different price level and thus make the policy appear costly A growing dependence on imports however involves a potentially higher cost than would result from expanded domestic production and also poses a threat to our national security Project Independence In response to these considerations in November the President inaugurated Project Independence designed to ensure an expansion in domestic energy production so that the Nation would no longer be subject to economic disruption or the threat of such disruption from a sudden curtail- ment of vital energy supplies. This program include large proposed expenditures for research and development which are d ' ,cribed below The choice of policies to bring about the capability for self-sufficiency in energy production should depend primarily on economic criteria. Because domestic energy investment is now inhibited by the risk that the oil-exporting countries will disrupt the market for political or economic reasons the policy should be oriented toward reducing that risk. It is important however to ensure that the incentives for efficient domestic production will continue and that any reductions in costs are passed on to consumers. In addition policy should be designed to permit prices of different sources of energy to reflect differences in quality ( or desirability ) so that resources will be used efficiently. This means that while the Nation needs to be protected from dependence on unreliable supplies domestic producers should not be isolated from the normal business risks arising from domestic competition. Policy should not protect against the risk of a decline in the price because of technical advances by other domestic producers ; to reduce this risk would encourage inefficient production. There should be adequate incentives for development of new products for innovation in production methods and in general for measures that reduce the social cost of producing energy One way to achieve the capability for energy self-sufficiency is to provide selective incentives for the introduction of designated new sources of energy such as shale oil or synthetic gas from coal. For example the Government could agree to purchase a specified amount of shale oil over a number of years at a guaranteed price. If the market price is above the support level there is no need for the Government to act ; but if the price falls below the support level the Government would make deficiency payments to producers. Such action would encourage the development and construction of the necessary shale oil production facilities while market forces would determine prices to producers of other types of energy and to energy users. This proposal results in lower profits to producers of conventional energy resources for which no price guarantee is made A drawback of the proposal is that different energy sources would have different prices thereby leading to an inefficient resource use. Moreover the Government would be required to determine which new sources of energy to support. There is also a likelihood that production from nonsupported energy sources would be discouraged and that the Government could be forced to support an ever-increasing part of the market. For these reasons many believe it would be preferable to rely on general market incentives rather than selective subsidization It is also important to recognize that the exercise of monopoly power by the oil-exporting countries has increased the real cost of energy to the United States. Although Project Independence will reduce energy prices below the prices currently charged for imports of petroleum and liquefied natural gas the cost of energy is unlikely to return to the pre-1973 levels. It is therefore important that the higher costs be reflected in the prices paid by consumers to ensure that they economize on energy use Another way to achieve the capability for self-sufficiency is to give domestic energy producers assurance that import prices would not fall below certain levels. Variable tariffs could be used to ensure that prices of imported oil and natural gas do not fall below such levels. This would ensure competition among domestic producers and would encourage development of the lowest-cost domestic sources of energy. The price of all energy sources would reflect their value to consumers and would therefore encourage efficient use An important factor in selecting an appropriate policy is the responsiveness of domestic supply to changes in price. Restricting energy imports may appear to be an attractive option if it is believed that the long-run domestic price will be say $ per barrel of crude oil. But if the cost is expected to be triple that amount import restrictions appear decidedly less attractive Role of Imports At least until the United States will continue to depend on oil imports to supplement domestic production. As domestic energy output expands it will be possible gradually to reduce this dependence. If imports can be obtained at a sufficiently low price however without posing a threat to our national security they can continue to play a role in our long-term energy policy The risks associated with petroleum imports could be substantially reduced by means of a storage program. Petroleum could be stored both in salt domes and in the form of oil fields with shut-in production capacity. In the event of an unexpected curtailment of oil imports the salt dome storage would be immediately available to offset the loss of foreign supplies ; and the shut-in capacity would be available within a few months to supply petroleum until it is possible to produce from new wells. On the basis of the level of imports and an assessment of the risk of an actual or threatened reduction in foreign supplies the Government could determine the appropriate amounts of storage and shut-in capacity Energy Research and Development The principal object of a Federal energy research and development program is to develop new technologies that permit the production and use of energy at a lower cost to society either by reducing the cost ( including the environmental cost ) of providing a given amount of energy or by reducing the quantity of energy needed to produce a given output of goods and services Until recently most energy research and development has been conducted by the private sector. There is now a need for the Government to play a more active role partly because of the long-term nature of many energy research and development projects and partly because of the fundamental nature of much of the research that is needed. There are other reasons. The payoff from such projects depends critically on future Government policies with respect to environmental control leasing of mineral rights and import restrictions. It may therefore be unusually risky for private investors to undertake this research. Many kinds of research and development concerning energy involve benefits to society as a whole that can not be fully captured by the investor so that it is unprofitable for any one firm to conduct the research. Finally the interdependence among projects provides a compelling case for the Government to provide an overview and to coordinate research and development in the energy field though not necessarily to conduct the research itself There is an additional potential benefit that might result from an energy research and development program. By making a coordinated effort to develop those technologies required to ensure self-sufficiency the United States will improve its bargaining power vis-a-vis the oil-exporting countries In this way a federally coordinated energy research and development program may play an important role in forcing the world price of oil down to the competitive level A major component of Project Independence is a stepped-up program of energy research and development. The Administration has recommended an expenditure of $ billion over a 5-year period beginning with fiscal This program is principally addressed to the accomplishment of six tasks : Improving the efficiency of energy use and of the conversion of fossil fuels to electric power Increasing the domestic production of petroleum and natural gas Expanding the use of coal Increasing the use of nuclear power Developing renewable energy sources Reducing the environmental effects associated with all stages of energy production and use The Administration 's research and development program represents an important step in moving the economy toward an established capability of being self-sufficient in energy production. However the program deals only with the technological aspect of energy production and use Energy production is limited not only by the state of current technology but also by economic incentives. The prospect of higher energy prices will accelerate the development and application of technological advances by the private sector. If the private sector is given a larger role in Project Independence expenditures on research and development will be more closely geared to those techniques likely to become commercially applicable thus further assuring the success of the program ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY The Nation 's urgent need for adequate and dependable supplies of energy has raised concerns about how efforts to fill the need will affect the goal of O improving the environment. The fundamental premise of economic policy is that the Nation 's total resources must be allocated as efficiently as possible This concept includes careful allocation of our scarce environmental resources but it does not follow that environmental policy should be insulated from other problems and policies In enacting laws to protect environmental quality Congress was responding to the strong public demand that environmental resources clean air water and land should be enjoyed as amenities rather than used as receptacles to absorb residual wastes of production and consumption. The new legislation set environmental standards that would be costly to achieve but it did so with the presumption that the goals were worth the costs. However the standards also assumed certain basic cost relationships among the additional resources devoted to meeting the standards ; the energy crisis has disrupted these relationships by sharply raising the cost of fuels As the price of energy increases environmental policy provisions that call for significant consumption of energy become more expensive and energyconserving provisions become cheaper. If policy adjustments are not made unnecessary amounts of society 's scarce energy resources will be used to attain any given level of environmental quality. Adjustments to avoid such waste do not represent a change in the relative importance that either the Government or the public places upon environmental quality. Instead they are similar to the reduction in consumption that occurs if the price of any commodity increases significantly while other nonprice influences on the consumption of that commodity remain unchanged. The appropriate shortterm adjustments indicated in environmental policy because of energy price increases have two requirements : First they must accurately reflect the increased scarcity of energy expected in the near future ; second they must not interfere unnecessarily with appropriate adjustments to the somewhat less intense scarcity of energy likely to prevail in the more distant future Thus provisions of environmental policy that save energy become cheaper and as a result comprehensive efficiency criteria indicate a greater use of them. For example to achieve the air quality standards specified in the Glean Air Act the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) has stated that a very substantial reduction in the number of vehicle miles traveled ( VMT ) by automobiles and lightweight trucks will be necessary in several large urban areas. This reduced fuel consumption would be desirable both in countering the energy crisis and in improving the environment. Since higher energy prices reduce the costs of such VMT reductions efficiency criteria suggest faster implementation of this particular environmental policy. In accordance with this view the Administration has acted to provide on a priority basis for substantial funding of mass transit in areas in which air quality will require large VMT reductions The theory of implementation in the Clean Air Act calls for the States to formulate plans to achieve the act 's air quality standards. The act requires only that the more important primary or human health standards be met in but stipulates a " reasonable period of time " for attainment of the secondary standards which are intended to protect esthetics and vegetation. However some States required in their plans that the secondary and primary standards be reached at the same time and this became legally binding under the Clean Air Act. Such advanced timing of the environmental goals would require much more low-sulfur coal than is now available domestically. It would also seriously constrain the ability of other States to reach the more urgent primary or health standards. Although estimates vary the so-called clean fuels deficit is roughly equivalent to one-quarter to one-half of all coal burned in In States with advanced secondary standards and in States where the primary standards will not be met the only legal course open to coal-burning utilities would be to switch to lowsulfur oil or natural gas. In a period of high prices and short supplies for these fuels such substitution is inefficient The Administration has therefore proposed in the Emergency Energy Act to give the EPA the authority to postpone attainment of the secondary air quality standards in States where such action would reduce the clean fuels deficit. One longer-term danger of this action however is that it removes some of the incentive that users of high-sulfur coal would have to develop improved emission control technology. A relatively easy way to restore this incentive and give it a more efficient form would be congressional enactment of the Administration 's sulfur emissions tax proposal This example of the adjustments in enviromental policy that are indicated by higher energy prices is only a postponement of an implementation schedule not a lowering of standards or other change in the policy itself. As a short-run response to the energy crisis postponement has two advantages over a structural policy change. It entails less risk of obstructing the realization of long-term goals of environmental policy ; and it avoids adding to the uncertainty about these goals which might inhibit the investment required by both energy and environmental needs Efficient Environmental Policy : The Post-Crisis Challenge Although postponing the implementation of environmental standards is preferable to revising such standards one should not conclude that current standards are optimal and need no revision. Indeed the standards particularly those in the Clean Air Act should be regarded as interim and provisional targets that reflect the urgency of the Nation 's commitment to environmental protection at the time they were adopted. These standards may become more stringent or less stringent. In any event they do not yet embody the careful distillation of scientific knowledge that will be required for the most efficient use of our scarce environmental resources in the longer run For example air quality standards permit only specified concentrations of a limited number of particular pollutants in the ambient air. But although concentrations of some pollutants might damage health or create other costs for some individuals regulations to limit processes that release particular pollutants into the atmosphere will also impose costs upon others. Standards ought to be based on a careful balancing of these risks costs and benefits as they would be perceived and evaluated by fully informed individuals Not enough is known however about the ways in which activities that result in the release of pollutants are linked with ambient air quality to permit such a balancing nor is enough known about the effects of various concentrations of pollutants upon human health. Another consideration is the efficiency of the means employed to reach optimal environmental standards once they are identified. Thus far legal and administrative regulations and directives have been the principal instruments. Administrative capacity and legal enforceability require that these regulations be uniform and relatively simple At the same time the activity and organizations they seek to regulate are complex and varied. If individuals and enterprises had more discretion and flexibility specified standards could be attained at a lower cost and with fewer scarce resources. Taxes emission charges and user charges are mechanisms that introduce this flexibility and efficiency into environmental protection AGRICULTURE The problems and policies of American agriculture since the 's have been predominantly related to excess productive capacity and the adjustment of resources to that condition. A related condition was an underlying instability in agricultural prices and incomes brought about by variability in food production and foreign demand and intensified by a slow response by consumers and producers to changes in prices. Government restrictions on farm output which were adopted to deal with the problem of excess capacity as a by-product also tended to reduce price instability In circumstances began to change in agriculture. One reason was a sharp rise in the demand from abroad for U.S. farm products. By the higher level of exports had eliminated almost all excess capacity and longstanding restrictive agricultural policies were modified to encourage all-out production. In an important sense the disappearance of chronic excess capacity should be recorded as a success. With its disappearance however the second problem instability has now taken on more significance Wide swings in farm and food prices contribute to instability throughout the economy. This became especially clear in when rising food prices accelerated the overall inflation rate. Although instability will at times lead to reduced farm prices there are existing standby measures that cushion the decline in farm incomes. Comparable measures do not exist at present to moderate an acceleration in consumer food prices New conditions now face agriculture. They have raised a new set of issues that are discussed in this section AGRICULTURE : FULLY EMPLOYED The stabilization of agricultural markets especially for grains was an outgrowth of two related public policies designed to support farm income. There was an underutilization of productive capacity in the farming sector measured in terms of available cropland underemployed labor and underutilized capital equipment. In recent years this underutilization was a result of Government programs that provided payments to farmers and concurrently diverted or " set aside " land from production usually on an annual basis. Since the early 's about one-sixth of the Nation 's cropland was recorded as being withheld from production under Government land retirement programs. In addition to withdrawing land from production farm programs caused sizable stocks of several commodities to be accumulated by the Government. Because of the stockpile program substantial short-term fluctuations in either production or demand were largely offset by the accumulation or release of stocks of farm commodities under the various price support programs. These policies reduced instability in farm markets over the years at considerable cost in both Government budget outlays and intervention by the Government in the agricultural sector. As experience was gained legislative and administrative actions were taken to " fine tune " production and restrict what was viewed as excessive accumulation of commodities under Government control. By the early 197O 's the programs had become very effective in controlling total crop acreage to mesh prospective production with expected demand. Actual production varied of course with yields per acre which were influenced by weather conditions. Nevertheless a clear downward trend in stocks was evident and reflected the direction of Government policy ( Table ) TABLE U.S. grain stocks compared to grain utilization selected periods End of marketing year stocks as a percent of total utilization Marketing year Wheat Annual average : Feed grains Rice Soybeans Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Disappearance of " Excess Capacity " For years it was fashionable to talk of " excess capacity " in agriculture The measure most widely referred to was the acres of cropland that were idled each year by Government programs. That measure seemed to be an adequate approximation because if more output and hence more land were demanded the complementary inputs labor machinery fertilizer and seeds would also be available to expand production. Several decades of research and rapid mechanization had resulted in an abundance of these other inputs particularly of labor because of a continuous flow of worksaving technology into agriculture. If more production were needed more crops more livestock or both the resources were already on the farms of the Nation or could be readily purchased. Only during World War II when vast amounts of manpower had been drawn off the farm was a shortage of labor apparent. After that period agriculture experienced a long succession of years with excess land excess labor and abundant supplies of purchased inputs This situation led to a widespread view that excess capacity was endemic in U.S. agriculture and that it would be large enough to cover almost any potential shortfall in worJd food production. Given time to expand production the Nation 's farmers could produce more of everything more grain and soybeans as well as more meat milk and other farm commodities without substantial increases in costs or prices The amount of labor employed in agriculture adjusted downward throughout the 's and 's ( Table ) Without its being generally realized the availability of labor to produce more livestock as well as crops slowly approached a balance with normal requirements for food production So long as productivity of manpower in agriculture was growing rapidly from the addition of new capital equipment or other technological innovations the remaining workers could meet the requirements for larger output without interfering with the continued exodus of workers from the agricultural sector TABLE Change in inputs used in farming to Percent change ( annual rate ) Period i Cropland Farm labor Machinery Fertilizer to to to to to to to to to Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Labor productivity and farm output were moving uniformly upward until at least the mid-1960 's. Then recent evidence suggests some of the trends flattened out. This was especially true in livestock production which is more labor intensive than field crop production. The annual rate of increase in livestock output declined from percent for each year in the period to percent in and to only percent annually after ( Table ) The reduced availability of labor placed new restraints on expansion of livestock production. Trade-offs between more crops or more TABLE Production and productivity in agriculture selected years to Percent change ( annual rate ) Period Crop output to to to to to Livestock output Crop output per acre Livestock output per feed unit i Preliminary Note. Annual rates of change are based on 3-year centered averages for years shown except for which is for a single year Source : Department of Agriculture livestock became more significant although their existence went largely unnoticed until the burst of additional export demands for farm products after mid-1972. When market prices and Government policy encouraged stepped-up farm production the response was less than expected. Additional acres were planted and crop production rose. Meanwhile livestock production declined in aggregate and the indexes of labor used in agriculture which have been declining steadily for years either increased or declined only marginally in These results suggest that some significant changes had occurred in the structure and excess capacity of American agriculture The persistent decline in the hours of laoor employed on farms at least temporarily bottomed out in the past year. If the long downward labor adjustment is largely over agriculture will have to provide higher returns to labor in the future in order to compete with the nonfarm sector for workers The growth in productivity of all inputs used in farm production has shown some slowing although there is no indication of a plateau. Nor has the rate of increase in yields of crops shown a decline. But the productivity of feedstuffs used in livestock production has shown some decline partly because until recently it was economical to substitute feedstuffs for forages in dairy and beef enterprises. Dairy products and meat are an important part of consumer food budgets and continuous improvement in the efficiency of feed conversion would help to hold down their real cost. For this reason there may be a need to review the organization and use of public funds in livestock research Expanding Farm Exports Growing exports have been the immediate cause of the new pressures on agriculture 's productive capacity and have contributed to the shift toward crop production particularly since mid-1972. For years the United States has nurtured foreign markets for food and fiber with Government supported export promotion efforts. A few months before the burst of world demand for U.S. agricultural products projections had suggested that a record $ billion of exports could be achieved by up from $ bil- lion in fiscal Actually the accelerated foreign purchases since mid1972 caused agricultural exports to reach $ billion in fiscal and $ billion in calendar About percent of the increase in fiscal was caused by increased volume ; the remainder came from higher prices Causes of export growth. An important question is whether the increased demand for exports is traceable to abnormally poor weather conditions in other countries or a longer-term rise in world demand. Both of these have contributed to export demand in the period. Poor crop harvests during in many countries were certainly a major factor : world grain production fell percent below the previous year However there are two reasons to believe that U.S. exports have moved to a higher plateau. First the demand for red meat and poultry in Western Europe and Japan has been expanding as incomes improved. The sharp economic expansion of combined with the depreciation of the dollar to augment this basic trend in In fiscal Japan and Western Europe accounted for about one-half of the growth in export volume The second factor has been growing markets in the Soviet Union the People 's Republic of China and Eastern European countries. The key here is primarily how much these countries import in total not how much they buy from the United States. The initial U.S. sales of grains to the U.S.S.R in mid-1972 were caused partly by very poor Soviet crops but they also stemmed from an earlier Soviet policy decision to improve consumers ' diets Implementation of the decision will mean higher Soviet grain imports on average in the future. Their grain purchases in together with Chinese purchases accounted for about a third of the increased export volume of U.S. grain in fiscal Even if such purchases are smaller in the future they can be significant in maintaining exports at high levels Domestic market complications. Isolated from domestic food markets the record on farm exports is impressive. However the greatly expanded exports have had significant implications for domestic food markets. When more feedstuffs are shipped abroad the result is increased competition and higher prices for the remaining supplies. This became clear in as the production of livestock products failed to respond to sharply higher livestock prices. The very large exports of feed grains and oilseeds raised the costs of livestock production thus reducing incentives to producers The problem was highlighted in when the contracted supplies of soybeans for export were thought to have exceeded the amount that would be available after domestic demands were met. This finding led to a temporary embargo and a later licensing of exports of soybeans ( and related products ) for the months of July through September. After harvesting of large crops began in the fall months all restrictions on exports were removed although a newly instituted reporting system on forward export sales was continued under new farm legislation passed in The controls on soybean exports seemed justified by special circumstances which made domestic processors and livestock producers unable to pay world prices for the available supplies of soybean products. The ceiling prices on red meats in March the later freeze on all food prices in June and the rising costs of feedstuff 's combined to place producers in a severe profit squeeze. As a result they cut back their production plans and began to slaughter breeding animals a response that could have seriously reduced food supplies for many months and even years if it had continued. However the export controls raised serious conflicts among a variety of national objectives. Removal of meat price ceilings and the earlier termination of all special efforts to expand exports gave domestic and foreign buyers equal access to U.S. supplies of feedstuff 's and food commodities thereby reducing the necessity of export controls * * * * * * * The recent shifts in resource use and output mix in agriculture have occurred in response to increased worldwide demands for agricultural products and tighter domestic supplies of farm resources. These changes have brought an end at least temporarily to the chronic excess capacity in agriculture. Exports have expanded swiftly so much that large carryover stocks of grain commodities have been depleted. With supplies of feedstuffs for livestock extremely tight livestock production has stopped expanding. Crop and livestock production are now competing more directly for the Nation 's farm resources. Over the last year extensive adjustments have occurred in agriculture in response to changing price relationships and sharply rising prices. Tightened markets for food have brought a new awareness of many interrelationships that could be safely ignored during periods of surpluses and have made policy decisions relating to food and agriculture more complex AGRICULTURAL POLICY FOR THE FUTURE Significant progress has been made in the past decade toward less Government intervention in and control of farm production. The agricultural acts passed in and moved the Government out of mandatory control programs for major farm commodities and provided a more flexible and effective means of controlling farm output. Another significant step toward making farm legislation more market oriented was taken when Congress passed the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of whose principal innovation is a system of target prices for wheat feed grains and cotton. When market prices are above the targets no Government " deficiency payments " are made to farmers and the Government has little involvement in agriculture. In years when market prices fall below the target prices Government payments to farmers make up the difference between target and market prices on base production. The Government also places a floor under market prices by being ready to purchase crops from farmers at relatively low prices. Farmers are thereby assured in two ways of at least a minimum income. Unless prices fall so low that the Government begins to accumulate inventories of commodities however its role is limited to making deficiency payments when they are required With this change in basic farm programs market prices assume more importance in guiding resources into production. Market prices will also have greater importance in allocating U.S. agricultural products among competing buyers. The intensity of market competition is likely to be much greater in the coming year than was true under the surplus conditions of the past The Need for Improved Information The act is particularly well suited to current conditions in agriculture. It permits the market to signal to farmers what priorities domestic and foreign purchasers are placing on various commodities and products The act allows and indeed mandates the Government to provide market information to the private sector so that decisions will be based upon the fullest possible knowledge about trends in market conditions. In fact the production period for both crop and animal production is so long that current prices may be a misleading guide to the most profitable future operations. Under these conditions advance information is especially necessary for efficient farm production Export demand is one important area in which a deficiency of information became apparent in The Administration has taken a number of steps to improve the flow of current economic intelligence regarding worldwide agricultural developments through consultations with other countries Among other actions it initiated a World Food Conference to be held in under the auspices of the United Nations. A bilateral agreement has been signed with the U.S.S.R. that will make possible more accurate forecasts of worldwide production and demand. The agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union will facilitate more prompt exchange of information on crop and livestock production. In June the Department of Commerce initiated a reporting system for forward export sales of major agricultural products. The new farm legislation later made this a permanent system under the administration of the Department of Agriculture Steps also have been initiated to improve domestic farm and food forecasting and planning. The Department of Agriculture has requested and the budget will contain increased funds to strengthen its information and analysis services to the rest of the Government and the private sector The need and scope for such activities were less as long as agricultural reserves existed in the form of stockpiles or idle acres. Under today 's conditions it is essential to give high priority to this aspect of the Government 's work Government Food Stockpiles One very important issue has emerged in and remains unresolved : What policy should the Government pursue on grain stockpiles ? In the past two purposes have been served by such stocks : as " operating stocks " which the private sector needs if it is to function normally ai. ' thus would elect to hold ; and as " contingency reserves " over and above normal operating requirements to cover variations in production or demand As discussed above. Government policies were directed toward and succeeded in gradually reducing grain stocks in recent years. In earlier years a substantial fraction of stocks had been held by the Government ; but virtually all of these were released in and total stocks reached the lowest level since Stocks of wheat in particular are only adequate to provide for normal operating inventories this year ; contingency reserves are nonexistent both in the United States and in the world The unusually low grain reserves mean that the world is at present more vulnerable to poor harvests than it has been for some time. But stockpiling obviously can not begin until world production levels have been built up. Otherwise such a step would cause already high prices to escalate further or necessitate a system of nonmarket allocations. Once a more normal supply-demand food balance is restored which should begin to occur in stocks can be accumulated again. In the past the world has sought protection against crop failure by relying upon stocks held principally by the United States and Canada. Although this arrangement has worked the current supply-demand conditions provide an opportunity to improve on the system. The Administration is exploring several approaches which through cooperative action could improve supply stability : As a minimum improved worldwide information flows are necessary to signal a tightening of supply-demand conditions as promptly as possible. Producers and consumers will then have the best opportunity to react to higher market prices Beyond that multiyear forward sales contracts negotiated either privately or by governments could be used to provide more supply stability. Events of have encouraged importing countries and exporting firms to seek commitments looking farther into the future These contracts can contribute to greater stability because they provide valuable information on prospective export demand to supplying countries and because production can thus be planned to meet contract sales A broader approach has been put forth by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. It would seek to establish stockpiling guidelines that participating countries would follow in developing their national policies. The system would be voluntary ; but to the extent that the guidelines were appropriately set and complied with this approach could increase supply stability A more rigorous approach would be to establish an essentially autonomous international agency having the resources to operate a buffer stock. Such schemes take various forms. They all present common problems however with regard to control financing and interference with desirable market activity The Administration supports the examination of multilateral approaches to the stockpile issue. It also recognizes that this country has an interest as the world 's major exporter in maintaining necessary levels of stocks since otherwise we could not be a reliable supplier of food for the world. It is also in this country 's interest to have adequate stocks to provide a measure of domestic price stability. According to preliminary estimates a contingency reserve would not have to be large or costly in order to offset most instances of poor harvests or abnormal demand. Large costs in the past have grown out of excessively large stock build-ups under price support programs. The prospects are reasonably strong that market conditions will not again lead to excessive stock-building in the near future. Any accumulation of contingency reserves would therefore require that the Government purchase commodities in the market or have ready access to farm-held stocks under the Government loan program Agriculture has always been a cyclical industry ; and the fluctuations though relatively minor have been around a trend of general abundance in the United States. One can not say with certainty whether the unusually tight markets of signal a turning point toward a period in which fluctuations will be around a trend of relative scarcity or whether represents only an abnormally large cyclical swing. This increased uncertainty implies that agriculture must be prepared to adjust to market developments as promptly and efficiently as possible. The current Government policy with minimum restrictions on market mechanisms is designed to make that possible CHAPTER Distribution of Income I MPLICITLY OR EXPLICITLY MOST DISCUSSIONS of the performance of the American economy and the economic role of the Government are concerned with the growth of national income and the way it is distributed Three fundamental principles of equity concerning the distribution of income are widely accepted : those who produce the same amount should be rewarded equally ( horizontal equity ) ; those who produce more should be rewarded more ( vertical equity ) ; and no individual or household should be forced to fall below some minimum standard of consumption regardless of productive potential. Although there is fairly general agreement on these principles the desirability of any given amount of inequality in the income distribution remains a matter of personal judgment and of social and political debate One of the principal social debates has been about the extent to which those having high incomes should share with those having less. Among its chief objectives the Government seeks the proper balance between redistributing income to the disadvantaged so that they may have the basic amenities of life and allowing a reward system which gives individuals incentives to work to their fullest capacity OUTLINE AND SUMMARY This chapter looks at the distribution of income among families and individuals and examines some of the government policies which have influenced it. The chapter considers the distribution of income among individuals and families and among various classifications of the population : age sex and race While the inequality of family income is quite stable over the long term it varies over the business cycle. Inequality increases during a recession and decreases in an expansion. This is a consequence of the variation in weeks worked that occurs because of changes in the unemployment rate Because the concept of income used to measure inequality is essentially limited to money income before taxes these measures need not reflect the true inequality of economic well-being. Some sources of income which are omitted would increase measured inequality and others would decrease it and estimates of some of these effects are given. While those omitted sources which would decrease family income inequality have been growing in importance over time there exists no such presumption concerning the omitted sources that would increase it Many factors such as schooling and on-the-job training determine the inequality of earnings among workers. Differentials in the earnings of whites and blacks and of males and females are analyzed with respect to the contribution to the differential made by training and other factors that influence productivity. Past discrimination has contributed to current differences in productivity because of the once widespread barriers to equivalent schooling and on-the-job training. Because of the difficulties of measuring productivity no conclusion could be reached about the magnitude of current labor market discrimination against blacks or women. For the same reason it is difficult to determine whether labor market discrimination has declined with time although there is a strong presumption that it has. For men the blackwhite earnings differential has narrowed and much of the change may be due to a narrowing of educational differences. The narrowing of the differential has been much more dramatic for black women however and outside the South black women now receive a higher wage rate than white women. This development is largely due to black women 's greater lifetime attachment to the labor force and hence their greater level of experience and training The differential in hourly earnings between men and women has widened over time and this change reflects the relative decline in education and experience of women in the labor force. With the rapid increase in the labor force participation of women the female labor force has become increasingly composed of recent entrants with fewer years of schooling and of experience. Younger women are however showing less tendency to withdraw from the labor force for a prolonged period ; as the age of these cohorts increases and they come to comprise a larger proportion of women in the labor force the experience and earnings differential between men and women should decrease Widespread concern is felt about those whose incomes fall below a level needed to maintain an adequate living standard. There has been a marked decline in poverty as conventionally defined from million persons in to million persons in in large part because of economic growth which increased wage rates and employment opportunities for men and women and permitted larger social security and pension benefits. Increasingly the poor are living in families in which there is no adult worker and increasingly the family is headed by a female The Federal Government has several programs some operated on its own others in conjunction with the States which are intended to decrease poverty. Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) is the most important Federal-State program designed explicitly for poor families in which there is no employed male head. The million AFDC families in represent nearly a threefold increase in the number of AFDG families since This increase can be partly explained by the spread of knowledge about the program and the lessening of the social stigma attached to it. In addition the faster rate of increase of benefits to AFDG families compared to average wages contributed to the change by making the incentives greater for an existing female family head to apply for benefits as well as giving women an incentive to head a family Social Security is the largest single Federal transfer program with million recipients of old age survivor or disability benefits in fiscal Many of the recipients of old age and survivors ' benefits were in families classified as in poverty. For many others however social security kept their income above the poverty level The Federal Government also transfers economic resources to aged and low-income families by subsidizing the price of food medical care and housing. The Food Stamp Program initiated in subsidized the purchase of food for million recipients from low-income families in fiscal The average monthly subsidy ( of $ per individual recipient in July ) represents a substantial contribution to the economic well-being of many low-income families although the food stamp subsidy is not counted in the measure of income used to define poverty A rapidly growing source of Federal transfers to the aged and the poor is medicare and medicaid which lower the cost of medical care to the recipients. In fiscal million people received medicare benefits and million received medicaid benefits The combined effects of the tax and transfer mechanisms of Federal State and local governments appear to redistribute income toward lowincome families. Various studies have concluded that when accrued capital gains are included in income the tax system is roughly proportional in the income ranges in which most Americans are located but regressive for very low incomes and progressive for very high ones. However some government transfers have a strong effect of redistributing income to low-income families. These include public assistance programs social security food stamps medicaid and medicare THE CHANGE IN INEQUALITY OF FAMILY AND INDIVIDUAL INCOME Between and median family income adjusted for the rise in prices doubled. This rapid increase in the overall level of income tells us much about the change in living standards but it tells only part of the story. The extent to which the gains from economic growth have been diffused throughout the population is also important SECULAR CHANGES There are various ways of illustrating the distribution of income among persons and of measuring the amount of inequality in the distribution Since families typically pool their incomes the distribution of family income is a particularly useful indicator of the distribution of economic well-being One common measure of inequality shows the percentage share of aggregate money income before taxes received by each fifth of families ranked by income. Quite remarkably relative income shares measured in this way have hardly varied in the years between and ( Table ) Thus in a relative sense the rich were not getting richer and the poor were not getting poorer. In this period the average income of each quintile increased at much the same rate. If anything there seems to have been a slight tendency towards greater equality since the share of measured income received by the top percent declined somewhat from to The decline in the income share of. the top percent may be a consequence of the secular decrease in the share of national income received by the owners of nonlabor factors of production TABLE Share of aggregate income before taxes received by each fifth of families ranked by income selected years 1947-72l [ Percent ] Income rank Top percent Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth Total families iThe income ( before taxes ) boundaries of each fifth in were : lowest fifth under $ ; second fifth $ $ ; third fifth $ $ ; fourth fifth $ $ ; highest fifth $ and over ; top percent $ and over. Income includes wages and salaries proprietors ' income interest rent dividends and money transfer payments Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census The general impression that no significant trend has developed in the relative inequality of income among families is confirmed by other measures of inequality. For example the variance of the natural logarithm of income a measure which takes into account dispersion throughout all ranges of income shows no trend in the dispersion of family income throughout the post-World War II period. ( See the supplement to this chapter for an explanation of this measure. ) A family 's income depends on the amount of work the different family members perform on the earnings they receive on the monetary return from property owned by the family and on transfers received from the government. Underlying the distribution of family income then is the distribution of individuals ' incomes. For males to years old or those to there is no trend during the post-World War II period in income inequality. However in all years inequality is greater for the age group than for the age group and this reflects the change in earnings with age. Thus measures of inequality for broad age groups merge the inequality resulting from differences between lifetime incomes with the inequality that results because individuals do not earn the same income in successive phases of their lives An increase does occur over time however in the inequality of income for males years of age and over and in the inequality of income for all members ( male and female ) of the labor force. The increasing inequality for all male workers and all workers results mainly from the greater proportion of workers with part-time and part-year work schedules rather than from an increase in the inequality of wage rates. The growth of part-time and part-year work may to some extent be attributed to a shift in industrial composition towards the service industries where flexible hours are more common and partly to the increasing desire among workers for flexible schedules with shorter hours. Such schedules are particularly attractive to students semi-retired older workers and married women. Associated with the increasing importance of these groups in the labor force has been a secular increase in the variability of annual hours worked and consequently in the variability of annual income for the labor force as a whole Since most families ( percent in ) are husband-wife families with a working husband the stability in the dispersion of adult male incomes has been one factor leading to stability in the distribution of family income. The increase in the proportion of wives with earned income evidently did not lead to increases in the relative inequality of family income partly because husbands ' and wives ' annual earnings have not been positively correlated In the future if a strong positive correlation between husbands ' and wives ' annual earnings should develop this correlation could be a factor in increasing the relative income inequality among families Stability of Income Inequality Among Adult Males It is striking that there has been no change in the relative inequality of income among adult males. The greater opportunities for schooling among persons at all income levels and the larger subsidies for training less advantaged persons might have been expected to reduce earnings inequality in the past years but the relation between equal access to training or schooling and earnings inequality is not so straightforward The post-World War II period has brought a narrowing of differences in years of schooling among adult males and this alone generally decreases the inequality of lifetime income. In the same period however the level of schooling has greatly increased. A recent study suggests that at higher levels of schooling the relative dispersion of wage rates tends to be greater than at lower levels and that the effects on income inequality of the higher level and of the smaller variance in years of schooling have somewhat offset each other Greater equality of opportunity could also lead to increases in income inequality if investments in schooling or training became more closely related to ability. Generally more able people receive a higher money return on an equal investment in education. In a world where financial access to schooling and training depend on family income ( and assuming that family income and O ability were not perfectly correlated ) extending equal financial access to such investments for all people regardless of income could result in those with more ability investing more. In that case inequality could increase Obviously many factors other than education influence earnings. However the distribution of adult males by age marital status health and union membership and the profitability of investments in school and postschool training have been essentially stable over the past years and this stability has undoubtedly contributed to the stability of the income distribution CYCLICAL CHANGES The inequality of income among families and among individuals fluctuates with the business cycle. Inequality increases in a recession and decreases in an expansion. During a recession wage rates tend to be sticky and there is no substantial change in the inequality of wage rates. However layoffs increase and there is an increase in the relative inequality of weeks of employment. The increase in the relative inequality in weeks worked during a recession shows up both within and across demographic groups ( age sex race and schooling ) During a recession unemployment within a group of the same skill age and other characteristics is not experienced uniformly ; rather in any one year it is likely to affect some workers to a disproportionate degree Thus an increasing rate and duration of unemployment have a greater effect on the weeks of employment of some workers than on others and result in a greater inequality of employment within the group A recession also intensifies the inequality of weeks of employment among groups with different characteristics. Workers with higher levels of skill that is more schooling and longer labor market experience usually work more weeks per year at all stages of the business cycle. During recessions however the disemployment is relatively greater for workers with less skill For this reason in a recession one finds a larger inequality of weeks worked between skill groups than during a business cycle peak OMITTED SOURCES OF REAL INCOME AND THE INEQUALITY OF WELL-BEING Because the concept of income used in the measures of inequality just presented omits some sources of real income it gives an imperfect description of the resources that families actually command. The omitted items can be very important. They include the imputed value of rental income received by homeowners living in their own homes as well as capital gains. Employee fringe benefits paid by the employer are omitted and so is the monetary value to the recipient of Government transfers in kind such as food stamps medical benefits and housing allowances. Many goods and services are produced at home and are excluded from these income measures because of the difficulty of placing a value on production outside the market. Families with a working husband and wife may thus have more measured income than some families in which the wife confines her work to caring for the home and children although the extra expenses or loss of leisure time of the working couple could mean that they are really less well off. Finally the data used here refer to income received in one year before payroll and income taxes The reason for not including these sources of income in census surveys of consumer income is that they are all extremely difficult to measure for individuals or families. Several studies have attempted to measure the magnitude and distribution of the different items but so far the net effect on income inequality of all the items can not be stated with complete confidence Nor can we say how past changes in the importance of the different omitted sources may have affected the true trend in income inequality TABLE Income inequality under alternative definitions of income Definition of income Income inequality Money income Line plus rental value of owner-occupied homes Line plus nonmoney wages and nonmoney farm income Line plus medicare payments Line plus imputed interest from banks and insurance companies Line plus other imputations2 equals money income plus imputed income. Line less direct taxes equals disposable family personal income Income inequality is measured by the variance in the natural log of income. ( See supplement to this chapter. ) The income classes used are : Under $ ; $ 2F000- $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; and $ and over Other imputations include services furnished without payment by banks and insurance companies military clothing and miscellaneous other items Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers Table presents estimates of the effect that some of these omitted sources of income would have had on measured income inequality. For convenience the basic measure of income dispersion used in the calculation is the variance in the natural logarithm of income ( see supplement to this chapter ) The measure is zero when there is perfect equality of income and it increases for greater income inequality. However while a reduction from to conveys an acceptable suggestion about a decline in inequality and a decline from to an acceptable suggestion about a greater decline the statement that the second of these two declines is twice the first would not be meaningful The rental value of owner-occupied dwellings can be imputed by assuming that it is proportional to the value of the house. When the imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings is added to money income the inequality of family income does not change significantly. Although the imputed rental value of housing rises with money income it does not rise as a percentage of income Farm wages and farm income received in kind ( such as food and lodging ) and medicare payments are generally concentrated among the poor and they reduce income inequality. The inclusion of imputed interest from banks and insurance companies does not significantly change inequality When personal income taxes and payroll taxes are deducted from money income plus imputed income the dispersion of income declines Because of the extreme difficulties involved no effort was made to compute the distribution of capital gains or losses among families. Nor was an effort made to remove the effect of transitory influences on income in any one year. Capital gains and losses however tend to be concentrated among upper-income families and for years of net capital gains their inclusion in the income concept would clearly increase family income inequality. Several studies suggest that if accrued capital gains are included in income a very high proportion of families earn incomes falling in ranges in which the tax system is essentially proportional The huge growth in Federal food medical and other in-kind subsidies to the poor during the past years would certainly reduce inequality if they were included in the income measures. In addition families differ in their use of government-subsidized goods and services such as manpower training programs public schools national parks and roads but the incidence of benefits by income level is not known Family Composition and Work in the Labor Market Families vary considerably in the hours they work in the labor market to produce measured money income. The difficulty of imputing a value to work done at home has already been noted. The fact that a wife does not work in the market can be taken to mean that she considers her productivity at home to be of more value than what she could earn in the market. Knowing that she does not work in the labor market is not sufficient however to determine the money value of the wife 's work at home Table indicates roughly how families at three levels of income differ in their composition and work in the labor market and how this has changed In both and families in the lowest fifth were much more likely to be headed by a woman or by a person either less than years of age or older than years. Partly because of these differences in age and sex the heads of lower-income families are less likely to participate in the labor market and so are the other family members Such families consequently depend more on income from sources other than earnings such as social security other retirement incomes and public assistance. By contrast upper-income families generally have many earners per family and are more likely to include a wife who works. Presumably these families have less time for work at home and they must buy with their earnings some of the services that would otherwise be produced at home TABLE Selected characteristics of the lowest middle and highest fifths of families ranked by money income and [ Percent ] Lowest fifth Middle fifth Highest fifth Family characteristic Total families Female head Head under years of age Head years of age and over No earners earners or more Husband-wife families Wife in paid labor force Mean number of children Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census These differences in the characteristics of families by income class have become more intense. They raise problems of interpretation which are important for public policy designed to influence the distribution of income Some of these issues are discussed below in the section on poverty DETERMINANTS OF DIFFERENCES IN EARNINGS AMONG INDIVIDUALS Wage rates and annual labor market earnings of individuals vary considerably. Much of this variation can be related statistically to individual differences in measurable characteristics schooling post-school training region of residence and other demographic characteristics as well as restrictions on entry into occupations. How far such unmeasurable characteristics as innate ability diligence personal attractiveness and contacts explain the remaining differences is not known. Nor can it be ascertained how important luck is in determining the distribution of income Other aspects of earnings are not included in earnings data. Psychic earnings from having a pleasant job or living in a pleasant locality are not measurable. Earnings received by individuals in kind such as free lodging and fringe benefits purchased by the employer are measurable in principle but difficult to measure in practice SCHOOLING Schooling is an important determinant of the distribution of earnings Table shows average usual weekly earnings for males to years of age who worked full time. Those with more schooling have substantially higher earnings ; and this relation has been persistent in many different sets of data TABLE Average usual weekly earnings of male workers years of age who worked full time by years of schooling and race Years of schooling $ $ Negro and other races White Over Note. Data are from a survey made in May A full-time worker is defined as one who usually works hours or more per week Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics One suggested reason why schooling and earnings are positively related is that schooling increases a worker 's productivity. A mobile labor force and competitive markets translate the increased productivity into higher income for the worker. To test the hypothesis that schooling increases productivity and thereby increases income one must have some measure of productivity other than income itself. Several studies have investigated the association between schooling and the productivity of self-employed farmers as well as the association between schooling and efficiency in household activities and in interregional migration and in scores on standardized ability tests They indicate that controlling for other variables those people with more schooling are more productive Some say that those capable of higher productivity receive more schooling and that business firms use the amount of schooling as a means of sorting out those capable of better performance. It is therefore important to distinguish between schooling as a means of changing productivity and schooling as a means of identifying the more productive members of the population The sorting hypothesis implies that firms regard the number of years of schooling as an index of individual qualities that the educational system can identify more efficiently than they can. The educational system according to this theory is effective in attracting persons possessing these qualities and discouraging the schooling of those without these qualities. Empirical tests of the sorting hypothesis have not been conclusive POST-SCHOOL TRAINING Another important aspect of training is experience acquired on the job after schooling is completed. On-the-job training can vary from formal training programs within the firm to the informal process of learning by doing. Thus particularly at younger ages a worker may be involved in a process of investment with returns accruing later on. For this reason earnings would rise as age increases Charts and give the results of two different procedures to find the relation between age and income for males. Chart presents the age-income profiles of a group of men over time ( cohort profile ) For a cohort income Chart Real Income Profiles of Cohorts of Men Born in Selected Years REAL ANNUAL INCOME ( DOLLARS ) 1/ BORN BORN BORN BORN J_ I J_ I YEARS OF AGE J / M E D I A N TOTAL MONEY INCOME FOR EACH AGE DEFLATED BY THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR increases with age but for adults it does so at a decreasing rate. Income increases with age because the workers are acquiring experience and because of the rising productivity of workers as technology improves and physical capital grows. The cohort profiles are higher for younger workers because they have not only more years of schooling but also the benefits that accompany a growth of technology and physical capital Chart presents the age-income profiles obtained from plotting the income of males of different ages in the same time period ( cross-sectional profile ) The tipping down for the oldest age groups ( to and to years of age ) of the cross-sectional profile for annual income reflects the lower income of retired persons and compared to younger males the lower level of schooling and obsolescence of knowledge of those older males still in the labor force There are too few comparable data to determine whether the cohort profiles are becoming steeper over time for adult males although there are some Chart Real Incomes for Men in Different Age Groups REAL INCOME ( DOLLARS ) ! / f / L- / / / ' \ \ YEARS OF AGE J/MEDIAN TOTAL MONEY INCOME FOR EACH AGE DEFLATED BY THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR hints to that effect. Increased high school and college attendance has increased the slope of the age annual income profile for younger males. If better data in the future indicate a steepening over time in the slope of the ageincome profile a constant income inequality within a broad age interval would imply a narrowing of income inequality for each age in the interval The relation between age and usual weekly earnings in for males with and years of schooling is shown in Table For the same level of schooling usual weekly earnings generally increase with age. The ageearnings profiles are steeper for those with more schooling and thus suggest a positive association of schooling and on-the-job training. Because women are more likely to participate discontinuously in the labor force entering and leaving several times during their lives their post-school training does not necessarily rise steadily with age TABLE Average usual weekly earnings of males who worked full time by age and years of schooling Years of schooling Age years years. years years years $ $ Note. Data are from a survey made in May Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics EMPLOYMENT The annual labor market earnings of a worker are a function of the worker 's weekly earnings and the number of weeks of employment during the year. Weeks of employment can vary because of unemployment ; but they also vary because of voluntary withdrawals from the labor force The number of weeks worked is greater for male workers to years of age than for younger older or married female workers. Younger persons work less because of school attendance and a greater incidence of unemployment. Students ( who now make up percent of the teenage labor force ) ordinarily work during vacations or have part-time jobs for a few months during the year. Most new entrants and reentrants to the labor force are young people or married women and most also experience some unemployment before taking their first job. One reason for the higher unemployment rate for young workers is that they voluntarily leave jobs to acquaint themselves with the labor market and to gain experience in various jobs. In addition the instability of their employment is increased by the fact that their productivity is very close to the legal minimum wage and they have a smaller amount of specific job training Employers make investments specific to the firm for some workers. Specific investments include the component of training a worker receives that is useful only in that firm and also hiring and placement costs. The more important specific training is the more costly it is for both the firm and the worker if the worker is separated from the firm. Workers with more specific training are therefore less likely to be subjected to layoffs or to quit and they will work more weeks during the year. Workers with advanced schooling ordinarily work more weeks during the year partly because their higher wage makes absence from work more costly and partly because they have more specific training Married men work more weeks per year than men who have not married but married women work fewer weeks than those who have never married Most married women work less if they have young children. Older workers work less because of deteriorating health and partial retirement The weekly wage and the number of weeks worked are related. Those who work more weeks per year tend to have a higher weekly wage partly because they have acquired more experience. On the other hand it has been suggested that the weekly wage for each week worked is higher in some seasonal occupations in which there are fewer weeks of employment during the year EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS BETWEEN GROUPS In the last quarter century there has been substantial public concern with the causes and consequences of the observed earnings differential between groups differentiated by race and sex. This discussion has focused on investments in training and current and past discrimination as factors that may explain the differential DISCRIMINATION Discrimination is said to exist when two or more groups that are differentiated on the basis of some characteristic irrelevant to an objective measure of productivity are not granted equal treatment in a particular activity. The differentiating characteristic may be race sex ethnic origin marital status age or physical appearance. Obviously some forms of discrimination give rise to more social concern than others. Discrimination may also take several forms : the way individuals and business firms behave in the market place for jobs housing credit and other goods and services ; and discriminatory taxation or public expenditure policies by government. It may be so closely interwoven with the culture of a society that the stereotyping of roles is accepted by all with little or no question The income and employment of an individual can be influenced by past and present discrimination. Past discrimination affects the years and quality of an individual 's schooling and the path to his present occupation and training. Current discrimination affects incomes when two workers are given a different wage for the same productivity and restrictions are placed on a worker 's occupational mobility It is important to distinguish between the differences caused by discrimination and those from other causes. Observed differences between the wages or occupational distribution in two groups of individuals may be due to discrimination or to factors entirely unrelated to discrimination. Because many important variables are not measurable one can not fully quantify the effects of past or present discrimination on earnings and occupational choice What can be quantified however is the extent of observed differences between groups that remain after making allowance for what is measurable RAGE DIFFERENTIALS Data on the income or occupations of white and black males and females indicate a substantial racial difference that has persisted for the last century. * * Almost percent of nonwhites are bracks but many of the available data do not distinguish between blacks and other nonwhites The relative income difference widened in recessions or depressions and narrowed during periods of economic expansion particularly during World War II. Evidence is accumulating however that there has been a long-run narrowing of the racial income difference. According to one recent study for example the median wage and salary income of black males increased at an annual rate of percent from to compared to an annual increase of percent for white males. For black and white females the rates were percent and percent respectively. In spite of this narrowing substantial racial income differences continue particularly for males Why the Differential Narrowed There are several reasons for the narrowing of the black-white earnings differential. Important changes have occurred in the relative schooling of blacks and whites. The substantial discrimination against blacks that was evident in the public school expenditures of many States appears to have ended For this and other reasons there has been a dramatic increase in the level of schooling for blacks. The median number of years of schooling among black males years old and over in the labor force increased between and by years to years. For white males the increase was years to a level of years. During the same period black females in the labor force increased their level of schooling by years to years compared to an increase for white females of only year to years The substantial migration of blacks out of the South and into States in the northern and western regions may also have influenced the relative increase in the earnings of blacks. In percent of the black population lived in the South ; by the proportion was percent. Earnings are lower in the South than in other regions for all workers but the difference is particularly great for black workers and in the past the difference between earnings in the South and elsewhere was even more pronounced. Thus blacks could increase their earnings by moving out of the South. Although whites have an even greater propensity than blacks to migrate between States or regions this greater regional earnings differential for blacks coupled with their greater concentration in the South provided an important way for blacks to improve their earnings. Blacks are likely to have increased their earnings relative to whites through migration despite their somewhat lower geographic mobility The changing occupational structure and labor force status of the population was another factor influencing the rate of growth of earnings. The labor force participation rate of married white females increased at a faster rate than that of married black females. The entry into the labor force of white females with little experience and the growth of part-time employment slowed the rate of growth of earnings among white females. The proportion of black females employed as household workers declined from percent in to percent in Two important factors served as catalysts enabling these changes to take place. First the American economy is highly competitive and business firms whose owners or white workers have less discriminatory attitudes toward blacks will be likely to employ more blacks. These firms prosper if blacks receive lower wages. When such firms expand the demand for black workers increases and the discriminatory differential declines Competition may not be a fully effective weapon against discrimination however if prejudice is very widespread. The second factor working with the first was a change in attitudes toward discrimination against blacks. This development improved the relative income and occupational status of blacks by directly reducing labor market discrimination. It also facilitated the passage of the Civil Rights Act and other Federal and State legislation as well as court decisions prohibiting discrimination in wages and employment. Such changes in the legal system made discrimination more costly and therefore lessened it. The reduction in discrimination in housing and in public accommodations brought about increased contact between blacks and whites and presumably expanded the information sources and job opportunities for blacks Dead-End Jobs There is a widespread belief that compared to white males black males are relegated to poorly paid dead-end jobs that is jobs in which earnings are initially low and do not rise with experience. This view originated as a result of examining the relation between age and income for white and black males at a moment in time ( cross-section ) For example reading down the columns of Table indicates a substantial decline for older age groups in the income of black males relative to white males. The appropriate procedure for a study of life-cycle income however is to follow a group ( cohort ) as it ages as is shown along the diagonals of Table For each TABLE Income of Negro males as percent of income of white males by type of income and age and [ Percent ] Type of income by age group Annual income : years years years years Weekly income : years years. years years Note. Data for and relate to Negro and races other than white end therefore are not strictly comparable with data for which relate to the Negro race only Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers cohort the ratio of black to white annual and weekly incomes either did not decline at all with age from to or declined at an appreciably slower rate than in the cross-section. Thus experience appears to have a similar relative effect on the incomes of white and black males. Although some black and some white males may be in dead-end jobs this is not the situation of the average black or white worker Current Differentials Although the earnings differential between black and white females has become quite small the differential that still exists between the earnings of black and white males is substantial. It does narrow however when the comparison is restricted to the States outside the South and when differences in years of schooling are taken into account ( Table ) A further narrowing of the differential occurs if the comparison is restricted to married men There are large differences in marital status between blacks and whites In March percent of white males years old and over were married and living with their wives compared to percent for black males. Among both white and black males marital status is closely related to earnings married men having higher earnings than those not currently married. How the division of labor within the family affects the earnings of married men and women is discussed at greater length in the next section TABLE Earnings of Negroes as a percent of earnings of whites } for persons years of age [ Percent ] All persons Type of earnings by sex and region All levels of schooling High school graduate Married spouse present College graduate or more All levels of schooling High school graduate College graduate or more EARNINGS OF MEN Annual earnings : All regions _ South North and West * ( ) Hourly earnings : All regions South North and West i ( ) EARNINGS OF WOMEN Annual earnings : All regions South North and West * Hourly earnings : All regions South. North and West i Includes Northeast and North-central Fewer than persons in the sample Note. Education region marital status and age relate to Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers Several factors can be mentioned to explain why black males still receive lower earnings than white males after adjustment for schooling age region and marital status. Prior investments made in the child at home are important in determining the extent to which a student benefits from schooling Black youths are more likely to come from poorer homes where the parents have less schooling to have poorer diets and to be less healthy. They are likely to start school with fewer advantages and skills than the typical white youth. Moreover at least in the past there was discrimination against black youths in public school expenditures. Later on as adults blacks have poorer health and may have poorer information about better jobs. Some of the current wage differences may thus be a consequence of past discrimination Many factors such as health and information about labor markets are difficult to measure however and their actual effects on earnings differences between blacks and whites have not been quantified. One can not then reliably measure the extent of the occupational and wage rate discrimination that now exists or the effect that current discrimination has on earnings SEX DIFFERENTIALS In the median annual earnings of women years old and over who did full-time year-round work were about percent of that of fulltime year-round male workers. This low ratio can not be taken as a measure of current market discrimination however since the average full-time workweek is shorter for women than for men and their life time work experience has been vastly different Specialization and Working Women Although the pattern is changing rapidly the traditional economic organization of the family has been marked by a specialization of function : women tend to specialize in the work associated with child care and keeping up the home ; men tend to specialize in labor market employment. In the past when it was typical for families to have more children than they now do this specialization of function was undoubtedly an efficient arrangement Whether it now reflects societal discrimination or efficiency is a matter for speculation In many families a lesser degree of specialization and a greater sharing of home and labor market activities have come to be the preferred form of family organization and women 's participation in the labor force has increased greatly. In percent of married women to years of age were in the labor force ; in the proportion was percent. However most married men still work nearly continuously during their prime working years ; and the labor force participation rate of married men from to years of age is over percent The work histories of individual women can not be ascertained from current labor force rates ; special surveys are needed to provide informa- tion about lifetime work experience. The National Longitudinal Survey ( NLS ) a large data source sponsored by the Department of Labor has recently become available and provides much more detailed information on the work histories of women than has ever been previously compiled The survey indicates that in among married women to years old with children only percent had worked at least months every year since leaving school. On the average married women worked at least months in percent of their years after leaving school but the work was not likely to be continuous One study which used the NLS showed that earnings of women do rise with experience and that continuity of experience as opposed to intermittent participation commands a premium. Withdrawal from the labor force for a time resulted in a decline in earnings when work resumed since previously accumulated skills or human capital actually depreciate during extended periods away from work. For the married women in the sample the hourly wage rate was about percent of that of married men in the same age group ( years ) in the same year ( ) after controlling for differences in years of schooling. At least half of the percent differential resulted from differences in their measured experience. The remaining differential is unexplained It is not known to what extent current discrimination as opposed to other unmeasured factors contributed to this differential. For example the study could not provide direct measures of the nature of the investments made in the productivity of women and men other than years of formal schooling. Women do not appear to obtain as much training on the job as men for the same length of time in the labor force. Thus although women 's earnings rise with experience the study found that they do not rise as steeply as men 's. This difference could result partly from a faulty measurement of a year 's experience for women ; as noted above in these data a year 's work could be as little as months of part-time employment. However the measured effect of experience could also be interpreted as the result of discrimination. That is employers may deny a woman on-the-job training or a promotion because of her sex sometimes from sheer prejudice sometimes because they think a woman is more likely to quit for personal reasons. One can also surmise that women themselves may not choose to invest in training at a cost of either lower current earnings or additional hours of work when the payoff might be lost because of the uncertainty of their future work patterns For example women in school have a lower enrollment rate in programs oriented toward the labor market engineering accounting electronics and a higher enrollment rate in courses that may be more applicable to work or leisure in the home child development languages literature. This pattern may reflect greater uncertainty among women about their future attachment to the labor force. A choice of field of study may also be influenced by social pressures however which make women feel less feminine and men feel less masculine if they enroll in courses traditionally selected by the other sex The study also relates lifetime work history to earnings for women who never married. A year 's experience has a much greater effect on single women 's earnings than on those of married women. Single women work much more continuously than married women though less so than married men. Some single women may choose not to make investments related to work because they expect to marry. But many look forward to careers and may therefore delay marriage or never marry at all. This career orientation is consistent with the relatively greater number of years of schooling completed by single women compared to those who marry. It is also consistent with their observed higher earnings. Estimates of hourly wage and salary earnings from census data show that women to years of age who had never married earned percent more than married women and percent less than married men but only percent less than men who had never married There is then also a differential between the earnings of married and single men and it may be taken as another illustration of how specialization within families may affect career patterns and earnings. Single men have somewhat lower labor force participation rates ; they also work fewer hours per year than married men. In part this may result from a higher incidence of disability which influences both marriage and work. Although they have greater work participation than married women single women also have higher disability rates than married women Because of differences in life-cycle participation in the labor force by women and men the experience of women does not bear the same relationship to age as it does for men. Many women who have entered or reentered the market at older ages are really beginners. Men 's earnings are at their peak when the men reach an older age but women 's earnings will represent a mixture in which a small minority have high earnings because of their considerable experience but the majority have earnings closer to those at the start of a career. As age increases it is therefore not surprising that the earnings differential between women and men widens. For example a comparison of usual weekly earnings of workers who worked hours a week or more in shows that the ratio of women 's earnings to men 's earnings declined from at ages to at ages for high school graduates. Of course the earnings ratios at older ages reflect the work histories of different cohorts of women. If the younger women maintain a greater attachment to the labor force during their lifetime ( and there is some evidence that this is the case ) then the ratio of women 's earnings to men 's may not decline as much with age in the future Differences in lifetime work experience also seem to explain why the ratio of black women 's earnings to those of white women exceeds the ratio of earnings of black men to those of white men ( Table ) Indeed in the regions outside the South within educational levels black women earn more than white women. The differential between whites and blacks in quality of schooling family background and discrimination can be assumed to be similar for women and men. Black women have a much greater life-cycle attachment to the labor force however than white women do although this differential is largely confined to married women. For example in among women to years of age with years of high school or more percent of the black women were in the labor force compared to percent of the white women The greater tendency of black married women to work compared to white married women may be due in part to the relatively lower earnings of their husbands. Partly because of the relatively high earnings and work participation of black wives the ratio of annual income of black husbandwife families to that of white husband-wife families is higher than the ratio of black men 's to white men 's income. For families headed by males to years old the ratio in was percent compared to percent for males alone ( Tables and ) TABLE Median income of Negro h'isband-wife families as percent of white husband-wife families by region and age of husband and [ Percentl Age of husband Total All families Under years years years years years and over. South North and Westi i Includes Northeast and North-central Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Trends in the Earnings Differential Much has been made of the rather puzzling observation that the ratio of earnings of all women to those of all men has declined during the past years. This observation refers to annual earnings or the earnings of full-time year-round workers who are not necessarily representative of the total. But average hours and weeks worked during the year fell for women relative to men from to If annual wages and salaries are divided by total hours worked during the year the result is a much modified decline in the hourly wage of women relative to the hourly wage of men ( Table ) An additional factor which would produce a relative decline in women 's earnings is the relative decline in their general educational level and their labor market experience during the period. In women in the labor force had on the average more schooling than men did ; but this advantage O TABLE Relation of wage and salary earnings and of total money earnings of women to those of men and Earnings of women as percent of earnings of men Type of earnings Mean wage and salary earnings : Annual Hourly Hourly adjusted for education Mean total money earnings : i Annual Hourly Hourly adjusted for education Earnings for any year are for those in the experienced labor force the following year Approximate adjustment based on differences in the educational distributions of men and women in the labor force in and Not available Source : Council of Economic Advisers was eliminated by Since education has an effect on earnings both men 's and women 's earnings increase with education it is important to take these changes into account. An approximate adjustment for educational level increases the differential in and because women in the labor force then had more education than men. After the educational adjustment the differential shows little change from to What has not been accounted for is the experience differential between men and women. As has been explained above this difference seems to be the most important factor causing a divergence in hourly earnings. But since the labor force participation of women particularly married women was increasing rapidly during the period it is very likely that the constant flow of entrants into the labor force resulted in a decline in the average experience of women in the labor force during the years The foregoing suggests that if we could compare women and men with a given amount of experience and education the ratio of women 's hourly earnings to men 's might well show an increase over the years a narrowing in the gap. This would of course be compatible with the fact that women have dramatically increased their participation in the labor force during the past years. The rapidly increasing opportunities offered them would be one reason why they have done so OCCUPATIONAL DIFFERENCES The occupational distribution of blacks differs from that of whites. In for example percent of employed white males and percent of employed black males were managers or professionals whereas percent of white males and percent of black males were hired farm or nonfarm laborers ; and percent of employed black females were domestic household workers compared to only percent of white females. There is also consid- erable occupational segregation by sex and some believe that the sex segregation is even greater than the racial segregation. For example percent of managers and percent of farm laborers were men ; but only percent of nurses and percent of elementary school teachers were men Occupational segregation by race derives partly from differences in schooling and partly from the geographical distribution of blacks who disproportionately live in the South. Moreover there has been substantial discrimination against blacks who entered or tried to enter certain occupations. This discrimination stemming from the attitudes of white employers employees and consumers of services resulted in a smaller proportion of blacks entering these occupations. In some professions for example medicine law and the ministry blacks were generally restricted to practicing in segregated black markets. In addition blacks were not always granted equal opportunity to move up the occupational scale for example from laborer or operative to foreman or manager Some of the differences in occupational composition by sex can be attributed to differences in physical attributes. Undoubtedly however jobs requiring physical strength are on the decline and it is questionable whether this factor was ever very important. One may also argue that prejudice on the part of employers fellow employees and consumers operates to exclude women from some activities in the labor market and to favor them in others Another hypothesis stresses the difference in role identification that leads to differences between the work careers and training of women and men That is women who anticipate combining some work with marriage seek occupations and work situations which are most complementary to home responsibilities such as those in which hours are shorter or correspond to the children 's school hours or those offering work close to home. Another criterion is the penalty for interruptions in work. For example women might avoid situations with rigid seniority rules or they might choose careers in which skills are least likely to depreciate during a period spent at home Some of the occupations stereotyped as women 's such as elementary school teaching and nursing are indeed those where the same skills can be utilized in the home. According to this view occupational differences arise from choice although the choice may be induced by a pervasive societal bias which dictates that home responsibilities are the women 's major work. It is quite difficult to separate empirically the effects of discrimination in the labor market from the effects of personal considerations in women 's occupational choices One may question whether the wage rates received by blacks and women have been affected by the occupational segregation. Earnings differ from occupation to occupation. If blacks or women were clustered in occupations that were low paying for all groups including white males then the lower average hourly earnings of blacks and women could be attributed to dif- ferences in their mix of occupations rather than to earnings differences within individual occupations. To estimate the effect of occupational mix on the earnings of black males indexes were calculated to measure what black males would earn if they had the white male occupational distribution but the earnings of black males within each occupation. Similar indexes were computed to measure what white women would earn if they had the same occupational distribution as white men but the earnings of white women within occupations Preliminary results using census data on detailed occupations indicate that black males would have hourly earnings about percent higher if they had the white male mix of occupations. Since white males earned percent more than black males occupational differences would appear to " explain " percent of the differential. However those with high levels of education have a very different occupational distribution compared to those with lower levels of education. Hence it may be that in adjusting for occupation one is really adjusting for education. Indexes calculated for seperate education groups indicate a much smaller explanatory power of occupation. For example among males who completed to years of schooling the earnings of black workers would be increased by only percent if they were given the white occupational distribution and this would account for percent of the race differential in earnings Comparing white women and white men to years old the preliminary results for indicate that women would increase their earnings by about percent if they had the occupational mix of men and this would account for about percent of the gross earnings differential between women and men. Since women have completed roughly the same average years of schooling as men education would not be expected to interact so strongly with occupation. Within education groups occupational mix seems to explain less for women below the college level than for women as a whole but relatively more at the college level Since occupation alone does not explain very much of the overall earnings differential between men and women it would seem that earnings differentials within occupations as they are now defined must be more important than earnings differentials between occupations. In other words if custom or overt barriers to entry have relegated women to different occupations from those of men this factor has not been the major one in lowering their earnings It has already been noted that earnings differences between women and men are in large part a consequence of differences in lifetime labor market experience. Since earnings differences between occupations may also be influenced by sex differences in the extent of post-school training between occupations it may be necessary to make a distinction between the explanatory power of occupational mix per se and the explanatory power of occupational differences in experience. This requires data not currently available In conclusion it appears that the different occupational distributions of white men compared to black men and white women explain at most about one-fourth of the existing earnings differentials between them. Because occupational differences can also be explained by other factors that differ between the races and the sexes such as labor market experience ( post-school training ) and region the true effect of occupation may be much smaller THE LOW-INCOME POPULATION The Government has assumed an ever larger role in helping to see that those in need reach an adequate standard of living ; and a considerable share of the Federal budget is now devoted directly and indirectly to that end THE DEFINITION OF POVERTY There is not and probably never will be a consensus on any one definition of poverty. Many programs require however that we distinguish those who fall below a minimum income standard ; and accordingly the concept of the low-income or poverty threshold has been developed. The Government concept is defined essentially as an amount about three times the estimated cost of a nutritionally adequate diet. The standard is adjusted for differences in family size sex of family head number of children and farm-nonfarm residence ; and different schedules are set for each group The standard for each group is adjusted each year for changes in the overall consumer price index. Thus the average threshold for a nonfarm family of four increased from $ in to $ in Because the poverty threshold is in real dollars an absolute standard it can not be used to measure changes in the relative inequality of income. Indeed as the average real income level of the population increases the poverty standard lags farther behind the average. Thus the poverty threshold for a family of four declined from about percent of median family income in to percent in Only cash income is used in determining low-income status although a crude implicit adjustment is made for food grown at home by farm families It has not been feasible to take account of the tremendous growth in the number and size of transfers in kind such as public housing food stamps child care and medical care. For example in Federal and State government expenditures per poor person on the food subsidy and medicaid programs alone valued at cost were equal to about percent of the money income of the average person in the low-income category It would be extremely difficult to determine the exact incidence or value of all the benefits. The programs for the low-income population are administered by different agencies and jurisdictions they also have different aims and are distributed to somewhat different target populations. Moreover the income in kind can not be considered a perfect substitute dollar for dollar for cash income. For example a public expenditure of $ a month for public housing may be valued by the poor family at considerably less than $ Nevertheless it seems safe to conclude that some low-income families with in-kind benefits are receiving real incomes in excess of the low-income threshold and that the proportion exceeding the threshold has increased with the growth of the programs. On the other hand some persons classified as above the low-income threshold who receive no in-kind benefits and who have unusual expenses for example because of poor health may have their real income position overstated THE DECREASE IN POVERTY There has been a rapid decline in the number and proportion of persons in families with a cash income below the poverty line ( Table ) In percent of all persons were classified as low income compared to percent in In all years the incidence of poverty is greater among blacks than among whites and much greater among female-headed families than among male-headed families. Since the decline in poverty has been particularly marked for both black and white male-headed families TABLE Persons below the low-income level and percent below the low-income level by family status selected years Family status Total persons below the low-income level ( thousands ) Group below low-income level as percent of all persons in group : Total persons years and over C ) ) Unrelated individuals Persons in families with male head : White Negro and other races Persons in families with female head : White Negro and other races ._ i Not available Note. Persons below the low-income level are those falling below the poverty index adopted by the Federal Interagency Committee in See text for explanation of index Years are not exactly comparable because of changes in definition and methodology Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census The principal factor behind the decline in poverty is economic growth The basic forces underlying economic growth have raised the productivity of even the least skilled worker and have enabled millions of workers to rise above the low-income threshold through higher wage rates for those in the labor force. In addition economic growth has increased the labor force participation of wives by increasing their labor market wage relative to the cost of consumer durables and other substitutes for time in the home. Thus the decline in poverty has been most pronounced for the working poor. In percent of family heads who worked at all and percent of those who worked full time year round were classified as low income ; by the percentages had dropped to and percent respectively Those heads of families who do not work but are no longer in poverty have benefited from increases in social security and pension income which were made possible by economic growth More and more the low-income population is composed of families headed by a person who does not work because of disability age responsibilities in the home or perhaps simply inability to cope with work ( Table ) Unemployment perhaps surprisingly does not play a major role in withdrawal from the labor force. Of those low-income family heads who did not work in percent cited inability to find work as the reason for not working Thus the vast majority of the poor who do not work seem to be in a situation where work is not a feasible alternative. For some the inability to work is a permanent condition but for others it may be temporary TABLE Work experience offamily heads below the low-income level by sex } and Female head Male head Total Work experience of head Total families ( thousands ) Total families ( percent ) Worked i weeks full time weeks part time or full time.. Worked part of year because unemployed Did not work Unable to find work Keeping house Ill disabled retired and other Head in Armed Forces Includes those who worked part-time hours for weeks not shown separately Not reported Note. Persons below the low-income level are those falling below the poverty index adopted by the Federal Interagency Committee in See text for explanation of index Data for and are not exactly comparable because of changes in definition and methodology Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POOR As the population in poverty has come to include a smaller proportion of families with a working adult the demographic characteristics of the poor have changed. Male-headed families have decreased as a proportion of all poor families dropping from percent in to percent in because male family heads are more likely to work than female family heads The proportion of low-income families headed by a female has increased sharply from to from to percent for all females and from to percent for black females. In part this trend results from an increase in the proportion of all families headed by a woman from percent in to percent in However while the incidence of poverty among female-headed families declined in this period it did not decline nearly as fast as for families headed by a male The Male-Headed Family Among male-headed families the presence of children has a direct influence on poverty status since for a given income the more children there are the higher the poverty-income threshold. Children also indirectly affect the family 's income because it is more difficult for a wife to work outside the home when young children are present. In percent of low-income families with a male head had three or more children compared to percent for families above the poverty line. The presence of a working wife can bring an otherwise poor family above the poverty line. Only percent of the wives in low-income families headed by a male worked in compared to percent of wives in families above the poverty line The number of children and the work experience of wives are also important variables affecting the ability of the poor to move up from poverty One longitudinal survey which followed the poverty status of a cohort for years starting in found that about percent of nonaged families headed by a male experienced steady income increases and ended the period out of poverty. This group had significantly fewer children than those who remained poor during those years and a larger proportion of wives who increased their labor market work over the period. However a period of years is too short to determine whether this group is permanently upwardly mobile or simply experiences long-term fluctuations in its income position Low earnings per se are still an important reason for poverty among male-headed families. Educational levels are very low for this group. In only percent were high school graduates or better compared to percent among other male family heads. As might be expected the poor were also much more concentrated in low-income jobs particularly farming : percent of employed men heading low-income families were farmers or farm laborers compared to percent among those not poor. In the future as the level of education rises and as productivity change continues to increase earnings one would expect that the incidence of poverty ( under a fixed standard ) may come close to disappearing for this group The Aged Poor The population or more years old increased as a percentage of the poor from to Since then however the incidence of poverty has dropped sharply for this group from percent in to percent in and the aged represent a declining proportion of the poor. This rapid change is primarily due to across-the-board increases in social security benefits of about percent from Since there has been further expansion in social security benefits. The increase in a widow 's benefits to percent of her deceased husband 's benefits should reduce the extent of poverty among widows Undoubtedly however cash income understates real consumption by the aged poor compared to that of the other poor. Many of the aged have income in the form of imputed rents from owner-occupied homes. Elderly people often consume out of past savings and many widows receive life insurance benefits which are not included in income data. In addition compared to others classified as poor the aged poor derive a larger proportion of their measured income from sources which are not taxed such as social security and some pension income. The aged also have fewer expenses related to employment. The aged benefit disproportionately from medicare and medicaid which are not counted in money income statistics although in this case obviously their need is often greater because of poorer health Even excluding the benefits of medicare and medicaid however it would appear that on average a two-person aged family may have a higher level of consumption than a two-person family which has the same measured cash income but whose members are under age The Female-Headed Family Perhaps the most important issue concerning poverty status in this country is the increasing identification of poverty with the female-headed family Future progress in eliminating poverty will depend in large part on the extent to which poverty can be reduced for this group. If the proportion of families headed by women continues to increase the problem may become still more difficult. Among families with a female head percent were classified as in poverty in compared to percent for male-headed families. Among black female-headed families the proportion was percent. The factors behind this very high incidence of poverty among families headed by women are complex As discussed earlier the average married woman has not had the same labor market experience or vocationally oriented training as her husband Since the incidence of marital breakup is greater among less educated couples the woman who becomes a family head is more likely to have assumed during her marriage the traditional role of caring for children and the home and she is less likely to have had work experience. Women who have children without having married tend to be young with little work experience or formal education. Earnings for women in these circumstances tend to be much lower than for men of the same age and to be lower even than the earnings of other women particularly those with considerable education. Moreover the expenses of going to work are higher for a person with sole responsibility for child care. It is thus clear that if work is to be a sensible option in the single-parent family earnings ( after taxes ) must be sufficiently high to cover the additional costs of child care and other home expenses Not surprisingly poverty status among women is strongly related to presence of children and to work participation. As noted above among women in general the presence of children particularly young children has a strong inhibiting effect on work participation. About percent of female family heads under years of age have children under age As one would also expect mothers who head families are more likely to work than mothers living with their husbands. In percent of the former and percent of the latter worked full time the year round. However mothers heading families are much less likely than men to work full time the year round Among males heading families the proportion was percent Of the small proportion of female family heads with children who did have full-time year-round jobs in percent were in poverty a markedly lower incidence than the percent for all female family heads with children. One can not however infer from this statistic that poverty would fall to that level for all women with children if they did full-time full-year work. It is likely that those women who work extensively are relatively more productive in the labor market because of higher educational attainment greater work experience in the past or greater ability The poverty status of female-headed families is often the result of a marital breakup and this situation is temporary for many. One longitudinal study which followed the poverty status of a cohort over a 5-year period starting in discovered that of those persons in nonaged female-headed families who were poor at the start of the period percent experienced consistent increases in income and had moved out of poverty by the end of the period. ( The comparable percentage for male-headed families was percent. ) Remarriage of the female family head was the primary factor associated with this upward mobility About percent of the persons in female-headed families who started as poor in remained poor throughout the years. The demographic characteristics associated with this more permanently poor group were low education a large number of children and residence in low-wage rural areas with low public assistance payments. For this group the high costs of child care and poor prospects of high earnings suggest that training and increased work in the labor market by the female family head could not be relied on as a route out of poverty The remaining percent of persons in female-headed families who started in poverty moved in and out of poverty during the 5-year period A large part of this change in poverty status was associated with a change in household arrangements Because of the lower work participation of low-income female heads of families the major source of income for this group is public assistance. In public assistance accounted on the average for percent of the income of low-income female-headed families. Many in-kind benefits are given automatically to families receiving public assistance specifically those in the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program which is largely a program for female-headed families. Moreover because public assistance income is not taxed the real consumption of female-headed families is probably understated compared to that of husband-wife families whose income depends more heavily on earnings The increase in female-headed families may per se be an important variable in determining the size of the poverty population in future years. There is some evidence discussed below that our system of welfare payments which has been an important way of increasing income for mothers heading families may itself have promoted some of the increase in female-headed families through the structure of incentives. This is clearly an important issue in the future design of transfer payments to the poor GOVERNMENT TRANSFER PROGRAMS All expenditures by government directly or indirectly have implications for the distribution of income. Analyses can be made of the direct income distribution effect of public transfers. It is far more difficult to identify the income distribution effects of other government expenditures Some of the transfer programs were initially viewed as public insurance mechanisms. Social security was intended as a public pension plan. Unemployment compensation and workmen 's compensation are government mandated insurance. Veterans ' compensation and benefits were adopted as a form of deferred payment for military service. Public assistance was and is explicitly intended as a mechanism for raising the income of those families that would otherwise fall below a socially desired level of consumption FEDERAL TRANSFERS IN The Government gives transfers to individuals and families in the form of cash or subsidization of the price of particular goods and services. Of the two transfers in cash are easier to administer and they also have the advantage that the recipients presumably know better than the Government does how to allocate the transfer income so as to maximize their own wellbeing. Some transfers are given in kind however on the presumption that the goods are of such importance that the recipients should consume at least a minimum quantity. Food medical care and housing are examples Table presents a summary of the Federal Government transfer expenditures in fiscal The poverty status of recipients is based on money income including cash transfers but excluding the value of transfers in kind TABLE Federal Government transfer programs,fiscalyear Program Total expenditure ( millions of dollars ) Number of recipients ( thousands ) Monthly benefits per recipient Percent of recipients in poverty Social Security : Old age and survivors insurance. Disability insurance $ Public assistance : Aid to families with dependent children Blind Disabled Aged Other cash programs : Veterans ' compensation and benefits. Unemployment insurance benefits O ) ( ) In kind : Medicare Medicaid Food stamps. _ Public housing Rent supplements Homeownership assistance ( section ) Rental housing assistance ( section ) The number of recipients is for individuals not families Poverty is defined relative to the money income and the size of the recipient 's family. Money income includes money transfer payments but excludes income received in kind. All percents are estimated Programs with Federal-State sharing of expenses * Not available Source : Office of Management and Budget AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) is now the primary cash assistance program run by the States with Federal assistance Eligibility The original purpose of the program was to assist children in families where there was need for income because of the death severe disability or prolonged absence of the father. The financial aid was intended to enable mothers to stay at home and care for their children rather than be compelled to work. If the mother did work her welfare payments were generally reduced by one dollar for each dollar earned a provision that eliminated the pecuniary incentive for her to go to work. Families with an able-bodied father present who earned little income were not eligible for any federally aided assistance The reasons why AFDC recipients lack the father 's support have changed dramatically over time. In the 's when the program began about percent of those receiving benefits from the program were children of fathers who had died or who were severely disabled. By only percent of the fathers were in this category. The composition of AFDC families has thus shifted toward families with living fathers who are absent either because of divorce or separation or because they are not married to the mother Attitudes have changed and the AFDC rules have shifted toward encouraging mothers to work. Starting in appropriations were authorized to help mothers to become self-supporting through services such as child care for dependent children and rehabilitation assistance for the mother The amendments to the Social Security Act provided a work incentive for families by reducing the implicit tax on earnings and granting assistance in preparing for work through appropriations for services such as training counseling and child care ( the Work Incentive Program or WIN ) The AFDG program has also been liberalized to allow limited assistance to needy families with an able-bodied father present. Since States have had the option of providing aid to families with an unemployed father and States in fact do so Growth of the Program During the 's the proportion of all families in the AFDC program was roughly stable ( Table ) Since then however the proportion of families receiving aid has grown dramatically benefits per recipient have increased and total expenditures in the program have increased even more sharply TABLE AFDC benefits families selected years and AFDC families AFDC benefits i Year Total annual payments to recipients ( millions of dollars ) Average December payment per recipient2 Total ( thousands ) Percent of all families ' $ ? ? ? Aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) Average of all States for December of each year As of December of each year AFDC families as of December and total families as of March ( except for April in ) Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Social and Rehabilitation Service ) Several factors seem to have contributed to the rapid rise in the number of families receiving public assistance. One is the larger number of families with children and with a female as head although this increase in turn may be partly a consequence of the large rise in benefits. From to such families increased by while AFDC families increased by When benefits increased dramatically from to however female-headed families with children increased by million but AFDC families increased by million. A larger proportion of femaleheaded families with children may have become eligible for AFDC many eligible families may have learned for the first time that they could join or a large number no longer hesitated to receive welfare. The publicity given to the problems of poverty during the 's may have informed the poor of their legal rights Undoubtedly the AFDG program became more financially attractive during the period. The basic cash benefit level per recipient increased by percent from to ; this may be compared to the increase in median earnings ( full-time year-round ) in the same years amounting to percent for men and percent for women. In addition AFDC families were made automatically eligible for many in-kind benefits which were introduced or expanded in this period. According to estimates by virtually all AFDC families were eligible for medicaid percent actually participated in the food stamp or food distribution program percent benefited from the Federal school lunch program and percent from subsidized housing. In a family in New York City consisting of three children and a mother who did not work which received all of the benefits listed above would have received benefits which cost the government $ of which $ was cash income. Benefits vary widely however and in Atlanta the value of the same package of benefits for the same family would have been $ of which $ would be cash income. These amounts do not include the value of other benefits received such as child care and manpower training The recipients may not of course value the various in-kind benefits at their actual cost. Benefits such as food stamps are similar to cash and other benefits may subsidize basic goods and services. The value the recipients place on some programs such as medicaid would be more difficult to evaluate As the AFDC program with its related benefits became more generous more people may have decided that the return was worth the difficulties and possible humiliation of applying. Much more study is needed before all the factors underlying the increase in the AFDC case load are understood AFDC and Family Formation and Stability Another issue of social importance is how the increase in AFDC benefits affects the formation of female-headed families. One recent study of whether higher levels of stipends in AFDC did result in a higher rate of female headship used multivariate analysis to control for the effect of male wages and other relevant causal factors. The finding for was that across metropolitan areas holding constant the male wage a percent higher AFDC stipend in an area was associated with a nearly percent higher rate of female headship. Holding constant the AFDC stipend an increase in the male wage was associated with a decline in female headships. The analysis was duplicated for with similar findings although the relationships were somewhat weaker. By however in-kind benefits would have formed a much larger unmeasured addition to the stipend ; results for that year may consequently be less reliable From to women with children became more likely to head families. The proportion increased from to percent for white women and from to percent for black women. In this period widows declined as a proportion of all female heads of families with children but unmarried mothers accounted for an increasing share. It is quite possible that rising AFDC payments provided one incentive for young women to forgo marriage and set up a household of their own with their children The majority of both black and white female heads of families with children are separated or divorced. During the period to disrupted marriages continued to play a part in the total increase in female headships Some of this increase however was the result of a decline in the proportion of divorced and separated mothers who lived with other relatives and an increase in the proportion who set up their own households and would then be counted as family heads. Rising levels of AFDC benefits may have made it financially possible to do so. For this group the effect of AFDC was not to cause the separation of couples but to induce the mother to live alone with her children Work Incentives Important changes in the rules intended to reduce welfare expenditures by providing a monetary incentive to work were introduced during the 's. As noted earlier AFDC recipients were initially subject to a dollar reduction in cash benefits for each dollar earned ( an implicit marginal tax rate of percent ) In a modification of the tax on benefits was introduced requiring the States to grant a deduction for workrelated expenses. As a result of the amendments AFDC recipients are allowed to retain the first $ of their earnings without any loss in benefits after which cash benefits are reduced by cents for each additional dollar earned Mothers in the AFDC program show no major change in their work in the labor market since the actual start of WIN in ( Table ) Yet this was a period when the labor force participation of women with children was increasing. The recession in may have weakened employment prospects in that year. However the large increase in the percentage unemployed in may well be the result of the work requirement provisions imposed in June as a result of the amendments whereby all employable welfare recipients were as a condition of payment required to register for work or for training in the WIN program. It should be noted though that the full long-term results of the program changes introduced at that time are not yet reflected in the data One explanation of the puzzling lack of response to the work incentives introduced in is that the rapid growth of in-kind benefits each of which is reduced in amount as earnings increase served to increase the actual reduction in total benefits faced by a recipient who started working As an AFDC recipient 's earnings rise she thus pays a price not only in loss TABLE Trends in the employment status of mothers in the AFDC program selected years Status of mother Total mothers ( thousands ) * _ Total mothers ( percent ) Mothers employed Full-time Part-time Mothers not employed Actively seeking work Limited to mothers jn the Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) program who were living at home Not available Note. Data refer to status in January of each year. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Social and Rehabilitation Service ) of some of the AFDC grant but also in the loss of some food stamp housing and other benefits. According to this view while the amendments alone would have given an incentive to work their effects may well have been offset by the increasing benefits in kind some of which would be lost for each increase in labor market earnings It is not clear however how important in practice this factor could be since the reduction in cash benefits as earnings rise has become very small Many States exempt large amounts of earnings before any reduction in benefits occurs and this reduction is in addition to the $ a month income disregard established by the amendments. In Mississippi for example the State income disregard is large and it is unlikely that the reduction in cash benefits ever exceeds percent of earnings net of work expenses ( the average cash benefit tax rate ) Moreover a change in in the method of entering work-related expenses into the cash benefits reduction formula further lowered the effective tax rate. One study estimated that the average net tax rate paid by the average working AFDC mother in Illinois and New Jersey ( two relatively high tax States ) fell from percent to percent between and In general it would appear that the average tax rate on earnings must have fallen since even after accounting for the growth of in-kind benefits and their effect on the overall implicit tax rate An important factor discouraging work may have been the increase in the benefit level itself ( including in-kind benefits ) which since many persons eligible for AFDC have low potential earnings made it possible for many to maintain a higher living standard than could be obtained through work. Moreover the average AFDC mother incurs substantial work expenses including child care payroll taxes transportation and additional outlays for clothing and food. These expenses are likely to make up a large proportion of earnings that are not high to begin with. Thus the actual dollar increment of earnings that could be retained even if the benefit tax rates were zero could well be too low to make it profitable to work Equity and Welfare Reform Many problems of equity have been raised with respect to the AFDC program. There are wide variations from State to State in the level of benefits There are wide variations from family to family in the extent to which they receive in-kind benefits. And perhaps most important many poor families with a working parent earn less than the total benefits to a welfare family In designing a reform of the public assistance program it will be important to pay attention to these inequities It will also be important to give women fewer incentives to have children without marrying or to separate if they are married. It may therefore be necessary to extend income supplements to the poor family with a working male head. In the long run however such a program would provide work disincentives for husbands and wives in intact families. This could be overcome by a moderate implicit reduction in benefits as earnings rise but such a solution could be costly. Resolving the dilemma will be one of our most challenging problems SOCIAL SECURITY AND SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME Since the 's the Federal Government has provided funds for the aged blind and disabled and for the dependents of deceased workers. The current programs for these groups are known as Social Security and Supplemental Security Income Social Security The transfer program with the largest disbursement of funds and number of recipients in was Old Age and Survivors Insurance ( Table ) OASI provided $ billion in benefits to million recipients. The recipients were either aged or the dependents of deceased workers. Approximately percent of the recipients were classified as in poverty on the basis of money income ( including social security benefits ) Over million persons received disability benefits under social security almost one-quarter of whom were in poverty Social security benefits have been rising rapidly in recent years. The minimum and maximum benefits for a worker retiring at age under full benefits has increased from December to December by percent and percent respectively to $ and $ per month. The consumer price index increased by percent in the same period. In addition acrossthe-board increases of and percent are scheduled for March and June Starting in social security benefits can be increased annually to reflect increases in the consumer price index One effect of the benefit increases is that the aged are now more likely to compose a separate family rather than a subfamily within a larger family. Although increased social security benefits have reduced poverty in the past most recipients at present are not in poverty. Across-the-board O benefit increases greater than the increase in the cost of living can not be expected to reduce poverty markedly in the future Accompanying the increase in social security benefits has been a rise in the social security payroll tax. From to the tax rate paid by both the employer and employee was percent of the worker 's earnings up to $ In January the social security tax rate ( for OASI and disability and hospital insurance ) was percent of earnings up to $ There is reason to believe that part of the employer 's tax is shifted to employees Viewed solely as a tax the social security levy is regressive. As a percentage of all Federal Government receipts social security taxes increased from percent in to percent in The social security tax is unique in that there tends to be far less public opposition to raising revenue from this source than from other sources Supplemental Security Income As of January Federal grants-in-aid to States for public assistance to the aged blind and disabled were discontinued and a new federally administered Supplemental Security Income program ( SSI ) financed out of general tax revenues was instituted. The primary purpose of this new program is to provide a nationally established minimum income for these three specific categories of adults who in general can not be expected to earn an adequate income. Most of the recipients of public assistance benefits under the old program for the aged blind and disabled were in poverty in ( Table ) The benefits under SSI for those with no other money income are $ a month for a single person and $ a month for a couple. These are to be increased to $ and $ respectively in July SSI recipients can not purchase food stamps. With the federalization of assistance benefits have increased for the aged blind and disabled poor in many States and States can provide additional income supplements to SSIrecipients FEDERAL FOOD SUBSIDY PROGRAMS Ever since the Great Depression of the 's the subsidization of food consumption has been a major Federal Government program to aid the poor Food Stamps Food stamps are a Federal program initiated in to supplement the income of the poor in participating counties. The growth of the program has been phenomenal. In June persons received food stamps at a cost to the Federal Government of $ million during fiscal By July there were million recipients and Federal costs in fiscal were $ billion. In June food stamps were available in States and the District of Columbia and the program will be mandated for the entire Nation in July An eligible family can buy food coupons for a price that is lower than the redemption value at the grocery store. The difference between the redemption value and the price of the coupons to the family is the subsidy Families on public assistance are automatically eligible for the program Almost percent of recipients in July were not on public assistance however although percent of food stamp recipients were in the poverty population The average monthly subsidy per person in recipient households was $ in July or percent of the redemption value of the average coupon. The maximum monthly subsidy for a family of four with no money income is $ and the subsidy declines for each additional dollar of income A family of four with monthly income in excess of $ receives no subsidy The income concept for eligibility is money income including money transfers after deducting income and payroll taxes child care expenses if needed because of work rent payments exceeding percent of money income and other allowances Other Food Programs There are two other Federal food programs. The family food distribution program provides free foodstuffs for low-income families. From a peak of million recipients in fiscal the number has declined to million in July Relatively few counties have both a food stamp and a food distribution program at the same time. The food stamp program has gradually replaced the family food distribution program which will in general be terminated in July The Federal school nutrition programs subsidize milk consumption as well as breakfast and lunch for children in participating schools with larger subsidies for children from low-income families. In fiscal million school children benefited from the school lunch program at a cost to the Federal Government of $ million MEDICARE AND MEDICAID Since the Federal Government has been more directly involved in the subsidization of medical care for the aged and the poor through two new programs medicare and medicaid Medicare Medicare is a Federal Government health insurance program covering hospital care post-hospital extended care physicians ' services home health services and certain other benefits for all persons aged years and older Since January medicare has been extended to those under who have been entitled to benefits from social security disability insurance for at least years as well as to all those covered by social security and their dependents who require treatment for chronic kidney disease. The benefits under medicare are broad but with defined limits and there are deductibles and cost sharing ( coinsurance ) that the recipient must pay In fiscal million persons received medical care paid for through the medicare program. The average benefit was $ per month ( Table ) Medicare is chiefly designed for the aged many of whom are not poor. About percent of the recipients of medicare benefits in fiscal were in poverty on the basis of current money income Me die aid Medicaid is a Federal-State health assistance program for welfare recipients and the medically indigent. Medicaid is administered by the States on a cost-sharing basis with the Federal Government. The eligibility requirements and the benefits differ among the States The medically indigent are those who are not necessarily poor by the Bureau of the Census poverty standard but are judged by the States to have incomes sufficiently low or medical expenses sufficiently high to qualify for assistance. In fiscal percent of the medicaid recipients were in the poverty population. Some of the million persons receiving medicaid in fiscal were among the aged poor and were using medicaid to pay the premium deductibles and coinsurance required by medicare. Medicaid benefits are received by many persons such as children on AFDC and their mothers who are not chronically ill and hence have small annual medical expenses but who are nevertheless in poverty The Growth of the Programs Public expenditures for medicaid and medicare have been rising at an annual rate of percent from to As knowledge of the programs has spread the number of recipients has increased. This source of increased expenditures is not likely to continue indefinitely. There has also been a large increase in the utilization of services per recipient and in the prices charged per unit of service. Although part of the price increase may reflect quality improvements some of it derives from pure increases in price Higher deductibles and coinsurance would reduce the growing cost of the programs due to the increase in services and prices per unit of service At the same time however it would increase the out-of-pocket cost of medical care for the aged and the poor. A mechanism is needed that will provide adequate medical care for the aged and the poor and reduce the strong inflationary pressures built into medicaid and medicare but that will do so without direct Government provision of medical care or extensive regulation of the medical care sector INCOME DISTRIBUTION EFFECTS OF MONEY TRANSFER PROGRAMS The transfer programs discussed above as well as other government transfers affect the incomes of families. Comparisons between these money transfer payments and the total money income of families show the income redistribution effects of the transfers. How participation in the labor market and family formation are affected by money transfers is an important issue but too little is known at the present time to quantify what the distribution of family income would be if there were no transfers Money Transfers As the data in Table indicate percent of the families reported receiving some transfer payments in Social security and railroad retireTABLE Proportion of families having transfer income from particular sources Percent of families in each income class with transfer payments Income class Social security and railroad retirement Total Public assistance Other Under $ $ l,000- $ l f 999_ $ $ 2,999_ $ $ 3,999_ $ $ 4,999_ $ $ 5,999_ $ $ 6,999_ $ $ 7,999_ $ $ 9,999_ $ $ f $ $ 24,999__ $ and over All families Family income is family money income including transfer income in cash Public assistance includes AFDC and assistance to the aged blind and disabled Includes unemployment compensation workmen 's compensation government employee pensions veterans ' benefits and unidentified transfer payments Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Social Security Administration ) ment benefits were the most common form of transfer and were received by percent of the families. Public assistance went to percent of the families ; both unemployment compensation and veterans ' benefits were paid to approximately percent of the families. Only percent of money income was derived from transfers. The average transfer per family was $ of which percent was from social security percent from public assistance and percent from other sources The higher the income the smaller the proportion of families receiving a transfer. The percentage of income in each group derived from government transfers was also lower for higher levels of income. For example those with incomes between $ and $ received an average of percent of their income from transfers but only percent of the income in the $ ^ to $ range was derived from transfers. Low-income families had approximately twice the dollar value of transfers that highincome families had. Except for the lowest two income groups however the mean income from government transfers for those who received transfer income was largely invariant with family income after transfers. Highincome families receive a small proportion of their total income from government transfers not because of a smaller dollar transfer per recipient but because they have more income from other sources ( earnings and property income ) and fewer among them receive transfer income Public assistance is specifically designed to provide income supplements for those who would otherwise have little income. Since public assistance is heavily concentrated in the lowest income groups and the benefits per recipient are a very large fraction of the income of the poor public assistance has a strong income redistribution effect. Social security and railroad retirement payments are largely received by aged families and younger families headed by a widow. Although these families tend to have low current income the benefits are larger for those who had higher earnings in the past The target populations for the other forms of transfer payments that is the unemployed those injured on the job retired Government employees and veterans are not necessarily poor. Except for the lowest and highest income groups approximately percent of the families in each group received funds in from one or more of these four sources. Again except for the extremes of the distribution there is virtually no change in dollar benefits per recipient for higher-income groups. The higher the other income of the family the smaller the proportion of income derived from such benefits. These transfers have a mild income redistribution effect Within the category of other payments unemployment compensation is more important for middle-income families ( $ to $ ) than for the poorest and wealthiest of families. The members of the poorest families ordinarily have too little work experience to qualify for unemployment compensation. The income earners in the highest-income families have lower rates of unemployment Income Inequality Before and After the Transfers Table presents a measure of income inequality the variance in the natural logarithm of income for family money income and family money income minus particular transfers ( see supplement to this chapter ) This permits a determination of the extent to which the different types of transfers reduce income inequality. Such an approach implicitly assumes that the transfers do not give rise to labor market or family formation responses by TABLE The effect of money transfers on family income inequality Type of income Income inequality All income All excluding " other " t r a n s f e r All excluding social security All excluding public assistance3 All excluding social security and public assistance3 All excluding all transfer income Income inequality is measured by the variance in the natural log of income. ( See Supplement to this chapter ) " Other " transfers include unemployment benefits workmen 's compensation government employee pensions and veterans benefits. The income classes used were : Under $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; $ $ ; and $ and over Public assistance includes AFDC and assistance to the aged blind and disabled Sources : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Social Security Administration ) and Council of Economic Advisers the recipients. The data suggest that social security and public assistance dramatically decreased the measured relative inequality of family income The combined effect of the other transfers is a small decrease in income inequality The Tax Transfer System The success of the Government 's programs for the redistribution of income can not be judged from any one program or from an examination of taxes or transfers separately. Primarily because of public assistance social security medicaid and food stamps the transfer system is highly progressive in redistributing income to low-income families. It was shown above ( Table ) that the net effect of personal income and payroll taxes on cash and imputed income appears to be progressive. Several studies have examined the effect of the tax system on the distribution of income when accrued capital gains and losses are included in the income concept. These studies suggest that the tax system is roughly proportional over the income intervals in which most families belong regressive for those with very low incomes and progressive at the upper end. However the combined direct effects of the tax and transfer systems clearly appear to be progressive SUPPLEMENT The Variance of the Natural Logarithm of Income The " variance of the natural logarithm of incom'e " is the measure of overall income inequality used in the analysis of the distribution of income in this chapter. It can be written as : N ( lnY,-lnY ) S ( lnY ) = i = l JJ- ~ ( ) where Yj is the income of the i th observation ( individual or family ) In designates natural logarithm ancj there are N observations in the data. Larger values of S2 mean greater inequality of income and S2 equals zero if there is no inequality. While a reduction of the measure from to conveys an acceptable suggestion about a decline in inequality and a decline from to an acceptable suggestion about a greater decline the statement that the second of these two declines is twice the first would not be meaningful The variance of the natural logarithm of income is a commonly used simple measure of relative inequality. A measure of relative inequality does not change in value if all of the observations have the same percentage change in income. If Y * = Y ( l+k ) ( ) where k is the percentage change in income the natural logarithm of both sides of equation ( ) is lnY * i = lnYi ln ( l k ) ( ) Computing the mean of both sides of equation ( ) E I n Y ln ( l-f k ) ( ) Then subtracting equation ( ) from equation ( ) lnY * i InY * = ( lnYs ln ( l-fk ) ) " ( mY ln ( l k ) ) = lnYj mYT ( ) and S2 ( lnY * ) = SHlnY ) ( ) Thus a proportional tax on income or a proportional cash subsidy does not change relative income inequality Relative inequality decreases ( increases ) if the income of each observation is increased ( decreased ) by the same dollar amount. A $ per year grant to a poor family constitutes a larger percentage increase in income than an equal dollar grant to a wealthy family. Such a grant reduces the relative inequality of income A progressive tax is one in which the higher the level of income the larger the proportion of income paid in taxes. In a regressive tax a smaller proportion of income is paid in taxes as income increases. A progressive tax reduces and a regressive tax increases relative income inequality ( S ( lnY ) ) CHAPTER The International Economy in I NTERNATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT grew at a near record rate during despite the strains placed on the international economy by massive capital flows large fluctuations in exchange rates and strong price pressures due to crop failures capacity limitations and cutbacks in oil production by the major producers. The existing international monetary and trading system proved resilient enough to enable governments to cope with the difficulties they experienced in managing their economies without having to take measures that would have seriously disrupted international trade and investment flows. While individual governments adopted different policy instruments including external measures in seeking to stabilize their economies potential policy conflicts were minimized by mutual accommodation. The common effort to arrive at pragmatic solutions to joint problems undoubtedly strengthened the international economic system As indicated elsewhere in this report the major problem faced by the United States as well as the other major industrial nations during was inflation. In most economies demand at the beginning of the year was fast approaching or was already in excess of the capacity to produce more goods Demand pressures were intensified when large speculative capital flows led to excessive increases in the money supply in a number of countries. Superimposed on this generally inflationary environment were particularly large imbalances between demand and supply in particular sectors. Capacity limitations were especially severe in the processing of raw materials like petroleum and steel. Moreover crop failures in many parts of the world put pressures on agricultural supplies in the United States and elsewhere and in the latter part of the year the major oil producers in the Middle East cut back the oil they were supplying to the rest of the world General inflation combined with particularly large increases in the prices of basic foods and processed materials to create tremendous political pressures in most countries for government actions to reduce price increases. Among the policy measures governments took in response to such pressures were price controls and export controls. The latter measure had the unfortunate side effect of shifting the inflationary pressures to other countries. Nevertheless in most cases governments recognized the limits of beggar-my-neighbor policies and the tensions among countries resulting from the pursuit of such policies were successfully eased by means of diplomatic efforts In working out cooperative approaches to the various global problems governments benefited from discussions regarding a longer-term reform of international economic arrangements. In turn the experiences of the past year provided a new perspective on plans for reform. Progress was made in each of the three major areas of reform : the international monetary system the international trading system and arrangements relating to international investment The international monetary system. Discussions on the future of the international monetary system were held in the framework of the Committee of Twenty which was set up by the countries belonging to the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) An indication of the current state of these discussions was provided by the chairman of that committee in a report to the annual meeting of the IMF in Nairobi in September The international trading system. Also in September countries reached agreement in Tokyo on some general objectives and a framework for a major new round of trade negotiations. They pledged to aim simultaneously for an expansion of international trade opportunities and improvements in the rules and procedures for coordinating trade policies. Prior to this meeting the Administration sent to the Congress draft legislation to authorize U.S. participation in a new round of trade negotiations and to improve the legislative provisions dealing with Presidential management of U.S. trade policy International investment. Discussions were held on investment questions in the framework of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The preliminary conclusions reached on the basis of these discussions point to the desirability of some new procedures and guidelines which would assure an efficient international allocation of new capital WHAT HAPPENED IN ? In the area of international economic relations the year may be characterized as one of continuing adjustment to past disequilibria as well as to new developments that entered the picture during the year. Early in the year the governments of most major countries abandoned attempts to fix exchange rates at negotiated levels. While central banks continued to intervene to some extent foreign excharge markets played the major role in determining the exchange rates that would clear the market. This process was marked at times by unusually large fluctuations of market exchange rates. Nevertheless the market performed its intermediating function well and neither trade nor long-term capital flows were seriously disrupted at any time during the year The developments in the balance of payments accounts of individual countries reflected in part the developments in the foreign exchange markets. The appreciation and depreciation of individual currencies achieved either through formal measures by the authorities or as a result of free movement of exchange rates continued to influence the flows of international commerce and thus the deficits and surpluses of individual countries. Special developments such as the shortages of food in certain parts of the world and later in the year the emerging world energy crisis also affected the direction and magnitude of trade and capital flows among countries What Happened to Exchange Rates ? Developments during in the foreign exchange market can be conveniently broken into four periods coinciding with the quarters of the year. These developments are described in detail below. Briefly in the first quarter massive capital flows from the United States to Europe and Japan had two effects : First foreign central banks added around $ billion in claims against the United States to their reserves as a result of their efforts to support the value of the dollar in terms of their own currencies. Second when large-scale market intervention failed to restore stability to foreign exchange markets fixed exchange rates were abandoned ; consequently the dollar fell during the quarter by an average of percent against the EC currencies floating jointly and percent against the currencies of major industrial countries when each is weighted by that country 's bilateral trade with the United States ( Table ) For the computation of the trade-weighted depreciation of the dollar see the supplement to this chapter In the second quarter the dollar depreciated against most continental European currencies but remained in close relationship to the Japanese yen the Canadian dollar and a number of other currencies accounting for twothirds of U.S. trade. The dollar dropped percent against most EC currencies floating jointly and around percent against the group of currencies. Net claims of foreign central banks on the United States during this period actually decreased by about $ billion In the third quarter the decline of the dollar was arrested and its value remained roughly the same against the group of currencies. In fact there was limited intervention by a number of central banks including the United States to prevent the dollar from rising TABLE Changes in the foreign exchange value of the dollar U.S. liabilities to qfficia foreigners and U.S. liabilities to private foreigners Percent change from preceding quarter Item First quarter Foreign exchange value of the dollar Second quarter Third quarter U.S. liabilities private foreigners * U.S. liabilities official foreigners Fourth quarter Trade-weighted depreciation of the dollar against major currencies ; computed by Morgan Guaranty Trust Company central banks and governments Liabilities to foreign Not available External liabilities to other banks and to other foreigners Sources : Morgan Guaranty Trust Company and International Monetary Fund In the fourth quarter the dollar rose sharply. It rose percent against the German mark and around percent against the group of currencies Central banks intervened substantially to slow the dollar 's rise and claims by foreign central banks on the United States declined The first quarter of : Fixed exchange rates are abandoned. Foreign exchange markets were stable in the beginning of In most foreign exchange markets the dollar was above the level where central banks were committed to buy dollars to keep its value within the agreed margins. The stability was so fragile however that any disturbance had a highly unsettling effect on the market. The first such disturbance was an acceleration of the capital flight from Italy into Switzerland. Confronted with massive outflows the Italian authorities allowed the lira to float first for financial transactions and later for all transactions. In Switzerland the influx of funds from abroad intensified an already high rate of inflation. To gain greater control over its monetary policy Switzerland decided on January to allow the franc to float. By terminating their purchases of foreign currencies in support of a fixed value of the franc vis-a-vis other currencies the Swiss monetary authorities were able to avoid further involuntary increases in the Swiss money supply The floating of the franc by Switzerland a country viewed by many as the epitome of financial orthodoxy strengthened expectations that other exchange rate adjustments were inevitable particularly for currencies of countries with large payments imbalances such as Japan and Germany These expectations led to increasingly large speculative purchases of marks and yen for dollars. Such sales reached a peak in the first week of February forcing the closing of foreign exchange markets on February Extensive consultations among the monetary officials of major countries followed and culminated in a number of coordinated exchange rate adjustments. On February the Administration announced that it would ask Congress to approve a percent devaluation of the dollar in terms of Special Drawing Rights ( SDR 's ) At the same time the Japanese authorities announced that the Japanese yen would be allowed to float upward. The resulting exchange rate structure was endorsed by the major industrial nations The multilateral adjustment of exchange rate patterns in February including the devaluation of the dollar did not however restore market confidence in the entire pattern of rates in particular the rate for the German mark. Large-scale flows of speculative funds out of dollars into marks and some other currencies continued until exchange markets were officially closed on March The exchange markets remained officially closed until March although private trading of currencies continued. On March five of the European Community ( EC ) countries Belgium Denmark France Germany and the Netherlands allowed their currencies to float jointly vis-a-vis the dollar and other currencies. As before these countries decided to keep the exchange rates between any two of their currencies within % percent of an agreed relationship. In addition Norway and Sweden subsequently decided to peg their currencies to the jointly floating EG currencies The second quarter of : The dollar drops further. Between the end of March and the end of June the markets were characterized by a substantial depreciation of the dollar against most European currencies. At the same time the dollar remained relatively unchanged against the currencies of Japan Canada and a number of other countries. The dollar declined about percent in terms of most EG currencies floating jointly and percent in terms of the trade-weighted average of currencies. The dollar declined by as much as percent vis-a-vis the German mark which was revalued by 5/2 percent relative to the other EG currencies floating jointly ( Chart ) There were three sources of downward pressure on the dollar in European exchange markets during this period. First the United States continued to have a deficit vis-a-vis Europe on basic balance transactions Chart Change in the Value of the U.S. Dollar Relative to Selected Foreign Currencies PERCENT CHANGE FROM MAY \ BRITISH POUND TRADE-WEIGHTED AVERAGE VALUEOFTHE D O L L A R * L / * A * FRENCH FRANC / JAPANESE YEN i GERMAN MARK I I I I I I1 i i i i i i ii i i i i i i i II SEPT. OCT. NOV. DEC JAN FEB. MAR. APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AUG * RELATIVE TO MAJOR CURRENCIES ; COMPUTED BY MORGAN GUARANTY TRUST COMPANY NOTE : FOR INDIVIDUAL CURRENCIES FRIDAY CLOSING PRICES WERE USED SOURCE : MORGAN GUARANTY TRUST COMPANY which include trade grants and other unilateral transfers and long-term investment. This meant that the public was supplying more dollars through these transactions in exchange for European currencies than were being purchased with European currencies through these transactions. Second many non-European countries besides the United States had deficits vis-avis Europe in basic transactions. Since most of these countries use the dollar as a reserve currency they tended to finance their deficits vis-a-vis Europe with dollars. Dollars from non-American sources were thus competing with dollars from the United States in European exchange markets Third the dollar is widely held abroad not only by central banks but also by many private individuals banks and corporations. With the continuing decline of the dollar during the previous years many of these private foreign holders wanted to exchange their dollars for foreign currencies As long as markets clear however there can be no " additional " dollars remaining unsold. Exchange rates will change until enough sellers have been discouraged from selling or enough buyers have been encouraged to buy. Equilibrium in the market was established during this period by private foreigners on balance increasing their dollar holdings. Figures for dollars held by private foreigners in Europe are not available but the changes in these holdings are reflected in the $ billion increase of U.S liquid liabilities to all private foreigners from the end of March to the end of June. Foreign central banks decreased their holdings of dollars over this period by $ million The rapid drop of the dollar significantly below what many considered its longer-term value created widespread uncertainty regarding future exchange market trends ; for a short period during the end of June and the beginning of July the spread between buying and selling rates widened and it became increasingly difficult for traders to obtain forward coverage Nevertheless foreign exchange markets remained open throughout this period and normal international trade and investment transactions continued without major disruption. Fears by many that floating exchange rates would disrupt international trade proved to be without foundation The third quarter of : The dollar begins to rise. The decline of the dollar relative to European currencies was reversed in the third quarter as an increasing body of opinion in the market held that the dollar had become undervalued a view that was strengthened by the emergence of a sizable surplus in U.S. trade of goods and services. In this favorable atmosphere some further impetus to the turn in market opinion came from the announcement on July of U.S. intervention in the foreign exchange market in order to maintain orderly market conditions This move discouraged speculation against the dollar by raising the possibility that the U.S. authorities would buy as many dollars ( or sell as many foreign currencies ) as would be necessary to prevent a further decline. To make large-scale intervention by U.S. authorities in the foreign exchange market a credible possibility it was announced at the same time that bi- lateral swap facilities had been increased by $ * billion ; the amount of foreign currencies that the Federal Reserve could borrow from other central banks thus rose to nearly $ billion. In fact intervention by the Federal Reserve amounted to only about $ million during the last weeks of July. During this period the dollar rose by around percent against the jointly floating European currencies The fourth quarter of : The dollar rises further. During the fourth quarter the appreciation of the dollar continued in part because it was thought that the United States was in a relatively better position than Western European countries and Japan to deal with the cutback of oil production in the Middle East and the simultaneous increase in world oil prices. At the same time the surpluses in U.S. trade were becoming larger and figures published for the long-term investment account began to show a surplus. Between September and December the dollar rose by about percent against the jointly floating European currencies. By the end of the year the dollar was thus approximately back to its February post-devaluation level. The dollar was rising so fast in fact that some foreign central banks found it increasingly desirable to reduce their controls on capital inflows and to sell off some of the dollars which they had accumulated in the past. Foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank declined by $ billion each during the October to November period as a result of their dollar sales Increasingly in the fourth quarter the exchange markets became dominated by the energy crisis and the abrupt and massive additions to import costs of oil. Early in January both the yen and the European currencies floating jointly depreciated sharply and in some cases reached levels lower than those prevailing immediately after the multilateral adjustment of February On January the French franc was allowed to float freely and immediately declined by percent Over the year as a whole the functioning of the exchange market improved as traders gained experience with floating exchange rates. This can be seen for instance in the narrowing spread between the buying and selling rates of the major currencies traded and in.the diminished day-to-day fluctuations of these currencies. In general one has to conclude that despite the dramatic decline and the equally dramatic rise of the dollar against the major European currencies foreign exchange markets functioned remarkably well and only on a few days was it difficult to carry out foreign exchange transactions What Happened to All Those Dollars ? Over the years a large volume of dollars has been accumulated by foreigners both governments and private individuals. To a large extent these dollars are held because the dollar is the most widely used currency for international transactions and a stock of dollars was therefore useful for all the reasons that induce people to hold money. Dollars are thus held voluntarily by private banks corporations and individuals. They are also held volun- tarily by foreign central banks even though central banks to some extent hold these dollars not because they want to increase their dollar reserves but because they want to avoid a rise in the value of their currencies relative to the dollar Dollars held by foreigners are generally held in the form of dollar balances at commercial banks. However not all of the dollars held by foreigners are dollars which are liquid liabilities of the United States that is dollar balances held in U.S. commercial banks. Some dollars are liabilities of European private banks which have accepted dollar deposits. These are generally known as Eurodollars. European banks can create new dollars by lending dollars to someone who will redeposit them in a Eurodollar bank As long as the proceeds of new loans are left as deposits in the banking system the banking system as a whole can continue to create new money in the form of bank deposits A number of central banks have participated in the creation of new dollars in the Eurodollar market by depositing their reserves with European commercial banks making Eurodollar loans. By so doing these central banks not only facilitated the expansion of Eurodollars but in many cases they ended up by creating new official reserves. Most major central banks however have now agreed to refrain from depositing new reserves in the Eurodollar market When they are sold in the foreign exchange market dollars owned by foreigners become indistinguishable from dollars owned by Americans. That is when they are sold they exert a downward pressure and when they are purchased they exert an upward pressure on the market value of the dollar Private American holders of dollars and private foreign holders of dollars whether these are held in U.S. or in foreign banks have similar economic motives in selling or buying dollars in the foreign exchange market. For instance if the dollar is expected to fall relative to foreign currencies holders of dollars will have an incentive to sell dollars and to buy foreign currencies. If the dollar is expected to rise relative to foreign currencies holders of foreign currencies have an incentive to buy dollars and to sell their foreign currencies. While the average foreign holder of dollars is likely to be more sensitive to such changes in the foreign exchange value of the dollar than domestic holders of dollars the experience of the last few years has shown that Americans will exchange large amounts pf dollars for foreign currencies when they find it profitable to do so There is some reason to believe that during the first half of expectations of a future fall in the value of the dollar may have induced some dollar holders both in the United States and abroad to sell their dollars thereby depressing the market value. Thus there were occasions when the value of the dollar was declining in the market even though the United States was experiencing a rapid improvement in its underlying balance of payments. In the second half expectations of a future rise of the dollar may have reinforced an upward trend by inducing both Americans and foreigners to shift from foreign currencies into dollars It is difficult to get a precise estimate of the total amount of dollars held by foreigners because figures on dollar deposits in foreign banks are not easily available. Recorded liquid dollar liabilities of the United States dollars held by foreigners which are liquid liabilities of either a U.S. bank or the U.S. Government amounted to about $ billion at the end of ; of this $ billion was held by official institutions and about $ billion was held by private banks and other foreigners. In addition the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) has estimated that at the end of the total liquid dollar liabilities of private banks in the EC Sweden and Switzerland amounted to almost $ billion. If interbank deposits made by these banks are taken out of this figure and certain other adjustments are made the BIS finds that the Eurodollar volume was about $ billion. The total volume of dollars held by foreigners as balances in both American and European banks was thus in the neighborhood of $ billion. Of this amount perhaps a little more than half was held by official institutions and the remainder by foreign private banks corporations and individuals. In comparison the domestic supply of dollars in the United States in the form of currency and demand deposits was about $ billion at the end of During the total stock of dollars held abroad increased further. Total liquid dollar liabilities of the United States at the end of September amounted to $ 92/2 billion of which $ billion was held by official institutions and $ 20yi billion by private foreigners. Indications are that the volume of Eurodollars has expanded as well What Happened to Trade and Investment ? During the first quarters of Americans exported $ billion more in goods and services than they imported a large change from the first quarters of when imports surpassed exports by $ billion. On a longterm basis private foreigners invested $ billion more in the United States than Americans invested abroad during the first quarters of the year ; during the same period in U.S. private long-term investment abroad exceeded foreign private long-term investment in the United States by $ billion These developments in the balance of payments are consistent with what one might expect from the exchange rate realignments of the past years The depreciation of the dollar in terms of foreign currencies should lower the price of U.S. goods and services relative to foreign goods and services thereby stimulating sales abroad and encouraging U.S. residents to purchase goods produced at home rather than abroad. By reducing the relative cost of production in the United States and thus adding to its profitability the depreciation tended to encourage investment in the United States rather than abroad. Any interpretation of the effect of the depreciation on developments in trade and investment during however is complicated by the changing business conditions in the United States and elsewhere by crop failures abroad by changes in the demand for and sup- O ply of oil and by domestic price control programs all of which also affected the U.S. balance of payments Trade in goods and services. The value of U.S. merchandise exports increased percent from the first quarters of to the first quarters of while imports increased percent over the same period. Higher prices resulting from intense inflationary pressures here and abroad during accounted for much of the increase in the value of U.S. trade. Adjusting for price increases however makes the turnabout in U.S. merchandise trade even more apparent. The volume of imports increased only percent during the first quarters of just over half the growth rate from to while the volume of exports increased percent during the first quarters of more than double the growth rate from to The rapid growth of exports during following the realignment of exchange rates is consistent with economic expectations. But factors other than the realignment of exchange rates also affected U.S. exports during Shortfalls in foreign crops played a major part in increasing agricultural exports during the first quarters of Drought in India and Africa poor weather conditions in the Soviet Union and the sharp reductions in Peruvian fishmeal production greatly reduced world production of grains and protein feeds in thus reducing supplies available for Because the United States was the largest supplier of foodstuffs with relatively open access to foreign buyers these developments abroad had a particularly strong effect on U.S. agricultural exports. The depreciation of the dollar however was also an important factor in expanding agricultural exports by reducing the relative price of American crops. The value of agricultural exports in the first quarters of equaled $ billion up percent from the same period in Although exports of agricultural products accounted for only one-fourth of the value of total exports percent of the increase in exports during the first quarters of came from agricultural products. Prices of food exports during the third quarter were nearly percent higher than a year earlier a change which accounted for a large part of the increase in the value of these exports Domestic price control programs also stimulated exports during at the expense of domestic supplies. As prices of internationally traded goods rose it became more profitable to sell abroad where prices remained unconstrained rather than at home where prices were controlled The increase in U.S. exports which resulted from food shortages and domestic price control programs was offset in part by the rapid increase in imports of crude and refined petroleum products. The fact that the demand for oil in recent years has been growing more rapidly than domestic oil production has created a gap which could only be filled by imports. At the same time the world price of oil increased dramatically during the year Although the major Arab oil producers embargoed oil shipments to the United States in October this did not reduce the value of oil imports during the rest of the year. ( For a more complete discussion of these developments see Chapter ) The relatively slow growth of total imports during despite the rapid increase in imports of crude and refined petroleum products is the most visible indicator of the impact of exchange rate realignment on U.S. trade In the later stages of a cyclical expansion imports should accelerate as domestic producers run low on domestic supplies and rely on foreign suppliers to meet their demands. The fact that the volume of imports did not grow very much faster during than it did in suggests that the dollar depreciation had a significant effect on trade Developments in U.S. bilateral trade provide some additional clues to the impact of exchange rate realignments. For countries whose currencies have shown a relatively large appreciation in relation to the dollar one might expect that imports from the United States would grow more rapidly than exports to the United States. This appears to be true both for Japan and for the EC. Japan whose currency has risen sharply against the dollar experienced a percent increase in imports from the United States during the first quarters of while Japanese exports to the United States increased only percent. The EC whose currencies also rose sharply in relation to the dollar increased their imports from the United States by percent while their exports to the United States increased by percent For countries whose currencies changed relatively little in relation to the dollar the growth rates of exports to and imports from the United States should be more nearly alike. This appears to be true for Canada and the United Kingdom whose currencies changed relatively little during in relation to the U.S. dollar. Exports by Canada to the United States and imports from the United States both increased by around percent. Exports by the United Kingdom to the United States and imports from the United States both grew by around percent U.S. trade with Communist countries in Europe including the U.S.S.R. increased dramatically during not because of exchange rate realignments but because of a normalization of trade relations combined with poor harvests in the Soviet Union. Exports to the Communist countries in Europe increased to $ billion for the first quarters of while imports rose to $ billion. Most of the increase in exports was due to larger sales of agricultural products Investments. During the first quarters of private foreigners made more long-term investments in the United States than Americans made abroad. The effective depreciation of the dollar encouraged foreign investment in the United States during the year because it reduced the relative cost of producing internationally traded goods in the United States rather than abroad. The relative cost of producing in the United States declined further as a result of a tendency for wages to rise more rapidly abroad than in the United States ; foreign firms thus had a greater incentive to produce in the United States. In view of the fairly large changes in relative labor costs ( Table ) the increase in foreign direct investment from none during the first quarters of to $ billion during the first quarters of may seem fairly small. Judging by the number and size of investment plans that have been announced by foreign companies however this flow can be expected to increase significantly in the next year TABLE Relative labor costs in manufacturing [ = Hourly compensation in national currency Output per man-hour Unit labor cost in national currency United States : Germany : Country and year Japan : Canada : Value of foreign currency relative to the U.S dollar Index of U.S Unit labor unit labor cost cost in as percent of U.S index of dollars ^ foreign unit labor cost i Indexes in national currency adjusted for changes in prevailing exchange rates a Based on seasonally adjusted data for first months Note. Data relate to all employees in manufacturing Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Foreign purchases of U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities also increased from $ billion during the first quarters of to $ billion during the first quarters of Such an increase is also consistent with what one would expect from the large depreciation of the dollar inasmuch as the depreciation should increase the relative profitability of producing in the United States. Market expectations also exerted a strong influence on the flow of security transactions over the year. Foreign purchases of U.S securities were quite large in the first quarter reaching a total of $ billion During the second quarter purchases fell to $ billion but increased again to $ billion in the third quarter Direct and portfolio investments abroad by Americans amounted to $ ^ billion during the first quarters of as they had during the first quarters of There are two possible reasons for the absence of a decline : First economic conditions were buoyant throughout the world. Second most of the outflow occurred in the first quarter before the major exchange rate adjustments of and was probably motivated by the anticipation of subsequent exchange rate adjustments The U.S. Balance of Payments in In a world characterized by the managed floating of exchange rates measurement of the overall balance of payments has become less important. In a fixed exchange rate world one of the major functions of overall measures of the balance of payments was to signal to policy makers when a given exchange rate had become untenable. To the extent that exchange rates are allowed to adjust automatically in response to payments imbalances it is no longer necessary to communicate the desirability of an exchange rate adjustment to the policy maker. Of course to the extent that exchange rates remain constrained by official intervention in the foreign exchange market the balance of payments numbers will continue to indicate when such intervention may need to be relaxed The managed floating of exchange rates has changed in particular the analytical meaning of the official reserve transactions balance which measures the net direction and magnitude of official intervention in the foreign exchange market over a period of time. In other words it approximately shows the extent to which governments have bought or sold currencies to influence the exchange rate. It also includes government-togovernment payments outside the foreign exchange market but removing these transactions from the foreign exchange market has the same effect as direct intervention. As long as governments kept market exchange rates relatively fixed by buying and selling foreign exchange the net amount of such official purchases or sales provided an estimate of the net deficit or net surplus of a given currency traded in the market. To the extent that governments no longer attempt to keep market exchange rates from falling below or rising above a fixed level changes in the net demand or supply of a currency are reflected in a movement of the exchange rate rather than in a net loss or gain of reserves. Since exchange rates were at first fixed and then floating to varying degrees in changes in market pressures were reflected in part by changes in exchange rates and in part by net changes in international reserves that is by the official reserve transactions balance As measured by the official reserve transactions balance the United States had a deficit of $ 10I/2 billion in the first quarter a surplus of $ J/2 billion in the second quarter and a surplus of $ billion in the third quarter ( Table ) That is in the first quarter governments purchased roughly $ ^ billion to keep the dollar higher than it would otherwise have been ; in the second quarter governments more or less allowed the dollar to find its own level in the market ; and in the third quarter governments sold roughly $ billion to keep the dollar lower than it would otherwise have been TABLE U.S. balances on international transactions [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] First quarters Type of transaction IV Goodsi II III Military transactions Investment income Other Services g _ g GOODS AND SERVICES Unilateral transfers net CURRENT ACCOUNT CURRENT ACCOUNT AND LONG-TERM CAPITAL g Short-term claims Long-term capital U.S. Government4 Direct investment. _ Other private Short-term liabilities Errors and unrecorded transactions net Allocations of SDR TOTALS Excludes transfers under military grants Includes direct investment fees and royalties Excludes military grants of goods and services * Excludes official reserve transactions and includes transactions in some short-term U.S. Government assets 'Equals official reserve transactions balance Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis and Department of the Treasury Another commonly used measure of the U.S. balance of payments is the current account and long-term capital balance or the " basic " balance as it is sometimes called. This balance is computed by adding up all the recorded transactions in the current and the long-term capital accounts including unilateral transfers. It attempts to measure the extent to which the " long-term " or " underlying " demand for foreign exchange has exceeded the " long-term " or " underlying " supply of foreign exchange during a given period. If all such transactions were accurately recorded this balance would also equal the changes in official reserves and the changes in shortterm foreign assets of private banks corporations and individuals net of changes in liabilities. Because some transactions may not be measured correctly however or may escape measurement altogether a difference usually exists between recorded basic transactions above the line and recorded changes in reserves and short-term assets below the line. This difference appears as an errors-and-omissions item in the balance of payments statistics Deficits and surpluses in the basic balance need not necessarily imply any disequilibrium which requires corrective action by the government. To the extent that changes in net private holdings of short-term foreign assets are voluntary the existence of a surplus or deficit need not imply that it is either undesirable or unsustainable. When such changes are quite large in any one year however there is a strong possibility that the change is a temporary response to unusual circumstances such as differences in interest rates. In these cases some governments might be inclined to intervene to moderate the exchange rate fluctuations which could result from large shifts in short-term foreign assets The U.S. basic balance was in deficit by $ billion during the first and $ 5/2 billion during the second quarter of while during the third quarter it was in surplus by about $ 2J/2 billion. For the quarters the U.S. basic balance was in surplus by about $ billion. In other words Americans in the first quarters of earned $ billion more from current account and longterm capital transactions than they spent on similar transactions Table also shows that during the first quarters $ billion in net foreign currency expenditures were not recorded while recorded short-term private claims on foreigners increased by $ * /2 billion. These two items were " financed " by the $ billion current account surplus ; a $ 5/2 billion net increase in recorded short-term liabilities to private banks corporations and individuals ; and an $ billion net increase in U.S. liabilities to foreign official institutions The Net Foreign Asset Position At the end of the estimated value of American assets abroad was $ billion and the value of American liabilities to foreigners was $ billion. The $ billion difference between the two is the estimated net American investment position abroad. The net investment position declined by about $ billion from to but data for the first quarters of suggest that it probably increased last year Changes in the U.S. net asset position are brought about in part by surpluses or deficits in the balance on current account a balance which includes U.S. transactions in goods and services as well as unilateral transfers ( Table ) The largest changes occurred in the balance on goods and services. When the United States has a deficit in its trade balance as in and it imports more than it pays for with exports thus increasing American liabilities to foreigners. With a trade surplus as in the first quarters of the United States acquires imports and an increase in net assets abroad in return for its exports. One would therefore expect an improvement of the U.S. net asset position during The U.S. net asset position is also affected by several kinds of transactions and accounting adjustments that do not appear in the balance of payments When foreign subsidiaries reinvest their earnings this increases the value of U.S. assets abroad ; and when foreign-ow7ned subsidiaries in the United States reinvest their earnings this increases U.S. liabilities to foreigners During U.S. reinvestment of earnings may have exceeded foreign reinvestment by $ billion or more thus adding to the U.S. net asset position. Changes in the valuation of outstanding assets and liabilities which result from changes in market value or changes in exchange rates also have a small impact on the U.S. net asset position. Because of the small surplus on current account and the large level of net reinvested earnings the net asset position of the United States must have improved markedly during Balance of payments figures indicate however that the increase in liabilities to foreigners exceeded the increase in U.S. assets abroad by about $ ^ billion for the first quarters of the year. This inconsistency can be partly explained by the net acquisition of unrecorded short-term foreign assets by Americans U.S. assets abroad are on the whole less liquid than U.S. liabilities to foreigners. At the end of about percent of the $ billion in assets abroad were considered nonliquid. Direct investments amounted to about $ billion ; holdings of long-term foreign securities were about $ billion The remaining nonliquid assets include $ billion in nonliquid short-term assets held by private Americans $ billion in private long-term claims by banks and others and $ billion in Government-owned assets. Most of the U.S. liquid assets are in the form of official monetary reserves. On the other hand more than half of the $ billion in liabilities to foreigners are considered liquid ; most of these liabilities are in the form of bank deposits short-term Treasury securities and negotiable certificates of deposit HOW GOVERNMENTS BEHAVED IN THE MONETARY ARENA During international monetary arrangements continued to evolve in response to changing needs. A major characteristic of these evolving arrangements is a considerable diversity in practices by different countries Yet despite this diversity countries cooperated with each other to a remarkable extent as they had in and from their cooperation one could begin to see the development of some conventions to guide countries in their monetary relations. This process has benefited from the discussions taking place in the framework of the Committee of Twenty a committee associated with the International Monetary Fund Exchange Rates and Intervention Exchange rates became more flexible in as the governments of most major countries reduced or suspended their commitments to maintain fixed exchange rates and other governments changed their par values more frequently. While governments have continued to intervene in the foreign exchange market in order to influence the movement of the exchange rate it can no longer be assumed that they will finance an excess demand or absorb an excess supply of foreign currencies at given exchange rates. The situation can best be described as one of managed floating In managing their exchange rates countries followed widely differing practices as can be seen in Table Some countries have allowed their currencies to float within a rather wide range resorting to only limited TABLE Maximum percent change in exchange rates between vatious foreign currencies and the dollar during Maximum percent change in rate during Type of intervention No change percent More than percent Sweden Belgium Germany Denmark France Netherlands Norway Italy Canada United Kingdom Iceland Finland Portugal Austria Switzerland Brazil Colombia Venezuela Republic of China Thailand Korea Ghana India ( pound ) Pakistan Spain Egypt Ethiopia Iran Iraq Saudi Arabia Sri Lanka South Africa Greece Yugoslavia Australia Uruguay Afghanistan Japan CFA Countries ( French franc ) Chile Morocco New Zealand Countries maintaining a joint float with intervention to maintain a stable relationship within the group but minimal intervention in outside currencies Countries floating independently with some intervention in the foreign exchange market Countries undertaking considerable intervention to maintain a stable relationship vis-a-vis the dollar ( except where another currency is noted ) percent Turkey Argentina Bolivia Costa Rica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Paraguay Peru Israel Philippines Country fixing rate with respect to an average of other currencies Note. The procedure for computing maximum percentage changes was to find the largest end month deviation during the year from the dollar exchange rate in effect at the end of December Sources : International Monetary Fund and Council of Economic Advisers intervention in foreign exchange markets to maintain orderly market conditions. One group of countries comprising Germany France Belgium the Netherlands Denmark Norway and Sweden decided to keep their currencies relatively fixed with respect to each other. Whenever spot market exchange rates between any two currencies in the group deviate by more than 2J4 percent from an agreed relationship the monetary authorities are obliged to intervene in terms of each other 's currencies. However in January the Government of France announced that it would sever the tie between the franc and the other EC currencies floating jointly. Some countries have decided to keep their currencies fixed to one or the other of the major currencies. A few countries have followed the practice of keeping their currencies fixed relative to an average of other currencies weighted according to their importance in bilateral trade Most countries regardless of the exchange rate regime they have chosen have continued to intervene in the foreign exchange market to varying degrees. Some countries the United States among them have restricted themselves to limited intervention with the object of maintaining orderly market conditions. Other countries although they were officially floating TABLE Major changes in capital controls Country Controls on banks and other financial intermediaries Australia February broadened coverage of restrictions on borrowing abroad October increase from to ^ percent in noninterest-bearing deposits required on borrowings from abroad with a maturity in excess of year ? Belgium Controls on portfolio investment Controls on direct investment March to early S e p t e m b e r negative interest rate of percent per week on nonresident convertible franc holdings exceeding the daily average in the last quarter of Late September negative interest rate reimposed March general ban on foreign investment in Australian real estate Canada December act calling for screening of new foreign direct investments in Canada passed France March to early October prohibition of interest payments on nonresident franc deposits of less than days ; increase ( to percent ) in mandatory reserve requirements on excess of these deposits above their Jan. level March restriction on banks ' forward exchange transactions with nonresidents April to late October banks allowed to impose a negative interest rate of percent per month on the increase in nonresident franc deposits above the January level September banks prohibited from lending francs to nonresidents March to early October nonresident purchases of shortterm securities prohibited Germany February 4-prior authorization required ( and as a rule not given ) for contracting of foreign loans and credits in excess of DM February Government empowered to raise the cash deposit requirement against foreign borrowing from to percent ( authority not yet invoked ) July to October minimum reserve requirements against foreign liabilities effectively increased to percent as opposed to percent on domestic liabilities February new restrictions on sale of domestic securities to nonresidents February authorization requirement for nonresident direct investment valued in excess of DM July blocked noninterest bearing deposit of percent ( percent for mutual funds ) required on portfolio investments abroad July similar deposit required on direct investments abroad May relaxation of controls governing acquisition of Japanese securities by foreign investors and acquisition of foreign securities by Japanese investors May continued relaxation of controls on direct foreign investment in Japan. With some exceptions virtually all industries will be fully open to foreign ownership by the end of Italy Japan May increase from to percent in allowable foreign currency financing of external operations including direct investments overseas purchases of real estate abroad and prepayments for imports TABLE Major changes in capital controls Continued Country Controls on banks and other financial intermediaries Controls on portfolio investment October25 relaxed requirement that foreigners floating yen loans must immediately convert percent of the proceeds into foreign currency Controls on direct investment November banned resident purchases of foreign bonds within months of their maturity ; ended requirement that security houses should balance foreign purchases and sales of Japanese stocks November Government announced that it would make no further additions tc its dollar financing of one-half of Japanese banks ' import loans December marginal reserve requirement on free yen deposits by nonresidents lowered from percent to percent Netherlands March to May noninterest bearing reserve requirement levied on increases in banks ' net foreign guilder liabilities ; special commission levied against inincreases in balances in convertible guilder accounts Switzerland May Federal Reserve Board ( FRB ) lowered reserve requirements against Eurodollar borrowings in excess of the reserve free base ( from to percent ) and took steps to eliminate gradually the reserve free bases December Federal Reserve Board announced effective Jan. increased foreign lending and investment ceilings for banks and other financial institutions subject to the Voluntary Foreign Credit Restraint Program : ceilings raised on foreign loans by U.S. banks by U.S. agencies and branches of foreign banks and by U.S. nonbank financial institutions January Controls on foreign lending by financial institutions suspended January residents allowed to subscribe for new Euroguilder notes issued by residents January to October banks prohibited from having net liabilities in foreign currencies ( spot and forward together ) October National Bank revoked the percent per quarter negative interest rate on banks ' franc deposit liabilities to nonresidents United States. December foreigners allowed to purchase Japanese bonds without restrictions April Interest Equalization Tax ( IET ) extended through June Continued liberalization : export credits extended by direct investors to their affiliated foreign nationals exempted from controls December Treasury Department announced reduction of the IET from an annual rate of to J4 percent per annum effective Jan. December Commerce Department announced effective Jan. increased minimum allowable direct investment abroad by U.S. firms from $ to $ million per year. In addition various other regulations were relaxed January IET reduced to zero January Controls on foreign investment by U.S corporations suspended Sources : International Monetary Fund and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have intervened on a broad scale to minimize day-to-day fluctuations in their rates. Still other countries have continued to intervene in order to keep their exchange rates stable with respect to a major currency a group of currencies or an average of all currencies Despite the great variety of exchange rate practices by different countries relations among countries have remained fairly harmonious. Although no attempt was made to agree on a code of conduct to guide governments in formulating their exchange rate and intervention policies extensive consultations have led to wide acceptance of some basic tenets that should influence the formulation of policies in this area. An idea repeatedly expressed in official statements is that countries should intervene in the foreign exchange market when intervention is necessary to maintain orderly market conditions. On the other hand interventions aimed at obstructing or accelerating a basic market trend would be generally regarded as harmful There is probably also wide recognition that a country with meager reserves may need more latitude for allowing its exchange rate to decline than a country with ample reserves ; and conversely a country with ample reserves may need more latitude for allowing its exchange rate to adjust upward than a country with meager reserves. Similarly when its rate is rising a country with meager reserves should have wider latitude to intervene in the foreign exchange market than a country with ample reserves whereas a country with ample reserves should have a wider latitude to intervene in the foreign exchange market when its rate is falling The conceptual basis for these conventions if one may call them that is similar to the ideas put forward by the United States and some other countries for reforming the international monetary system. The continuing discussion in the Committee of Twenty can be expected to give these ideas more concrete form Capital Controls Another development during has been the adoption of new measures for controlling capital movements as can be seen in Table ( Controls already in force at the beginning of the year are not shown in the table. ) Capital controls were tightened further in the first part of by many major industrial countries when exchange market developments put upward pressure on many of the European currencies and several countries sought to moderate this pressure by imposing restrictions on banks and other financial intermediaries. Some of the more common restrictions were discriminatory reserve requirements and penalty rates or prohibition of interest payments on nonresident deposits. Capital controls did not however succeed in preventing large speculative short-term capital inflows either prior to the revaluation of the dollar in February or from late May to early July Some countries on the other hand took steps to discourage capital outflows or encourage capital inflows. Italy required noninterest-bearing deposits against investments abroad in order to stem a continuing capital outflow. Japan relaxed controls on inward direct and portfolio investment to reduce the overall balance of payments deficit which developed in Since the 's the United States has maintained three kinds of restraints on capital outflows : an interest equalization tax on purchases of foreign securities restrictions on foreign direct investments by U.S. corporations and limitations on foreign lending by U.S. financial institutions. These restraints were relaxed in December and removed entirely in January Changes in International Liquidity in Total international reserves increased by $ billion during the first months of compared to $ billion in and $ billion in From the end of to the end of September total reserves doubled increasing from $ billion to $ billion. As in previous years most of the increase was in foreign exchange and resulted from intervention by foreign central banks in the foreign exchange market to slow down the appreciation of their currencies vis-a-vis the dollar. After the major European countries and Japan decided to allow their currencies to float in relation to the dollar the further accumulation of foreign exchange was reduced. As can be seen from Table foreign exchange reserves increased by $ billion during the first months of Of this amount $ billion occurred in the first quarter before the major European currencies were floated. The $ billion increase in foreign exchange reserves consisted of an $ billion increase in U.S. liabilities to foreign central banks. The remainder constituted increases in dollar balances of central banks held in commercial banks outside the United States and reserves held in currencies other than the dollar. Toward the end of the year a reversal of this trend set in as an increasing number of foreign central banks sold dollars to slow the decline of their currencies relative to the dollar Despite the large increase in foreign exchange holdings in the composition of reserves did not change significantly during the year. The proportion held in gold fell from to percent while that held in foreign exchange increased from to percent of total reserves. Most of the increase in primary reserves ( gold SDR 's and reserve positions in the Fund ) resulted from the devaluation of the dollar in terms of gold and SDR 's which automatically increased by percent the dollar value of the existing stock of gold SDR 's and reserve positions in the Fund TABLE Composition of international reserve assets Value of reserve assets l ( millions of U.S. dollars ) Percent of total reserves Type of reserve asset September September Total reserve assets SDR Reserve position in IMF Gold stock Foreign exchange U.S. liabilities i End of period Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Internationa ] Monetary Fund ( IMF ) The official price of gold was raised from $ per ounce to $ per ounce by the Smithsonian Agreement in December It rose from $ to $ an ounce in conjunction with the announcement early in that the dollar would be devalued in terms of SDR 's. The price of gold in the private bullion market in London increased from $ at the end of to $ at the end of having reached a peak of $ on June and July Since the market price of gold has been almost three times as high as the price at which governments have fixed the price of gold for official transactions countries that hold gold have been reluctant to use it in international settlements. As a first step to unfreezing gold a number of countries which had previously agreed not to buy or sell official gold in the free market decided to end that agreement in November. While IMF rules still prohibit official gold purchases from the private market when the free market price is above the official price official sales to the private market are permitted when the free market price is above the official price. Snnce the market price is now nearly three times the official price central banks would now be in a position to sell gold from the market without violating IMF rules. No country has yet announced however whether or when it intends to sell gold to the market PLANNING THE FUTURE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM Discussions begun in by the Committee of Twenty on reform of the international monetary system continued during The state of these discussions at the time of the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund in Nairobi during September was summarized in a document entitled First Outline of Reform. It is a report in which the chairman of the committee cites the issues on which some measure of agreement has been reached points of disagreement and suggestions by members of the committee about ways of dealing with outstanding issues The current international monetary arrangements have been evolving as countries have made pragmatic adjustments to changing realities in the international economy. In making these adjustments governments have been influenced by the discussions in the Committee of Twenty just as those discussions have been influenced by the experiences gained with the interim arrangements. In the discussion below the long-term alternatives are examined within a framework that encompasses both the Bretton Woods system and the current interim arrangements The Exchange Rate Regime The central function of an international monetary system is to facilitate the exchange of one currency for another in such a way that trade and investments can take place across national frontiers almost as easily as within a given country. There are various ways of organizing the exchange of one currency for another. They differ chiefly in their methods of assuring that over time a country 's payments in foreign currencies equals its receipts in foreign currencies At one extreme balance between the demand for and supply of a currency is achieved at all times through a free market in which currencies are traded at whatever exchange rate will clear the market. Many monetary authorities are opposed to this degree of flexibility however since they fear that large exchange rate fluctuations would create difficulties for international commerce. In order to overcome some of these difficulties most governments have made it a practice to enter the market as buyers and sellers whenever changes in the private demand or supply of their currencies would otherwise lead to large fluctuations in exchange rates The exchange rate at which one government would like to fix the value of its currency relative to other currencies may not coincide with the exchange rate at which other governments would like to fix their currencies.. To avoid such potential conflicts it is desirable to agree on some rules which may specify when governments may or should intervene in the market or when governments may or should allow exchange rates to change The rules could be very tightly written allowing little national discretion ; or they could be written with considerable room for nations to make their own judgments. The Bretton Woods system imposed a relatively strict discipline by requiring governments to intervene in the foreign exchange market whenever rates deviated by more than % percent from internationally agreed rates. Exchange rates could be changed only when it could be demonstrated that the existing rates created a disequilibrium which was regarded as fundamental Under the current arrangements agreed to in March governments have accepted a general obligation to intervene in the foreign exchange market to assure orderly market conditions. * In the future international monetary system the Committee of Twenty has agreed that exchange rate rules should be less rigid than they were under the Bretton Woods system but that they should impose more precise obligations than exist under the present arrangements When Should Countries Use Demand Management Policies ? Changing the exchange rates is not the only way of removing an imbalance in international payments flows. In fact it is theoretically possible to have a system of completely fixed exchange rates in which long-term balance between the demand for and supply of foreign currencies is achieved through changes in the level of domestic demand. Under the classical gold standard * The communique issued on March by the Group of Ten meeting in Paris stated that the participating countries " agreed in principle that official intervention in exchange markets may be useful at appropriate times to facilitate the maintenance of orderly conditions keeping in mind also the desirability of encouraging reflows of speculative movements of funds. " system these demand changes were assumed to take place automatically Since exchange rates were established by the fixed price of gold in each country payments equilibrium was assumed to be preserved by the impact of net transfers of gold on the domestic money supply and hence on the total demand for goods and services. However since most governments today consider it their responsibility to manage domestic demand in accordance with their goals of employment and price stability complete reliance on adjustments of domestic demand to keep the balance of payments " balanced " is therefore not considered reasonable. At the same time any government following a rational policy will manage its domestic demand with regard to the side effects on international currency markets since exchange rate movements have a feedback on domestic economic variables The methods by which a country equalizes its foreign currency payments and its foreign currency receipts affects not only its own economy but foreign economies as well and hence there needs to be agreement on mutually acceptable conduct. The Bretton Woods Agreement for instance established a strong presumption that countries would use domestic derpand management policies for balance of payments adjustment whenever that would not be inconsistent with domestic price stabilization and employment objectives Under present arrangements countries are free to decide on their own the extent to which demand management policies should contribute to a correction of payments imbalance. Nevertheless in the course of international discussions related to current balance of payments developments the impact of alternative adjustment measures on other countries is explored and where conflicts are identified mutually satisfactory solutions can usually be worked out In the future international monetary system it is generally assumed countries will continue to have considerable flexibility in choosing among alternative adjustment measures and they will also continue to take into account the effect of their policies on other countries. It is expected that the adjustment policies of countries will be reviewed by a new committee that will be established in the International Monetary Fund to be composed of policy-making officials from national capitals When Should Countries Use Controls ? It would also be theoretically possible to have a system in which balance of payments equilibrium is maintained by government controls over international transactions. The Communist countries in fact have adopted such a system. In most non-Communist countries an adjustment system based exclusively on the use of controls would be unacceptable because it would entail unwarranted government interference with private decisions and because it would lead to inefficient production and consumption patterns. In some circumstances however governments have found it desirable to use controls to adjust the balance of payments The Bretton Woods Agreement permitted the use of controls to regulate international capital movements but generally ruled out any restrictions on payments for transactions in the current account. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) which spells out what restrictions countries may place on trade directly as distinct from restrictions on payments for trade provides that governments may temporarily impose quotas but may not impose or increase tariffs in order to deal with a serious balance of payments deficit. In practice tariff surcharges have been imposed but have remained in effect only for short periods because other countries have exerted strong pressures to remove them promptly. Nothing has happened to change these rules during the time the present arrangements have been in effect. The First Outline of Reform indicates international agreement on a continued " strong presumption against the use of controls on current account transactions or payments for balance of payments purposes. " It also rules out the use of controls over capital transactions " for the purpose of maintaining inappropriate exchange rates or more generally of avoiding appropriate adjustment action. " There has also been wide agreement that in choosing among different forms of adjustment actions countries should take into account repercussions on other countries as well as domestic considerations When Should Countries Correct Payments Imbalances ? Another area of international concern is the timing of policy measures by countries to remove payments imbalances. This is of international concern because one country 's surplus is another country 's deficit and vice versa. When one country fails to deal with a growing payments imbalance it becomes more difficult for another country to deal with its payments imbalance. Under the Bretton Woods system the main provisions dealing with the timing of adjustment actions were focused on deficit countries. A country wanting to borrow from the International Monetary Fund had to satisfy the Fund that it was taking appropriate actions to reduce its deficit. The more such a country wanted to borrow the tighter the discipline that the Fund imposed. The IMF Articles of Agreement also provided for pressures to be exerted on countries with persistently large surpluses though this provision was never applied in practice. Under the current arrangements these provisions remain in effect although they have become largely inoperative According to the Chairman of the Committee of Twenty there is agreement that countries should " take such prompt and adequate adjustment action domestic or external as may be needed to avoid protracted payments imbalances. " There is also agreement that a judgment of what constitutes " adequate adjustment action " should be based on both objective indicators such as a country 's level of international reserves and an evaluation by an international body such as the IMF. The manner in which these elements might be best combined remains unsettled O What Pressures Should Be Exerted on Countries ? Once an obligation is established for countries to act in a timely fashion to remove payments imbalances the question arises what if any pressures ought to be exerted on countries that fail to carry out their obligations. The Bretton Woods Agreement provided mainly for pressures on deficit countries insofar as the credit facilities of the Fund were made contingent on a finding by the Executive Directors of the IMF that a country was taking adequate steps to remove the deficit in its balance of payments. Under current arrangements the strongest pressures are those exerted by the foreign exchange market. Attempts by a government to prevent an adjustment of the exchange rate in the face of a persistent surplus or deficit tend to trigger large speculative movements and these in turn exert strong automatic pressure that countries have found difficult to ignore. The Chairman of the Committee of Twenty has indicated that a reformed system will provide for graduated pressures to be applied by the international community on both surplus and deficit countries in cases of large and persistent imbalance. It has not been agreed in the Committee of Twenty however what those pressures ought to be and how they ought to be activated The Convertibility Issue Another issue under discussion is the convertibility of national currencies into primary reserve assets such as SDR 's and gold. This particular use of the term has to be distinguished from the exchange of one currency into another in the foreign exchange market. The issue of convertibility into primary reserve assets arises primarily in the context of an agreement to limit fluctuations of exchange rates by government intervention in the foreign exchange market. If a surplus country is obligated to buy the currency of a deficit country to forestall a decline of that currency in the foreign exchange market the question arises to what extent the deficit country ought to buy back its currency with primary reserve assets. One argument in favor of such a requirement is that it limits the extent to which a surplus country is obligated to finance another country 's deficit. Another argument is that it puts some pressure on the deficit country to accept " financial discipline " insofar as its deficit is due to excessively loose domestic policies Under the Bretton Woods system all countries except the United States intervened in the foreign exchange market to carry out an obligation to keep their exchange rates within internationally agreed margins. Since the currency used for such intervention was generally the U.S. dollar the dollar itself was kept fixed in foreign exchange markets by the intervention of other central banks. The United States in turn accepted an obligation to convert dollars into gold or other reserve assets upon demand. The United States finally suspended this convertibility of the dollar into primary reserves on August though the dollar remained convertible into other currencies in the foreign exchange market. Inconvertibility came after an extended period during which the American gold stock was very small in relation to the country 's liquid dollar obligations and the major central banks had abstained from converting large amounts of dollars into gold despite the fact that they were continuing to accumulate a large number of dollars. The Committee of Twenty has agreed that in the context of long-term monetary reform it would be desirable to establish the convertibility of ( the dollar as well as other ) currencies into primary reserve assets insofar as it is decided to stabilize currencies within agreed margins. But whether such an obligation to convert should be mandatory or at the option of the country acquiring the currency is still at issue The Level Distribution and Composition of Reserves To support the value of their currencies in the foreign exchange market most countries maintain an inventory of foreign currencies. In addition countries accumulate international assets such as SDR 's or gold which can be used to buy foreign currencies from the governments issuing them Finally countries maintain lines of credit with each other and with the International Monetary Fund so that they can borrow additional amounts of foreign currency when the need arises. Some might argue that the reserves a country keeps are its own affair. It is widely believed however that the reserves which countries keep are of interest to the whole world community because they affect the behavior of governments and in doing so also affect everyone else. There are three separate though interrelated aspects of the socalled liquidity issue : the level of world reserves ; their distribution among countries ; and their composition in terms of the types of assets held and the kind of borrowing facilities that are readily available The level of world reserves is important because if the level is not " right " countries on balance may be induced to adopt policy measures that have a disruptive effect on other countries. For instance some fear that if reserves are inadequate countries may not prevent changes in exchange rates considered excessive by the international community ; or they may not gear domestic demand management policies to appropriate employment objectives or they may impose controls on imports or capital outflows. On the other hand it is feared that if reserves are excessive countries in payments deficit may keep their exchange rates at a fixed level long after an adjustment would have been desirable ; or they may escape financial disciplice and thus create an inflationary problem for themselves as well as for others ; or they may impose controls on exports or capital inflows The distribution of reserves among countries becomes an issue once the decision is made to manage the global level of reserves. Judgment about the adequacy of world reserves from the point of view of any one country must be based on the relative distribution of those reserves among countries. Thus while some countries might consider world reserves to be " excessive " they might not be willing to give up any of their own reserves. From the point of view of countries with inadequate reserves global reserves can be excessive only to the extent that other countries are willing to give up " excess " reserves The composition of reserves among different assets becomes an issue because each asset ( or borrowing facility ) has its particular characteristics which determine its desirability and its most appropriate role relative to other types of assets. Moreover one can affect the total volume of reserves only by affecting the volume of individual components The Bretton Woods Agreement sanctioned the use of both gold and foreign currencies as international reserves but it did not make any provisions for international control of the level of those reserves. In practice the growth of the monetary gold stock was the result of the difference between newly mined gold and the private demand for gold. The growth of currency reserves ( mostly dollars ) was the result of the difference between the net amount of foreign currency acquired through intervention in the foreign exchange market and the conversion of such currency balances into gold or other assets. The Bretton Woods Agreement did provide one managed source of borrowed reserves in the form of controlled access to a stock of foreign currencies managed by the International Monetary Fund In the late 's two developments occurred which established some limited international influence over reserve creation. First as a result of an arrangement made among a number of central banks it was agreed to stabilize the stock of monetary gold. Second the member countries of the International Monetary Fund decided to create a new reserve asset called the SDR which can be created and distributed on the basis of international consent. At the same time there was an increasing desire to limit the accumulation of currencies but there was no effective means of doing so. The Committee of Twenty has agreed that in a reformed international monetary system " countries will cooperate in the management of their currency reserves. " No agreement has been reached however on how this is to be accomplished The Issue of the Numeraire The numeraire of the international monetary system is the common unit of account in terms of which the relative values of all currencies are measured. While it is of course possible to express the value of a currency in terms of any other currency it is usually convenient to adopt a single reference point. In addition to being a convenient measuring stick the numeraire is usually also the unit value in terms of which the obligations of countries to the international monetary system and the claims of countries on the system are expressed Under the Bretton Woods system gold served as the formal numeraire though the dollar became the de facto numeraire. The use of the dollar as the most commonly used unit of account was made legitimate by the official tie to gold. It was convenient because the dollar increasingly became the most important official as well as private international reserve asset When the convertibility of the dollar into gold was suspended in August the tie between the dollar and gold was broken. It was thus no longer possible to assume that international obligations of countries to the International Monetary Fund which in legal terms continued to be denominated in gold would bear a fixed relationship to the dollar. It was also no longer possible to establish a firm relationship between the value of the SDR the internationally created reserve asset and individual currencies. It has thus been difficult for countries to discharge their obligations to the International Monetary Fund and countries have been reluctant to use SDR 's in settlement of their obligations to each other There is wide agreement that the SDR should become the formal numeraire of the future international monetary system. In order to make the SDR the numeraire not only formally but also in practice it will be necessary however to establish an agreed procedure for calculating the value of the SDR in terms of individual currencies. Since the SDR is not traded in the market against currencies there is no one relationship which suggests itself more strongly than another. The most widely suggested idea is that the SDR should be valued in terms of an average of the major currencies HOW GOVERNMENTS BEHAVED IN THE TRADE ARENA During the first half of the economies of most industrialized countries grew rapidly and prices rose sharply. Real GNP in the United States grew at an annual rate of about percent during the first half of the year an annual rate well above the long-term average ; but growth rates in many foreign economies were also high in relation to long-term growth. The worldwide boom was accompanied by inflation rates exceeding percent in Canada France Italy Japan and the United States. This rapid growth of demand together with poor harvests and cutbacks in world oil production created particularly strong upward pressures on the prices of food and some key raw materials. A number of national governments attempted to contain inflation by controlling prices but by doing so they created widespread shortages and other economic distortions Shortages and soaring prices induced governments to add a new dimension to their trade policies. In addition to their traditional concerns about access for their products to foreign markets they showed increasing concern about access to foreign sources of supply for key materials. Similarly while governments continued across-the-board efforts to promote exports they also showed an increasing tendency to limit the export of commodities in short supply What Countries Did to Encourage Imports On July the Australian Government announced that it was unilaterally reducing all its tariffs by percent. In an accompanying statement the Government explained that " this reduction is designed to restrain price increases by increased competition and by stimulating in the short run a sufficiently large inflow of additional imports to help meet pressing demand. " It was estimated that " the tariff changes will have a direct impact on import prices of approximately the same order of magnitude as a revaluation [ of the Australian dollar ] of slightly less than percent. " While this was certainly the most dramatic example of the new economic incentives prevailing in similar evidence was provided by the actions of many other countries In the United States large increases in the prices of foodstuff 's became a particularly important public issue and efforts to contain these prices became a prominent objective of domestic economic policy as explained elsewhere in this report. This overall policy led to a review of the quotas on imported food products which have long been part of U.S. agricultural programs designed to protect farm income at home. Since the problem in was soaring farm prices rather than falling farm income the Administration decided to enlarge or suspend many of these quotas while supplies remained scarce. Quotas on meat imports were suspended for ; quotas on cheese butter and nonfat dry milk were all increased temporarily Many other countries took similar actions. Japan for instance reduced tariffs on about percent of her import categories and expanded or eliminated some of the remaining quotas on imports of manufactured and agricultural products. Canada lowered tariffs on certain consumer goods and agricultural products. The European Community reduced and in some cases suspended tariffs on various industrial products primarily chemicals. In addition the variable levies which the EC imposes on food imports as part of its Common Agricultural Policy automatically fell to zero as world prices exceeded the support price level in the Community What Countries Did to Reduce Exports With the booming worldwide demand for foodstuffs and raw materials prices of such commodities rose to record heights. This increase in domestic prices as a result of foreign demand pressure caused considerable resentment in many producing countries and led to public demands that domestic supplies be protected. The situation was further aggravated when some governments imposed price controls in an effort to contain the inflationary pressures Since export prices remained uncontrolled domestic producers had an increased incentive to export their goods with the result that the domestic shortages created by the initial imposition of the price controls were aggravated by increased exports. To alleviate the domestic shortages a number of governments imposed controls on exports The pressures of foreign demand for agricultural goods in had a particularly strong impact in the United States. In most of the other major countries exporting agricultural products the government acts as the middleman between the domestic producer and the foreign buyer and it can thus regulate the level of sales. In contrast the United States has traditionally permitted foreign buyers to purchase freely in the U.S. market. Partly for this reason and partly because the United States had the largest stocks foreign buyers converged on the U.S. market increasing U.S. agricultural exports by percent. Since U.S. food prices had been significantly lower in the past than food prices in more protected markets the resulting rise of food prices in the United States was larger than in most other countries. When ceilings were imposed on the prices of foodstuffs to contain the inflationary pressures the export pressures increased even more The problems created by rapid increases in foreign demand became particularly pronounced with soybeans and related products. When it appeared that export contracts would exceed available supplies until new crops were harvested temporary controls were imposed on exports of these commodities in early July. The export licensing provisions allowed each exporter to ship a fixed percentage of the exports he had contracted before June Later the controls were extended to cover other high-protein feeds. All these controls were terminated by October Despite the controls exports of these products were substantially larger in than in The soybean crop harvested in late had been a record crop and almost the entire increase in production was added to exports in The United States increased soybean exports by percent and increased exports of soybean meal by percent over the previous harvesting season Export pressures combined with controls on domestic prices also led to domestic supply shortages for a number of nonagricultural commodities including steel scrap and logs. To alleviate shortages the Government imposed temporary controls on the export of steel scrap in July. These controls were supplemented by a Japanese decision to reduce imports of ferrous scrap by million tons during the remainder of Japan also agreed voluntarily to cut back her imports of U.S. logs A large number of countries besides the United States imposed export controls to protect domestic supplies of food and to ease inflationary pressures. Brazil the world 's other major exporter of soybeans limited the export of soybeans and soybean products shortly after the United States imposed controls. Canada instituted an export licensing program for protein feed supplements edible oils animal fats and livestock protein feed ; export controls were also imposed on live cattle and hogs and on fresh chilled and frozen beef and pork. Australia tightened export controls on a similar list of feed products. Both the Canadian and Australian controls were lifted later in the year. The Common Market countries suspended export subsidies for several dairy products in July and in August banned the export of wheat and wheat products. The export bans were later replaced by export levies on wheat as well as corn and barley Export controls of a more serious kind were imposed by some of the oilproducing countries in the Middle East after renewed fighting broke out between Israel and some Arab states. In order to pressure third countries to support their cause most Arab states cut back oil production and exports and imposed an embargo on shipments to the United States the Netherlands and several other countries. These controls on oil as discussed earlier severely threaten the economic prospects of all industrial nations. If sus- tained they would probably be felt most intensely in Japan and Western Europe because of their relatively high dependence on imported energy sources Lessons for the Future The world was caught unprepared when the shortages during caused a shift from a buyer 's to a seller 's market for certain products. Because a buyer 's market had existed in varying degrees for several decades most international trading rules focused on trade policy devices such as tariffs and quotas that protected producers in their domestic markets. The existing patterns of thought as well as existing trade rules were not well geared to dealing with trade policy measures aimed at restricting exports and preserving domestic sources of supply As the year wore on countries began to seek practical accommodations on the new issues that arose ; and in the future it will become desirable to focus greater attention on the possibility of new kinds of commitments by exporting countries on foreign access to their supplies when world demand is strong. Such issues will be explored in the forthcoming world conference on food in the coming meeting of oil-consuming and oil-producing nations and possibly at similar conferences in the future. At the same time the formulation of a more general code of good conduct for exporting countries and the adoption of more systematic procedures for the resolution of disputes over the access to supplies should be addressed in the context of the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations PLANNING THE FUTURE INTERNATIONAL TRADING SYSTEM The United States reaffirmed its commitment to a continued expansion of world trade by joining other countries in opening a new round of comprehensive trade negotiations in Tokyo during September. In a statement issued at the end of the meeting the participating countries expressed their willingness to pursue negotiations aimed at " the progressive dismantling of obstacles to trade and the improvement of the international framework for the conduct of world trade. " A new initiative in the trade area is timely for a number of reasons First the reductions in trade barriers negotiated during the Kennedy Round have been fully implemented and this makes desirable the negotiation of new commitments. Second with the lowering of tariffs as a result of past negotiations nontariff barriers have become relatively more important as a source of distortion in international trade and have taken on greater importance in international economic relations. Third expansion of the European Community to include the United Kingdom Denmark and Ireland as well as the substantial elimination of trade barriers between the expanded European Community and most of the other European countries have created the possibility of a significant decrease of trade opportunities between Europe and the rest of the world including the United States A reduction of trade barriers on a global basis would reduce the resulting diversion of trade just as the Kennedy Round cushioned the diversion of trade after the EC was formed. Fourth the ongoing reform of the international monetary system will require mutually supportive improvements of the monetary and trading systems in particular to ensure that efforts in one field are not frustrated in the other. Finally recent years have seen an increase of political friction related to trade issues both within the United States and between the United States and its major trading partners. While some friction is inevitable given the large degree of economic interdependence among countries the heightening of these tensions reflects in part a failure of the international institutions designed to resolve economic disputes before they spill over into the political arena An improvement in the functioning of the international trading system may be the most important outcome of the new round of trade negotiations inasmuch as such improvement may be essential for alleviating the tensions which might otherwise lead to new obstacles to trade. A better international framework for resolving trade problems is required in five areas : nontariff barriers related to domestic economic and social policies ; agricultural trade barriers related to domestic agricultural programs ; safeguard measures to facilitate an orderly adjustment to new market conditions by producers in importing countries ; subsidies and other government assistance to industries ; and finally new understandings on the access of consuming countries to sources of supply which might include safeguard arrangements to facilitate orderly adjustments to new market conditions by consumers in exporting countries Quite appropriately however the primary focus of the new round of negotiations will not be on maintenance of the status quo but on a continued dismantling of trade barriers. It should thus be possible to avoid confusing the end the expansion of profitable trading opportunities with the means the negotiation of rules governing trade. Countries have benefited greatly from the rapid expansion of trade in the past quarter century ; and should this trend cease or be reversed because of a failure of international cooperation the economic welfare of all countries including the United States would be likely to suffer As in the past a major focus of the negotiations will be on a reduction of tariffs. While past trade negotiations have reduced the relative importance of tariffs they remain the most visible obstacle to trade Approximately percent of all trade in industrial products remains subject to tariffs in the major industrial countries and the average rate of such tariffs is about percent. Moreover while in the aggregate tariffs have been substantially reduced some very high tariffs remain on a few important consumer goods. Of all trade percent is still subject to tariffs of percent or more. It is hoped that the negotiations will result in a substantial expansion of the duty-free category as well as a substantial reduction in the average tariff on the remaining dutiable items Reducing Nontariff Barriers In order to make possible the more effective management of the trading system new understandings need to be negotiated with respect to a wide variety of nontariff barriers ( NTB 's ) such as import quotas preferential government procurement regulations discriminatory standards and unreasonable customs procedures. Some NTB 's are imposed for the same reasons that tariffs are imposed to protect a particular domestic economic activity In negotiating reductions in NTB 's the goal is the same as in negotiating reductions in tariffs : to remove or reduce the obstacles to free exchange of goods. Other NTB 's however are merely the unintended by-product of programs designed to achieve various domestic social or economic objectives The negotiating objective in such cases is to bring about modifications in the design or implementation of policies related to such an objective in order to avoid unnecessary distortion of trade. It may also be desirable to subject such policies to periodic review to make sure that the level of protection offered is the minimum necessary to achieve legitimate domestic goals There is a natural tension between the free market principle on which the GATT is based and the practical reality of extensive government intervention in the economy in most countries. The challenge for these negotiations is to devise arrangements that will give governments considerable leeway in forming and pursuing their own policies while encouraging them to adopt policy measures that will minimize the disruption of the economic interests of other nations. Such arrangements in themselves will not eliminate potential policy conflicts among governments but they can provide some guidelines for resolving such conflicts to everyone 's satisfaction. The absence of such arrangements creates the danger that governments will try to protect themselves against the disruptive influence of actions by foreign governments in sensitive sectors by imposing new measures that distort trade Reforming Agricultural Trade Trade barriers and domestic social objectives are perhaps most intertwined in the agricultural sector where domestic programs to support farm income and to guarantee the availability of food supplies from domestic sources have been sheltered by comprehensive tariff and nontariff barriers The challenge facing the negotiators is to work out some arrangements that would permit governments to honor their commitments to both farmers and consumers at lower levels of protection. A reduction of the level of protection would not only benefit consumers by reducing real food prices but encourage producers to use their resources in a manner more consistent with comparative advantage. It is also true of course that the necessary shifts in production patterns would be difficult for some producers and provisions to ease the adjustment costs would be needed in many countries. For some countries this will mean new measures to transfer income to those farmers who suffer income losses in the short run from lower levels of protection In working out an approach to the negotiated reduction of agricultural trade barriers one must distinguish between cyclical and structural reasons for agricultural protection. Cyclical problems arise when market prices rise above accepted norms or farm incomes drop below accepted norms. Structural problems arise if the norms for prices and incomes differ between one country and another Cyclical problems. Most farm programs are designed to put a floor under farm incomes when production increases sharply. During periods of peak production therefore governments tend to raise farm incomes either directly by making up any shortfalls with direct payments or indirectly by keeping farm prices above the level that would prevail in a free market. Governments can use either domestic or international trade measures to keep prices high Farm prices can be raised by reducing supply through cutbacks in the production or restrictions on imports or by increasing demand through financing the build-up of domestic stocks or subsidizing exports Governments may also attempt to restrain price increases when export markets expand or production declines sharply. During such periods governments try as far as possible to increase domestic supplies and reduce domestic prices of food by drawing down domestic stocks increasing domestic production reducing exports and increasing imports. Of course if all countries simultaneously have a problem of inadequate production attempts by one country to increase imports or reduce exports or both will make the problem worse for other countries. The more a country depends on exports or imports the greater its exposure Some countries the United States among them permit agricultural prices to vary over a wider range than is true in other countries for example the members of the European Community. This difference has permitted countries with narrower margins for price fluctuation to increase the stability of their own supplies and prices through trade at the expense of countries with wider margins for price fluctuation. The reason is that long before the country with wider margins takes such action the country with the narrower margin tends to limit imports and to increase export incentives when prices are falling and to limit exports when prices are rising. As a result surpluses and shortages are exaggerated for the latter when price pressures develop in either direction Two conclusions can be drawn from all this. First unless governments can develop some understandings on the use of trade measures during a period of excess or inadequate food production throughout the world tensions will be inevitable. Second governments will be reluctant to increase their dependence on foreign trade as long as they can not receive adequate assurances that other governments will not pursue policies which seek to shift the costs of moderating swings in farm incomes and food prices to their neighbors Structural problems. Agreements on a set of rules regarding cyclically related trade measures can be separated from negotiations designed to reduce agricultural trade barriers arising from structural differences between the farm sector in one country and another. While most governments are committed to preventing agricultural prices from falling below or rising above accepted levels these levels differ between one country and another Under conditions of free trade however market prices in different countries will generally not vary by more than the cost of transportation. To the extent therefore that one country wishes to support a market price that is either lower or higher than in other countries it has to impose some limitation on trade flows. If agricultural trade barriers are to be reduced countries will need to find some means to reduce the differences in market support prices An approach to agricultural negotiations. International negotiations on agricultural trade are timely because many foreign governments are in the process of reassessing their agricultural policies in response to considerable public dissatisfaction with the results of current agricultural programs. During normal times changes in existing programs would be difficult to negotiate even if no economic interest were seriously affected. At a time when change has become inevitable it is far easier to work out a greater harmonization of national approaches to agricultural problems These negotiations need to be approached in a fairly pragmatic manner It would be impractical as some have suggested to negotiate tight international agreements regulating prices production inventories and trade controls on individual commodities. On the other hand governments will be reluctant to increase the dependence of their consumers on imports and the dependence of their producers on exports without some agreement on the availability of such imports when food is in relatively short supply and the accessibility of such exports to foreign markets when food is in relatively excess supply. Undoubtedly some degree of international understanding on the use of trade controls relative to domestic measures will be required. As part of such an international understanding it may be desirable to achieve a better coordination of those internal policies which are undertaken to moderate extreme fluctuations in food supplies and prices Better international understandings on improved access to supplies as well as access to markets should persuade countries on their own to undertake more of the long-term changes in their agricultural programs that would result in more efficient patterns of worldwide production. Important in such long-term reforms would be the adjustment of relative prices among farm products. Another element could be a greater shift toward more direct methods of supporting farm incomes while allowing prices more room to decline during bumper crop years Negotiating a New International Safeguard System New international agreements would also be useful with respect to the rules and procedures adopted by countries to deal with problems of import disruption. Most nations at one time or another find it desirable to limit the growth of imports for a transitional period so that domestic industry can have time to adjust. Since the current international rules and procedures have proved largely unworkable in practice governments have generally worked out informal arrangements with each other. It would be desirable to bring these arrangements within an accepted international framework in which the interests of third parties could be better protected. The adoption of certain internationally accepted principles could also reduce some of the political friction which has tended to be associated with the negotiation of such arrangements. It would moderate the effects of adjustment while giving the international community some better assurance that restrictive measures will not be any broader or continue any longer than necessary for domestic adjustment to take place Subsidies and Countervailing Duties Better international understanding is also needed on the use of subsidies and the imposition of countervailing duties designed to offset foreign subsidies. Governments commonly employ subsidies to achieve specific economic and social goals. When such subsidies are used to favor industries competing with export or import industries they affect not only domestic economic activity but foreign economic activity as well. Foreign governments can try to neutralize the effect of the subsidy on their own trade by imposing an equivalent duty on imports or an equivalent subsidy on exports. Given the widespread use of subsidies by most governments trade would become increasingly subject to new tariffs if governments actually countervailed against every form of foreign subsidy. Conversely the competitive position of unsubsidized businesses in some countries could be increasingly affected by subsidized production in other countries. What is needed therefore is international agreement on the types of subsidies that are not internationally acceptable and consequently subject to countervailing duties and general agreement on the types of subsidies that are acceptable Access to Foreign Supplies The events of the past year have demonstrated that access to supplies can be as much of a problem as access to markets and that international guidelines on access to supplies can be as valuable as international agreements about access to markets. The possibility has thus arisen of a new type of reciprocity in international trading relations : commitments by producing countries to consuming countries on access to supplies and commitments by consuming countries to producing countries on access to markets. Similarly safeguard arrangements which are designed to protect producers in consuming countries when excessively large increases in imports threaten to disrupt domestic production could be matched by safeguard arrangements which are designed to protect consumers in producing countries when excessively large exports threaten to disrupt domestic markets in producing countries Pending Trade Legislation In order for the United States Government to be able to make such farreaching international commitments on trade practices and policies. it is necessary to obtain public backing and the appropriate legislative mandate Two approaches were considered early last year. One approach would be first to negotiate preliminary agreements with other countries and then on the basis of such agreements to seek the necessary legislation. The other approach would be first to seek a broad enough legislative mandate to cover negotiating outcomes that could be foreseen and a procedure for congressional participation where negotiating outcomes could not be foreseen and then to negotiate an agreement within the context of that legislative framework. The second alernative was chosen both because other governments could not be expected to put forward their maximum concessions if U.S offers did not have the explicit support of the Congress and because it would make possible more active participation of the Congress in an area where congressional prerogatives have traditionally been strong Accordingly last April the President sent draft legislation to the Congress After extensive hearings the House of Representatives approved a bill that would provide the necessary authorities to negotiate both a comprehensive reform of the international trading system and increased access to foreign markets and supplies. It would also significantly improve the management of U.S. trade policy on a day-to-day basis. In the coming months the Senate is scheduled to consider this legislation Congressional passage of trade legislation has become more important than ever because of the strains that the massive increase in international oil prices is likely to place on the international trading system in the coming year. All countries will be under pressure to reduce their imports and to expand their exports to pay for the increased cost of oil even though all oil-consuming countries together will not be able to improve their trade balance by more than the oil-producing countries are prepared to increase their imports. Given the large increases in oil revenues and the small populations of most oil-producing countries only a fraction of such revenues is likely to be spent on goods in the short run. At the same time a number of key products could be in short supply at current price relationships and this could induce new international competition for such supplies. In order to negotiate effectively with other countries on the resolution of some of these problems and in order to protect U.S. economic interests in the absence of such agreements a new legislative mandate is urgently needed The draft bill before the Congress would improve the President 's ability to manage U.S. trade policies in several respects. It would give the President limited authority to impose a temporary import surcharge or other import limitations either to deal with a serious balance of payments deficit or to cooperate in correcting a balance of payments disequilibrium. He could also reduce or suspend import restrictions in order to reduce either a persistent balance of payments surplus or excessive inflationary pressures in specific commodity areas. Other permanent authority would permit the President full exercise of U.S. rights and obligations under trade agreements and still another provision would revise and expand the President 's authority to take action against foreign countries which maintain unjustifiable or unreasonable import restrictions or other policies which seriously injure U.S. trade The legislation would also liberalize the criteria for granting adjustment assistance to firms and workers displaced by import competition and would temporarily limit the growth of imports when such growth might seriously injure a domestic industry * * * * * * * In the context of the postwar period developments in the international economy during the past year appear rather turbulent. Massive capital flows led to fluctuations in exchange rates that were far in excess of any that attracted attention in the recent past. Inflation accelerated throughout much of the world as demand for goods outgrew the productive capacity of the world economy. Shortfalls in farm output and cutbacks in oil production combined with selective embargoes on oil exports created intense international competition for food and energy. In all these different ways the world received an effective demonstration of the extent to which economic interdependence has become a reality Despite the economic difficulties most nations were able to record significant economic gains ; and despite some stresses and strains in international economic relations the postwar framework for economic cooperation among nations remained intact. This ability of the world economy to adjust to the new realities was in large part due to the willingness of most governments to accept greater flexibility in their economic relationships while continuing to recognize the need for self-discpline in the pursuit of individual national goals. Certainly the introduction of more flexible exchange rate relationships facilitated the adjustment of economic relations among individual national economies experiencing widely different domestic circumstances. Equally important was the willingness of governments to negotiate pragmatic accommodations to politically difficult international monetary and trade issues In the coming year the new arrangements for international cooperation that were evolving in the past year will be put to a strenuous test. The continuing constraints imposed on the production and export of oil by a number of countries in the Middle East will intensify the competition for energy supplies and chemicals. In addition the recent large increase in world oil prices will require major adjustments in relative incomes both within and among nations in relative prices of both domestic and internationally traded goods in world patterns of production and trade and in the worldwide flow of capital and the means of putting this capital to its most productive uses These adjustments are likely to pose severe hardships for some countries and some domestic economic difficulties for all nations. The pressures to take unilateral measures at the expense of one 's neighbors could become quite intense in such an environment. Were just one nation and then others to pursue such a course however the resulting disruption of international trade would be likely to cause even more serious losses of economic welfare for everyone. International conferences such as the recently concluded meeting of finance ministers in Rome and the coming conferences on the world oil and the world food situation will be useful in the search for cooperative solutions. At the same time the international monetary discussions and the multilateral trade negotiations will be indispensable to a broader effort to strengthen the international framework for managing the increasing number of economic problems that are of global significance SUPPLEMENT Measurement of Effective Changes in Exchange Rates Exchange rates between the United States and her trading partners have changed frequently over the past years. Since such changes vary from currency to currency it is useful to combine them into a single index number representing the effective change in the value of the U.S. dollar. Several methods of computing such a number have been developed but the different methods produce different results. This supplement discusses the rationale behind some of the indexes that have been developed and examines the differences in results Each method of computing the effective change in the value of the dollar combines individual changes in exchange rates into a weighted average. The most commonly used weights are based on bilateral trade shares. The appreciation of the German mark for example would receive a greater weight than the appreciation of the French franc because Germany accounts for a larger share of overall U.S. trade The weights may be computed on the basis of export import or total trade shares depending on the use of the index. The three sets of weights vary because the proportion of U.S. exports that goes to each trading partner will seldom equal the proportion of U.S. imports accounted for by that country. For instance in Japan provided percent of U.S. imports but purchased only percent of our exports. The appreciation of the yen would therefore receive a larger weight in an import index than it would in an export index. A composite import-export index of the depreciation of the dollar might use weights equal to the sum of bilateral exports and imports as a fraction of total U.S. foreign trade Changes in exchange rates may be expressed in two ways : either as the increase in the value of a foreign currency in terms of dollars or as the decrease in the value of the dollar in relation to a foreign currency. The magnitude of the percentage change in each case differs. If the value of the mark expressed in dollars rises by percent for example then the value of the dollar expressed in marks falls by only percent This is true for the same reason that is percent more than but is percent less than This confusing arithmetic fact has important implications for the calculation of these indexes because the magnitude of the effective change in the value of the dollar will depend on how the changes in exchange rates are expressed An import-weighted index of exchange rate change is normally expressed in terms of the change in the dollar price of foreign currencies. If one assumes that foreign exporters do not alter their prices expressed in their own currency then changes in the dollar value of foreign currencies accurately reflect the changes in dollar prices to American importers. Likewise an export-weighted index is usually based on changes in the foreign currency prices of dollars because changes in the value of the dollar reflect changes in prices to foreign purchasers if American exporters hold their dollar prices constant Selection of the countries to be included in the computation can markedly affect the value of the index. For completeness one might wish to include as many countries as possible in the sample but because some countries account for only a small share of overall U.S. trade limiting the sample to major U.S. trading partners should not significantly affect the value of the index. If a major trading partner were to be eliminated from the sample however the resulting index might not accurately reflect the effective depreciation of the dollar Bilateral trade shares of the United States have been shifting in the last years in response to changes in exchange rates further relaxation of trade barriers and crop failures abroad. An index of the effective depreciation of the dollar could therefore be sensitive to the choice of the year for which bilateral trade shares are computed. In some cases however it is difficult to predict how these changes will affect trade shares. For instance the depreciation of the dollar in relation to the currency of a trading partner should stimulate U.S. exports to that country but reduce U.S. imports from that country. Because these two results tend to offset each other the net effect on total trade shares is uncertain Changes in exchange rates are computed in relation to the exchange rates in effect on some base date. Commonly used base dates include these : May the last month in which all major U.S. trading partners observed fixed exchange rate policies for their currencies ; December the day of the Smithsonian Agreement ; and March the first day of the float against the dollar for a number of foreign currencies. Because the value of the dollar generally declined from May to July indexes of effective depreciation of the dollar using an earlier base date for exchange rates will generally show a greater depreciation of the dollar than those based on a more recent date. Typical spot rates used are the daily noon spot rates quoted in New York or London The Change in the Value of the Dollar : A Comparison of Several Indexes Two widely used indexes are the Morgan Guaranty index of effective exchange rate changes published by the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company and the Reuters Currency Index computed by Reuters Limited the London-based international news agency. Both are composite indexes combining bilateral export and import trade shares in one index but different techniques are used to compute them The Morgan Guaranty index uses a sample of countries other than the United States which together accounted for about two-thirds of total U.S. trade in * Using separate export and import trade shares computed from trade data ( before September trade data for were used ) Morgan Guaranty first computes separate export and import indexes and then averages the two results according to the relative weights of exports to and imports from the other countries in the sample. The export-weighted changes in the values of foreign currencies are expressed in foreign currency units per dollar ; the import-weighted changes are expressed in dollars per foreign currency unit. Spot exchange rates are the daily noon dollar bid rates quoted in New York The Reuters Currency Index which is followed closely by foreign central banks and foreign exchange markets uses a sample comprising nine countries eliminating * The countries are : Canada Japan the United Kingdom West Germany France Italy Belgium-Luxembourg the Netherlands Switzerland Austria Denmark Norway Sweden and Australia O Canada and four smaller countries used in the Morgan Guaranty sample. Each currency change is weighted by the sum of exports plus imports as a fraction of total U.S. trade. Trade weights are computed on the basis of average trade shares in Reuters uses noon spot rates in London for all currencies except the yen ; for this they use the closing rate in Tokyo because the yen market in London is thin and the quotations are not necessarily representative of world market conditions. All changes in exchange rates are expressed as changes in foreign currencies vis-a-vis the dollar. A comparison of these two indexes plus three others that will be discussed below is contained in Table TABLE A comparison of several measures of the effective depreciation of the dollar from May [ Percent change ] Morgan Guaranty index Reuters currency index1 ( ) Year and month : June Multilateral index Trade model index July Aug Sept _ ) Oct Nov -6.'93 Dec : Jan Feb.. Mar April May June Sept Oct Nov _ __ Aug Dec ) _ : Jan Feb Mar April May June July July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Treasury index ( ) Measures the appreciation from December of a group of foreign currencies in relation to the dollar Not available Note. Data are for the last business day of each month. Base rates used are central rates in effect at the end of May Sources : Morgan Guaranty Trust Company ; Reuters Limited ; Department of the Treasury ; Central Intelligence Agency Office of Economic Research ; and Council of Economic Advisers On Friday July the Morgan Guaranty index registered the largest depreciation of the dollar during : percent from the central rates in effect at the end of May On the same day the Reuters Currency Index indicated that a group of nine foreign currencies had appreciated percent against the dollar from the central rates established by the Smithsonian Agreement in December When the Reuters index is recomputed to show the change in the dollar since May thus permitting the two indexes to be compared the Reuters index indicates a foreign currency appreciation of percent. This number must be reconciled with the percent depreciation of the dollar shown by the Morgan Guaranty index The techniques used to compute these two indexes differ widely and some of these differences in approach affect the computations more than others. By successively modifying the approach used by Reuters until the two procedures are equivalent one can identify the effect each difference in method has on the calculations Morgan Guaranty uses the depreciation of the dollar in relation to foreign currencies when calculating export-weighted changes in the dollar and it uses the appreciation of foreign currencies vis-a-vis the dollar when calculating import-weighted changes Reuters uses only the appreciation of foreign currencies vis-a-vis the dollar. Recalculating the Reuters index to conform to the Morgan Guaranty weighting procedure lowers the Reuters index percentage points to percent still a larger measure of the depreciation of the dollar than is yielded by the Morgan Guaranty index Noon spot rates in New York on July differed significantly from the noon spot rates in London. Because the dollar generally declined during the day noon rates in New York taken hours after the noon rates in London show a greater depreciation of the dollar than the London rates. Recomputing the modified Reuters index using New York instead of London spot rates increases the measured depreciation of the dollar about half a percentage point from percent to percent The use of trade weights based on U.S. bilateral trade in instead of an average of bilateral trade during and increases the modified Reuters index from to With these adjustments the Reuters index has been modified so that the computation technique is identical to that used by Morgan Guaranty ; only the sample of countries differs. Adding Canada to the Reuters sample of nine countries lowers the Reuters measure almost percentage points from percent to percent The relatively small depreciation of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar is given a large weight in the calculation because of the importance of Canadian trade to the United States. Adding the four remaining countries to the Reuters sample plus Canada raises the index of the depreciation of the dollar to percent the number published by Morgan Guaranty on July Three observations are suggested by the results. First the calculation is affected to only a minor degree by some of the differences in approach for instance the choice of spot rates the selection of a year from which to compute trade shares and the decision to include several countries with relatively small shares of U.S. trade Second excluding a major trading partner like Canada can have a great impact on the measure of effective exchange rate change. Third the choice of whether to express changes in exchange rates in terms of the appreciation of foreign currencies or the depreciation of the dollar is also important especially if the changes in exchange rates are large for some important trading partners in the sample An index used internally by the Treasury Department is computed by a method similar to that used by Morgan Guaranty except that it covers all OECD countries ( other than the United States ) and the weights used are derived from bilateral trade data. Changes in the dollar cost of foreign exchange are weighted by bilateral import shares. Changes in the foreign exchange cost of dollars are weighted by bilateral export shares. The resulting import- and export-weighted indexes are then weighted by the relative importance of imports and exports in U.S. total trade with the 22-country group and finally averaged to produce a single index of the effective depreciation of the dollar On July the Treasury Department index showed that the dollar had depreciated percent since May in relation to the currencies of the other OECD countries percentage points less than the Morgan Guaranty figure. Some of the difference derives from the addition to the sample of eight countries whose currencies have appreciated relatively little in relation to the dollar. Any remaining difference is due to the use of trade shares based on bilateral trade in rather than Other Methods for Computing Weights One problem associated with the use of these indexes is that the weights take into account only bilateral trade with the United States when in fact changes in any one exchange rate affect trade of other countries as well. When the mark and the yen appreciate for example U.S. exports to Japan and Germany increase and imports from those two countries decline. In addition third countries now find German and Japanese imports relatively more expensive than imports from the United States. For this reason U.S. exports to third countries should also increase One solution is to weight changes in each country 's exchange rate by that country 's importance in total world trade. The multilateral index presented in Table is one such measure. For each of the countries in the Morgan Guaranty sample the depreciation of the dollar against each foreign currency is weighted by the sum of each country 's exports to and imports from the other countries ( including the United States ) divided by total trade among the countries. The spot rates used were daily closing rates in New York An additional revision of weights based on past trade shares might incorporate the use of price effects to anticipate the importance of changes in the value of each country 's currency to U.S. trade. A country whose trade is more responsive to price changes should receive a greater weight because changes in its exchange rate would have a larger impact on the U.S. trade balance than its relative trade share alone would indicate. A multilateral trade model may be used to compute a set of weights proportional to the effects of bilateral exchange rate changes on the U.S. trade balance To construct a trade model index of the depreciation of the dollar weights were calculated with the use of a preliminary version of a trade flow model developed by the Office of Economic Research of the Central Intelligence Agency. The model assumes that prices have a significant effect on trade among the countries and groups of countries that are included. In the preliminary form of the model producers of any one good which is traded internationally are assumed to react similarly to a change in the price of their product no matter which country they live in. The U.S supply of chemicals on the international market for example is no more sensitive to changes in the domestic currency price of chemicals than is the supply from any other country. Similarly importers of any one good also react to price changes in the same fashion no matter where they live. As a result of these assumptions the response of any two countries to a similar change in their exchange rates differs primarily because the product mix of their trade differs For July the multilateral index showed an effective depreciation of the dollar equal to percent about percentage points less than the Morgan Guaranty index. For the same day the trade model index showed that the dollar had depreciated percent from May if the change in each currency is weighted by its relative contribution to the change in the U.S. trade balance. One reason why both these indexes show a smaller change in the value of the dollar than the Morgan Guaranty index is that in both cases changes in exchange rates are expressed in terms of the depreciation of the dollar in relation to each foreign currency. The Morgan Guaranty index on the other hand uses the appreciation of foreign currencies in relation to the dollar for part of its calculation and the magnitude of changes expressed in this manner is greater Another reason both these indexes may differ from the Morgan Guaranty index is that the weights are calculated differently. While no simple pattern emerges from a comparison of the trade model weights with the bilateral weights there is a clear pattern suggested by a comparison of the multilateral weights with the bilateral TABLE Changes in exchange rates from May [ Percent change ] German mark Japanese yen French franc British pound Year and month Dollar rate Effective rate Dollar rate Effective rate Dollar rate Effective rate Dollar rate Effective rate : June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. AprMay. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec- Note. Monthly figures are averages of daily figures Morgan Guaranty Trust Company computes the effective change in the value of foreign currencies by applying the same techniques used to compute the effective depreciation of the dollar Sources : Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Morgan Guaranty Trust Company weights. First multilateral trade within the European Economic Community accounts for a large share of total trade among the countries in the multilateral index sample and hence the relatively large depreciation of the dollar in relation to most European currencies is given a relatively large weight in the multilateral index. Second because Canada accounts for only percent of total trade among the countries the small depreciation of the U.S. dollar in relation to the Canadian dollar receives a much smaller weight in the multilateral index than in an index based on bilateral trade shares. These two effects would tend to raise the level of the multilateral index and bring it closer to the Morgan Guaranty figure Effective Changes in Other Currencies Although the discussion in this supplement is directed specifically toward measuring the effective depreciation of the dollar the same techniques are used to compute the effective change in the value of other currencies as well. An index of the effective changes in a foreign currency is useful because changes in the dollar rate alone can be deceptive. The sharp appreciation of the German mark in terms of dollars for example is a misleading indicator of the overall increase in the value of the mark just as the depreciation of the dollar against any single currency may give a misleading impression of the decline in the value of the dollar. Changes in the dollar exchange rates and effective changes in the exchange rates for several foreign currencies are presented in Table for comparison Appendix A ACTIVITIES OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF WOMEN Activities of the Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women In September the President announced the establishment of the Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women to provide a formal mechanism for improving the information and analysis available to policy makers about the economic problems women encounter and for assuring that the economic interests of women are given appropriate weight in policy considerations In January the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers who is also Chairman of the Advisory Committee appointed the following persons from the private sector to serve on the committee : Jacqueline Brandwynne Casey Eike Cynthia Epstein Stephen Fuller Julia Greer Jacqueline Gutwillig Ruth Handler Lenore Hershey Gertrude Himmelfarb E. Marie Johnson M. Jane Kay Sister Collette Mahoney Jacob Mincer Arthur Rasmussen Bernice Sandier Ruth Washington Also serving on the committee are the Secretary of the Treasury the Secretary of Commerce the Secretary of Labor the Secretary of Health Education and Welfare and Anne Armstrong Counsellor to the President The committee met four times during The first meeting held in January was in part organizational and in part a review of Chapter of the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers which discusses the economic role of women. At this meeting the committee members suggested several topics that they felt were particularly relevant to women 's economic opportunities The meeting of April was devoted to a discussion of career development for women. Participating in the discussion were Dr. Sidney J. Marland Jr. then Assistant Secretary for Education in the Department of Health Education and Welfare ; Robert J. Brown Associate Manpower Administrator for the U.S. Employment Service ; and Dr. Bennetta B Washington Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Manpower. Dr. Helen Astin ( University of California Los Angeles ) and Dr. Cynthia Epstein ( Queens College New York ) who is also a com- mittee member presented results of research examining education attitudes and careers as they relate to women In its aim of furthering opportunities for women in business and industry the Advisory Committee also sponsored a symposium on " The Advancement of Women in Industry " on September The opening speech was given by Roy Ash Director of the Office of Management and Budget Representatives of several major firms reported on both the progress and the problems encountered in programs to improve the recruiting and promotion of women. Other speakers included representatives from government labor unions and universities As a result of the symposium the nongovernment members of the committee prepared a set of recommendations urging the private sector to adopt particular actions that would facilitate the economic advancement of women. Guidelines are included for employers unions and the media suggesting specific steps that can be taken to ensure equal opportunity for women. On December the committee met to discuss the final recommendations. These will be published and distributed to leaders of industry and will also be available to the public On the same day the committee members met together at the White House with members of the Citizens ' Advisory Council on the Status of Women and with delegates from member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) who were in Washington to participate in an experts ' meeting on " The Role of Women in the Economy. " The occasion was a reception at which the Task Force on Women 's Rights and Responsibilities dedicated a bust of Susan B. Anthony The committee 's plans for include intensive study of several topics which have important economic effects for women including child care social security taxes and benefits and the income tax structure At the December meeting the committee adopted a resolution presented to the Administration urging that evening school programs not be curtailed as a result of the fuel shortage since many adults both women and men depend on evening classes to continue their schooling Appendix B REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully HERBERT STEIN Chairman WILLIAM J FELLNER GARY L. SEEVERS Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to advise and assist the President in discharging his responsibilities under the act. During a wide range of economic policy-making issues arose. As the economy approached full employment the pace of inflation accelerated and a shortfall in farm product supplies sent food prices sharply upward. Late in the year the embargo of petroleum supplies by the Arabian producers precipitated the onset of a major energy crisis Herbert Stein served as Council Chairman during his second year in that capacity. Mr. Stein is on leave of absence from the University of Virginia where he is A. Willis Robertson Professor of Economics Several changes in the membership of the Council took place during On July Gary L. Seevers succeeded Ezra Solomon who had left the Council on March to return to the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University where he is Dean Witter Professor of Finance. Mr. Seevers was formerly Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Council On October William J. Fellner became a Member of the Council filling a vacancy created by the return of Marina v.N. Whitman to the University of Pittsburgh where she is Professor of Economics Mr. Fellner is Sterling Professor of Economics Emeritus at Yale University and Resident Scholar from the American Enterprise Institute now on leave ECONOMIC POLICY MAKING AND THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The principal directive of the Employment Act of is " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The basic responsibility of the Council is the analysis and interpretation of economic trends and developments to assist the President in reaching that goal. The Council also provides analysis and recommendations on other economic policy problems that warrant the attention of the Executive Office of the President. The Council prepares regular reports on current economic conditions and forecasts of the economic outlook. Its recommendations are an integral part of economic policy making Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark. Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns NeilH.Jacoby Walter W. Stewart... Raymond J. Saulnier. Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich.. Walter W. Heller... James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis.. Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun JamesS. Duesenberry. Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Hendrik S. Houthakker Paul W. McCracken.... Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman.. Oath of office date Position Chairman Vice Chairman._ Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman.. Member. Member. Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member. Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Augusts August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February Februarys July Februarys ___ February September March Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January July December March August Under the Employment Act it is also the duty of the Council " to appraise the various programs and functions of the Federal Government " and " to make recommendations to the President " as to how economic policy might be better adjusted toward the achievement of employment production and price level objectives. This has involved the Council with an increasingly wide range of problems and has expanded the Council 's direct advisory role within the Executive Office of the President. It has also created close working relationships with the departments agencies and offices in the executive branch both in evaluating current programs and in developing new ones The Council also reviews legislation proposed by Congress and submits recommendations based upon the economic implications of these prospective programs and actions In addition to its duties in the analysis and forecasting of economic trends and developments the Council and its staff in also participated in the examination of a wide range of economic issues incident to the formulation of programs and policies by the Administration. These included : the restructuring and modification of domestic farm programs in order to facilitate the further expansion of farm production and food supplies and the development of new farm legislation ; measures to improve the efficiency structure and functioning of the Nation 's financial markets and programs affecting environmental quality transportation and housing ; the analysis of various aspects of the energy problem including oil import policies and the impact of the oil embargo upon the economy ; policies to govern the exploitation of the resources of the seas ; study of the lumber and plywood industry and the management of the Nation 's timber resources ; supply problems of minerals and materials and the disposition of stockpiles of strategic materials ; and the sale and lease of Government-financed technology. During the President requested the Chairman of the Council to organize an Advisory Committee on the Economic Role of Women ; this is discussed separately in Appendix A. The Council also contributed to analysis of a number of other questions including : youth unemployment problems and the effects of social legislation upon youth employment opportunities ; ways in which the workmen 's compensation system might be improved ; proposals to improve health insurance ; and many of the specific problems arising in the operation of the price and wage control system International trade and investment continued to be topics of major concern to the Council. The Council helps formulate the Administration 's policies on overall international trade policy and it also works on the resolution of specific trade problems. In the Council contributed to decisions relating to the easing of restrictions on imports of meats and dairy products the reassessment of quota limitations on imports of other farm products including wheat and cotton the preparation of the U.S. negotiating position in the trade talks which are scheduled for and the legislation that would provide authority for the reciprocal reduction of trade barriers and improvement of Presidential authority for the day-to-day management of trade policy Early each year the President submits the Economic Report of the President to the Congress as required by the Employment Act. The Council assumes major responsibility for the preparation of this Report which together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers reviews the progress of the economy over the past year and outlines the Administration 's policies and programs to achieve the goals of the act The Council works closely with the economic policy-making units of the Administration. The review and analysis of the overall performance of the economy is coordinated within the series of " Troika " working groups which are composed of representatives of the Council the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) At regular intervals senior staff economists from each of these agencies evaluate recent economic performance and formulate economic forecasts. These studies are then submitted to a second group which is composed of a Council Member the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy and the Economist for OMB The analysis and projections are reviewed and cleared for consideration by the Troika which includes the Chairman of the Council the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of OMB. The Directors of the Council on International Economic Policy and the Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) commonly meet with the Troika thus providing a means of coordinating international and domestic economic policy with the direct controls on prices and wages. The Troika usually augmented by the Chairman of the Board of O Governors of the Federal Reserve System to form the Quadriad meets with the President from time to time to review the performance of the economy and discuss possible changes in economic policy The Chairman of the Council is a member of the Council on Economic Policy which was formed in January to provide for general coordination of all aspects of economic policy. The Council works closely with the Cost of Living Council which supervises the operation of price and wage controls under the Economic Stabilization Program. Mr. Stein is Vice Chairman of this group and is a member of its committees on food and health Mr. Seevers is a member of the CLC Deputies Group and also serves on the Committee on Food. Senior staff economists participate in a number of formal and informal CLC study and review groups. The Chairman is also a member of the Domestic Council the Council on International Economic Policy and the Federal Property Council. He and the Council Members serve on a number of subcommittees of these agencies in the Executive Office of the President In addition the Council and its professional staff served on more than interagency study groups for analysis and review of economic problems and the coordination of policy The Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) like the Council was created by the Employment Act of to make a continuing study of matters relating to the Economic Report and to submit its own report and recommendations to the Congress. Since its inception the Council has made itself readily available to the JEC. During the Chairman and Council Members appeared before the JEC or its subcommittees six times. On February the Council presented testimony before the JEC on the Economic Report and appeared again on August to review economic developments during the first half of Mr. Stein appeared before the JEC Subcommittee on Consumer Economics on March as did Mr. Seevers on September On July Mr. Stein presented testimony with Mrs. Whitman in connection with the economic role of women in the economy and on December he appeared before the JEC Subcommittee on International Economics to present testimony in connection with the effects of the oil embargo upon the economy. In addition to the Council 's appearances before the JEC on February Mr. Stein testified on the Federal budget before the House Committee on Appropriations and presented testimony on the economic effects of the oil embargo on December before the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee The Council continued its active role in the exchange of information and views on international economic developments and policies. The Chairman is the head of the U.S. delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and also serves as vice chairman of the committee. Council Members and staff economists attended several working party meetings of the committee during the year. The Council also participated in a working group of the Manpower and Social Affairs Committee of the OECD on the economic role of women in the economy and in this regard the Council 's staff coordinated the U.S. report and headed the U.S. delegation to an experts ' meeting with other countries In April Mrs. Whitman and a delegation of senior staff economists from the Council visited Tokyo to continue the semiannual exchange of information on economic problems and policies with the Economic Planning Agency for Japan an exchange that was initiated during In October the Council was host to a delegation of economists from the Economic Planning Agency who visited Washington to continue these discussions. In October Mr. Stein with Mr. Foss a member of the CEA staff visited Romania to continue the dialogue on economic planning that was also initiated in PUBLIC INFORMATION The annual Economic Report is the main vehicle through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. The Report presents a comprehensive review of economic conditions as well as forecasts for the coming year and an explanation of the Administration 's overall economic policy. In recent years about copies of the Report have been distributed. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly publication Economic Indicators which is prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the direction of Frances M. James and issued by the Joint Economic Committee with a distribution of about copies The Council holds monthly press briefings at which it presents information and analysis of current economic problems and developments. Information is also provided through frequent speeches by the Chairman and Members of the Council and through participation in seminars and panels The Council answers numerous requests for information from the Congress the press and individual citizens ; it also receives individual visitors and representatives from business academic and other groups as often as is possible without interfering with other duties ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF T H E COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed through direct consultation with the President and regular reports on economic developments. The Chairman represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal and informal meetings of Government officials. He also exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members directly supervise the work of the staff are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council and represent the Council at a wide range of meetings where they assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement. Whenever the Chairman is absent from Washington one of the Council Members automatically becomes Acting Chairman In practice the Chairman and the Council Members work as a team. For operational reasons however subject matter is divided among them informally. Mr. Seevers is responsible for the areas encompassing the Economic Stabilization Program international trade energy and natural resources food and agriculture urban and national growth policy transportation regulated industries environmental problems and antitrust Mr. Fellner 's special responsibilities comprise business conditions shortterm forecasting monetary and fiscal policy international finance manpower training and employment financial markets housing the economic role of women taxation social security and health education and welfare PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of senior staff economists two statisticians and members of the junior research staff Members of the professional staff were responsible for economic analysis and policy recommendations in major subject areas involving the Council 's interests and responsibilities. In addition staff economists carried out many different Council and interagency assignments requiring the application of their knowledge and analytical skills. The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : Senior Staff Economists George A. Akerlof Barry R. Chiswick John D. Darroch John M. Davis Jr Geza M. Feketekuty Murray F. Foss George M. von Furstenberg... Mary W. Hook Benton F. Massell Leo V. Mayer June A. O'Neill Joel Popkin Allan G. Pulsipher Sung W. Son Labor and Manpower Labor Human Resources and Income Distribution Prices and Industry Studies Special Assistant to the Chairman International Finance and Trade Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting Fiscal Policy Public Finance and Housing Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting Energy Agriculture and Food Labor Human Resources and Income Distribution Price Analysis Regulated Industries Science Technology Environment and Transportation Monetary Policy Financial Institutions Housing and Interest Rates Statisticians Frances M. James Catherine H. Furlong Senior Staff Statistician Statistician Junior Staff Economists James S. Fackler Eric B. Herr David C. Munro Laura B. Peterson Rosemary Quintano Lydia Segal Carl I. Van Duyne Labor Human Resources and Income Distribution Fiscal Policy Housing and Public Finance Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting International Finance and Trade Econometrics and Forecasting Price Analysis Econometrics and Forecasting Monetary Policy International Finance and Trade Research Assistants and Interns Mary P. Kane M. Cary Leahey Robert O. Mendelsohn Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician is in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office and manages the Council 's economic and statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of tables and charts for the Economic Report and for the Council 's work. She also handles the fact checking of memoranda testimony and speeches. Catherine H. Furlong Dorothy Bagovich Natalie V. Rentfro and Mary P. Kane assist Miss James The Council conducts a student intern program employing a limited number of promising graduate and undergraduate students of economics for temporary periods particularly during the summer months. Interns who served during were Lee J. Alston ( Indiana University ) Elizabeth L. Bailey ( Simmons College ) Irwin L. Collier Jr. ( Yale University ) Robert S. Dohner ( Harvard University ) David R. Henderson ( University of California Los Angeles ) and Steven B. Robkin ( Duke University ) Each year the Council obtains the consulting services of several economists Consultants who provided services during included Marion Clawson ( Resources for the Future ) John L. Cornwall ( Southern Illinois University ) George C. Eads ( George Washington University ) Karl A. Fox ( Iowa State University ) Hendrik S. Houthakker ( Harvard University ) Paul W. MacAvoy ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Richard N Rosett ( University of Rochester ) and Roger P. Sherman ( University of Virginia ) James R. Golden ( U.S. Military Academy ) was a member of the professional staff during the summer In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office provides administrative support for the entire Council staff including preparation and analysis of the Council 's budget ; procurement of equipment and supplies ; responding to correspondence and inquiries from the general public ; and distribution of Council speeches re- ports and congressional testimony. James H. Ayres served as Administrative Officer assisted by Nancy F. Skidmore Elizabeth A. Kaminski Margaret L Snyder and Bettye T. Siegel. The duplicating mail and messenger department was operated by James W. Gatling Frank C. Norman and Kharl A Williams The secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members consisted of Joyce A. Pilkerton Mary C. Fibich Patricia A. Lee Alice H. Williams and Margaret L. Snyder. Secretaries for the professional staff included D. Carolyn Fletcher Dorothy L. Green Bessie M. Lafakis Jean P. Noll Earnestine Reid Linda A. Reilly and Lillie M. Sturniolo. F. Denise Singletary supplemented the secretarial staff during the summer. Special assistance in connection with the Report was furnished by Dorothy L. Reid and Eleanor A. McStay former members of the Council staff DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff is drawn primarily from universities and research institutions and these economists normally serve for or years Senior staff economists who resigned during the year were William E. Gibson ( Brookings Institution ) Ronald F. Hoffman ( Department of Health Education and Welfare ) William A. Johnson ( Department of the Treasury ) Nicholas S. Perna ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Robert D. Tollison ( Texas A&M ) and Robert C. Vogel ( Southern Illinois University ) Junior economists who resigned in were Paul W. Boltz Andrew J. Safir and Mary E. Sullivan. Other resignations included Zell Berman research assistant ; and Cheryl L. Green and Julie L. Ohner secretaries. Mayme Burnett secretary retired from Federal service during The Council suffered a loss in August with the death of V. Madge McMahon who had been with the Statistical Office since Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : G-l. Gross national product or expenditure C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars G-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product C-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross private product C-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars C-6. Gross national product by major type of product G Gross national product by major type of product in dollars C Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups C-9. Gross national product by sector C-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars G Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations and dollar costs per unit of output C-12. Personal consumption expenditures C-13. Gross private domestic investment C-14. Relation of gross national product and national income C-15. National income by type of income C Relation of national income and personal income C-17. Disposition of personal income C-18. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars C-19. Sources of personal income C-20. Sources and uses of gross saving C-21. Saving by individuals C-22. Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : C-23 C-24 C-25 C-26 C-27 C-28 C-29 C Population by age groups Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Selected unemployment rates Unemployment by duration Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries C-31. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries C-32. Output per man-hour and related data private economy C-33. Changes in output per man-hour and related data private economy PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : C-34. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions C-35. Industrial production indexes market groupings C Industrial production indexes selected manufactures C-37. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing and major materials industries C-38. New construction activity C-39. New housing starts and applications for financing C-40. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment C Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade C-42. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories C-43. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders PRICES : C-44. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes C Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups C Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services O-47. Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted C-48. Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups C-49. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups C-50. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing C-51. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : C-52. Money stock measures C-53. Commercial bank loans and investments C-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors C-55. Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors C-56. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves C-57. Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits C-58. Bond yields and interest rates C-59. Short-and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding C-60. Instalment credit extended and repaid C Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing C-62. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender C-63. Net public and private debt GOVERNMENT FINANCE : C-64. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years C-65. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt fiscal years C-66. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years C-67. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts C Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts C-69. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts C State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years C-71. Public debt securities by kind of obligation C-72. Estimated ownership of public debt securities C-73. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt Pag CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : C-74. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations C Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations C-76. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group C Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business C-78. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations C-79. State and municipal and corporate securities offered C-80. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit C-81. Business formation and business failures Page AGRICULTURE : C-82 C-83 C-84 C-85 Income of farm people and farmers Farm production indexes Farm population employment and productivity Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio C-86. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs C-87. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : C-88. U.S. balance of payments C-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups C-90. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area C U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years C-92. International reserves and C-93. U.S. reserve assets C-94. International investment position of the United States at year-end and C-95. Price changes in international trade C Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars See Economic Report for data for intervening years not shown here Symbols used : Preliminary _ _ Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE C-l. Gross national product or expenditure PerYear or quarter Total gross national product consumpexpenditures Gross Net private exports doof goods mestic and investservices ment ^ Government purchases of goods and services * Federal Total Total National defense Other State and local Percent change from preceding period total gross national product6 Billions of dollars D v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV v : II III. IV See Table C-12 for detailed components See Table C-13 for detailed components See Table C-8 for exports and imports separately < Net of Government sales s This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential structures Change in business inventories Billions of dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates : IL... III IV... : IV... : II III... IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services i Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Continue Addendum : Gross private product Percent change from preceding periodJ Total gross national product Gross private product Billions of dollars * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Net of Government sales Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investment i Personal consumDtion expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product ^ Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential structures I960 * Seasonally adjusted : II III IV : II Ill IV. : II.. Ill IV * See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and Imports of goods and services ! Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product by sector Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Private2 Total Nonfarm General government _ _ P Seasonally adjusted : II III IV _ : II III IV : II III IV p_ Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables C-9 and C-10 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE C Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross private product Gross national product price measures = Total Year or quarter Percent change from preceding periodl Total Private Price Price Implicit index Implicit index price price deflator deflator weights weights Implicit price deflator Price index weights Private Chain price index Implicit price deflator Price index weights Chain price index * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * _.___ Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexes Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Year AgriTotal culture Congross fores- tract natry contional and strucproduct fishtion eries Manufacturing Total TransGovportaerntion Whole- Finance insurment Nonsale Ducomance Servand All and rable durable muniand ices govern- otheri goods goods cation retail real ment trade estate indus- indus- and entertries tries utiliprises ties 1972._ i Mining rest of the world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Final sales change Total Total gross national product Inventory Year or quarter Total Final sales Durable goods la Total Final sales ? 8.fi fi ? fi v ll Total Oi CO Final sales J-g Nondurable goods Gross Serv- Struc- auto ices tures product If c u n ! ? " ? ? ? ? ? ? n fi fi ? ? ? Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III __ IV... : : II III IV.. : I I IV p. " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Total Total Ingross na- Final ventional sales tory change prodFinal uct Total sales Durable goods c3< a> to | " g C " ~ ! ? ( ? * " Final sales ] Total Gross auto product Is ss Serv- Strucices tures Final Total sales Nondurable go c L7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... II. III. IV.. : I.. II. III. IV. : I.. II. III IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groupSy [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Government Disposable personal income Ye3 r or qua rter Total i Less : 1nterEquals : est Total paid excludand ing intransterest fer and paytransments fers to foreigners Net receipts Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving or dissaving Tax and nontax receipts or accruals Less : Transfers interest and subsidies Expendtiures Equals : Net receipts Total expenditures Less : Transfers interest and subsidies Equals : Purchases of goods and services Surplus or deficit na- ' tional income and product accounts ? ? H57 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ^ ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? p ? Seasonally adjusted annual rates III " I I V II. III.. IV.._ lf " _ ~ III.. IV P. See footnotes at end of table T A B L E C Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business Year or quarter JTOSS retained earnings International Gross private omestic investment * Excess of investment ( ) Net transers to forigners jy persons and lovers ment Net exports of goods and services Exports Less : Imports Equals : Net exports Excess of transfers or of net exports ( > ' Total income or receipts ! I960... P Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expenditure -L5 Seasonally adjusted annual rates III IV ObO.7 : L II III IV : I. II : I IV v Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Capital consumption allowances corporate inventory valuation adjustment undistributed corporate profits and private wage accruals less disbursements Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table C-13 s Net foreign investment less capital grants received by the United States with sign changed Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-9. Gross national pro 3uct by sector [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product1 Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm * Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product 1972__ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private productl Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm * Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product * I960 * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV * * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises s Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-ll. Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations and dollar costs per unit of output Gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations ( billions of dollars ) Current dollar costs per unit of dollar gross product ( dollars ) Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Year or quarter Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes CompensaNet tion of interest employees Total Profits tax liability Profits after taxes plus inventory valuation adjustment Total costsi Current dollars dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill This is equal to the deflator for gross product of nonfinancial corporations with the decimal point shifted two places to the left * Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-12. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter r J I s a c ca i ^ o3 I Nondurable goods Durable goods = O " S E a < ! T3 E O I c o -o i Services I IE o co I O X c I g </> = o X c co o u 19561I_ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II..- III.. IV... : II. III.. IV... : I L I I I IVP.. Includes consumer purchases of mobile homes Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysts TABLE C-13. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Total Residential structures Producers ' durable equipment Structures Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonform Nonfarm Nonfarm Farm p. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV 5i. : II ML... IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-14. Relation of gross national product and national income J929-73 [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption allowances Equals : Net national product Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income 2.'3 y Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III. IV : II III IV v : II Ill IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-15. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Compensation of employees Total national income l Year or quarter Total Business and professional income SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages and ries salaries Income Invenof tory uninTotal corpo- valuation rated adjustenter- ment prises Income of farm proprietors Rental income of persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Net interCorpo- Inven- est tory rate Total profits valuation before taxes i adjustment -A v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III. IV. : II III IV. : H III. IV v National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table C-14 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories * See Table C-74 for corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Year or quarter National income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Plus Wage ContriGovbutions accruals ernment for less transfer social dispayments insurburseto perance ments sons Interest paid by government /noi. \ { .net ; Equals : Dividends and by consumers Business Personal transfer income payments I960. 1970__ 1972__ * 5i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : ! IV : III IV. : ! II.. III. IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-17. Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPersonal sonal Interest transfer consump- paid by paycontion sumers ments expendto foritures eigners Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Total Billions of dollars Consumption expend * itures Personal saving Percent I960... P Seasonally adjusted annual rates Seasonally adjusted : L II.. III IV.. 121A : I II. III. IV.. : I I I ML. IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-18. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Disposable personal income Total ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) dollars Current dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) i Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars | ._. * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : | | III IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV v Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) O TABLE C-19. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursements * Total personal income Year or quarter Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Propri etors ' income Distrib- Service utive indus- industries tries Government Other labor income * Business and professional Farm1 Seasonally adjusted annual rates II Ill IV : II III IV S II Ill IV * .._ See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-19. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental income Diviof per- dends sons Personal interest income Old age survivors disability and health insurance benefits Total State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans benefits Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income * v Seasonally adjusted annual rates IV... : II... Ill IV : I II III IV P : The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C-15 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-20. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Year or quarter Capital grants received by the United State States i and local Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Total Total Gross investment Personal saving Gross business saving Total Federal Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investments Statistical discrepancy ( -4M mm " _ -i'.o * " " '.7 ^ -i ! i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III... IV... : II III. IV... : II III.... Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-21. Saving by individuals 1946-73l [ Billions of dollars ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Net investment in Less : Increase in debt Securities CurInsurNon- Mortrency Savance corgage Non- ConCorpoand and podebt Con- Other ings Govrate Corpo- pen- farm sumer rate Total deon sumer acerndumand counts ment and sion homes rables busi- non- credit debt rate fordereness farm secu- eign equiposits assets homes ties serves rities bonds I960. '64.8 -'.3 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : 1st half 2nd half : I II.. III. IV. : I IL III Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C Number and money income ( in dollars ) offamilies and unrelated individuals by race of head Total White Negro and other races With incomes With incomes under $ Total under $ Total num- Median num- Median ber income Number income Number ( milPerber Per- ( mil ( mil- cent lions ) ( mil- cent lions ) lions ) lions ) Year FAMILIES ^ $ $ ? } ? $ With incomes under $ Total num- Median ber Num ( mil- income ber Perlions ) ( mil- cent lions ) With incomes under $ UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS With incomes under $ With incomes under $ Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent NumPerber ( mil- cent lions ) $ $ $ L L i The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family The term " unrelated individuals " refers to persons years old and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE C-23. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-24. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( includ- Armed ing Forcesi Armed Forces ) Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Labor force particiUnem- pation rate ploy ( total ment labor rate ( percent force as of percent Unem- civilian of nonlabor instituployforce ) tional ment population ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent ; Thousands of persons years of age and over ; ; I960 See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-24. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Armed Forces Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor force participation Unemrate ploy ( total ment labor rate ( percent force as percent of civilian of noninstitulabor tional force ) population ) Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar2 Apr. May June ; i.9 July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec \ .l \ .l : Jan2 Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec i Not seasonally adjusted Not strictly comparable with prior data due to the introduction of population adjustments in the period. The adjustment beginning January added to the noninstitutional population to the civilian labor force to civilian employment and to unemployment. The adjustment in March added to the civilian labor force and civilian employment. Unemployment rates were not significantly affected by the adjustments Note. Labor force data in Tables C-24 through C-27 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-25. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employment Females Males Year or month Total Unemployment years Total and years over Males Total Total years years and over Total * i 42i,431 ; " " Females years years years and Total years and over over ',611 ! : ) : : i ! ! ! J i,340 ; : " 28,10T Seasonally adjusted ',055 ; " ; " 2,5bO : Jan... Feb.. Mari. Apr.. May.. June. " " I i,381 ^ ^ July.. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec ; : ; " I 47,99r i,483 ; : Jani.. Feb.. Mar Apr.. May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... Nov. Dec.. See footnote Table C-24 Note. See Note Table C-24 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-26. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ] B " sex and age All workers Year or month By color Both sexes years Men years and over Women years and over White By selected groups ExpeNegro rienced Housewage and and hold other salary heads races workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Labor force time lost * Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct..... Nov Dec i Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March a Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part-time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note. See footnote and Note Table C-24 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE O27. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Year or month Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over Seasonally adjusted i : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec i Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note See footnote and Note Table C-24 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E C Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment * Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) Total benefits Insured paid unem ( milploylions ment of dollars ) i Initial claims Exhaustions * Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Unadjusted Weekly average thousands Thousands Seasonally adjusted Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) * Percent p. P : J a n " Feb * ._ Mar Apr'. Mayp. June p. July * Aug * ._ Sept * Oct * ___ : Jan p Feb p. Mar p. Apr p. May p. June p July p. Aug p. Sept p Oct p Dec P NOVP. Dec p Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts. Monthly data exclude extended benefit payments Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year. Data for New Jersey not available for April-June For total unemployment only. Excludes data for New Jersey for April-December Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Manpower Administration TABLE C Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 'All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Total wage and salary workers Year or month Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Government Federal State and local 2i ? P See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-29. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Government Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.Sept. Oct.. Nov Dec : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.Sept. Oct.. Nov Dec.. : Jan... F e b Mar... Apr... May... June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.Oct... Nov P Dec V. Note. Data in Tables C-29 through C-31 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables C-24 through C ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-30. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month ConTotal private Manu- tract nonag- factur- construcriculing tion tural i Total Retail private Manunontrade agri- facturing cultural Contract construction Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Index = Retail trade Percent change from preceding period Current dollars dollars * Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ P Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June $ $ $ $ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec v Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table C-29 Includes eating and drinking places Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts < Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index Computed from indexes to two decimal places Note.-See Note Table C-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-31. .Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries ; [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ] Average spendable weekly earnings total private nonagricultural4 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural l Current dollars dollars Manu- Contract facturing construction Retail trade Percent change from preceding period Amount Current dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ $ $ $ * I960. P Seasonally adjusted annual rates Seasonally adjusted : Jan Teb_ Mar Apr May_ June $ $ $ $ $ $ $ M.8 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table C-29 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index Includes eating and drinking places * Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes for a worker with three dependents s In annualizing the rates of change the effect of the change in tax rates at the beginning of and is taken into account separately Note. See Note Table C-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE C-32. Output per man-hour and related data private economy [ = ] Output ^ Year or quarter Total private Man-hours Output per man-hour Compensation per man-hour3 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private nonnon- private nonnonnonnonfarm private farm farm private farm private farm private farm I960 Seasonally adjusted : I II III... IV... : I II III IV... : I II... III-..IV * i Output refers to gross national product in dollars > Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contribution for social insurance and private benefits plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Current dollar gross product divided by constant dollar product Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-33. Changes in output per man-hour and related data private economy [ Percent change from preceding period ] Man-hours2 Output Output per man-hour Compensation per man-hour3 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Year or quarter Total private Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total nonnonnonnonnonfarm private farm private farm private farm private farm private I960. Private nonfarm * 2'.1 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II III---.- i Output refers to gross national product in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contribution for social insurance and private benefits plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross product divided by constant dollar product Note. Data relate to all persons Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ-slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE C-34. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions { = Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable I960 * Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June UO.O July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug SeDt Oct Nov v Dec v Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E C Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = Materials Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods i Total Total Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total Intermediate products Total Business Durable goods Nondurable goods Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept. Oct.. NOVP Dec v. i Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately > Also includes industrial fuel and power not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E C Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ] Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals TransFabricated Ma- portametal chinery tion nstruequip- ments prodment ucts Nondurable manufactures Ordnance private and government Lum- Furniture ber and clay and miscelglass laneous ChemTexicals tiles Paper petro- Foods and apparel print- leum and and and tobacco leather ing rubber P Seasonally adjusted Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug s e o c f ! : : : : : July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec * Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-37. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing and major materials industries Manufacturing Utilization rate3 Period Output ^ Capacity Total Primary processing output = Advanced processing Major materials industries utilization rate ' Percent I960 -VlTT * Seasonally adjusted : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : * II v \ \ \ v IV * May differ slightly from data shown in Table C-34 because of rounding Output as percent of capacity Note. For description of series see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " October and November issues for manufacturing series and August issue for major materials industries series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data of Federal Reserve Department of Commerce McGraw-Hill Information Systems Company and various industry organizations TABLE CV38. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings1 Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction ' Total Total a New housing units Total Total Commercial Industrial Other * State Fedand erally locally owned owned i New series 1950._ _ ] ? ? * ^ ? _ ? fi See footnotes at end of table TABLE C New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings i Total Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction i New housing units Total Commercials Industrial Total Other * Federally owned State and locally5 owned Seasonally adjusted annual rates Sept... Oct.... Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... Apr... May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct * >_._ Nov : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July Aug Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to I960 included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc * Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm public utilities and all other private s Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census except as noted TABLE C New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public ^ Proposed home construction Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Type of structure Total One family FHA * VA Two or more families Requests for VA appraisals Government home programs ( nonfarm ) New private housing units Appliauthor- cations for ized FHA commitments New series I960 ( ) ( ) ( ) p ( ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-39. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Proposed home construction Private Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Government home programs ( nonfarm ) Type of structure * Nonfarm New private housing units authorized s Total One family Two or more families FHA * VA Applications for FHA commitments * Requests for VA appraisals Seasonally adjusted annual rates : J a n Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec. : J a n Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June [ July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov * Dec * Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for Data are not available for new homes started under the Department of Agriculture Farmers Home Administration program Units are for to 4-family housing Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; for ; for ; and prior to e Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Not available separately beginning January Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Housing and Urban Development and Veterans Administration ( except as noted ) TABLE C-40. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment l [ Billions of dollars ] Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Mining Railroad Air Other Public utilities Communication Commercial and other * _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV___ : II III IV : II III IV3... : | 3____ Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural service ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-41. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month Sales Inventories ! * K 183i " " " '107 ; Sales i Inventories Ratio Ratio s Sales i Inventories Ratio s Sales i Inventories Ratio ! ; Seasonally adjusted July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. [ ; " : : Jan.. Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June.. 1.43i ! ! ! 41,242i : ! July... Aug Sept.. Oct... Nov * >_ Dec p. : ! O6O | : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. T Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory /sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month < Manufacturing data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M " September * Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE O42. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ] Inventories2 Shipments i Durable goods industries Year or month Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies FinWork ished in process goods Nondurable goods industries Total Materials and supplies FinWork in ished process goods ' * Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p i Monthly average for year and total for month > Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-43. Manvjacturers * new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] New orders l Unfilled orders Unfilled ordersshipments ratio Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods industries nondefense I960. Nondurable goods industries Total Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Seasonally adjusted : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. May " " June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... NOVJ>_ Dec j jlll,897 Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December except as noted * Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. Comparable data for new orders ( total durable and nondurable ) are available for and only. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September for these data Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE C-44. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Year or month All items Housing Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Medical Personal care care Reading and recreation Other goods and services i : J a n Feb Mar. Apr May JuneJuly Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb.. Mr a Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE O45. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ) Commodities Year or month All items Services Special indexes Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable Nondurable All Rent Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities $ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ : Jan Feb Mar.... Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O T A B L E C Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Used cars Household durables Total Apparel commodities Services less rent Nondurables less Total food and apparel House- Transhold serv- portation ices servless ices rent Medical care services Total i New cars : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ( ) Other * i Includes certain items not shown separately Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services > Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E C Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers = seasonally adjusted ] Special indexes Year and month All All items All items items less less less medfood shelter ical Commodity groups All commodities Selected expenditure classes Commodities less food Food Total Durable Nondurable Shelter Fuel and utilities Apparel Trans- Medporand ical up- tation care keep : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. MarApr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ; ; July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups [ Percent change from preceding period i ] All items Year or month Unadjusted Commodities less food Services Food Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted _ _ : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec .l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec LOO : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Annual changes are from December to December Percent changes for services are based on unadjusted indexes since these prices have little seasonal movement Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for the all items index are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes carried to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C ~ Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds All commodities Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides Fuels skins and leather related Chemicals and products and allied products related and products power : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June I960.. _ July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug __ Sept.. Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE O49. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp Metals Rubber Lumber paper and and and and plastic metal wood allied products products products products Year or month Transportation FurniMachin- ture and N on me- equipment : ery and housetallic Motor equipmineral hold ment products vehicles durables and equipment ! Miscellaneous products C " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec i Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-50. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials Materials and components for manufacturing Year or month All commodities Materials and components For For Com- for conFor nonfood durable durable ponents struction manu- manu- manufactur- factur- facturing ing ing Materials Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Fuel Total Total : Jan.. Feb.Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr._ May.. June. July. Aug.. Sept._ Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE C ~ Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials Intermediate materials supplies and components Consumer finished goods excluding foods I960. 1973_ : Jan. Feb_ Mar_ Apr. May. June_ July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov Dec Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price I ndexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-51. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups [ Percent change from preceding period l \ Industrial commodities All commodities Year or month Farm products and processed foods and feeds Consumer finished goods Total All except foods Foods SeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adadusted j usted adjusted justed justed justed SeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adjusted justed adadjusted justed justed justed I960 : July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.... Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec _ " " o _ l _ .'3 \ l o '.4 L7 ! -'.1 * i Annual changes are from December to December Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for all commodities and industrial commodities are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes carried to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE C-52. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Components and related items Overall measures M3 M3 ( M l P lus Mi ( Ms plus time ( Currency deposits deposits plus at nonat comdemand bank mercial deposits ) thrift banks instituother than arge CD 's ) tions ) Year and month Deposits at commercial banks Currency Time and savings Demand2 Total Large CD 's< Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions fi U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ^ : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec * * : Dec : Jan Feb Mar ._ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve Banks and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government. Effective June excludes balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) * Negotiable time certificates of deposit issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks and savings capital at savings and loan associations Deposits at all commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-53. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ! Loans End of year or month Total loans and investments Total Investments Commercial and industrial U.S. Government securities Other securities : June : June Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusted * M8.7 v fl : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July v Aug * Sept * Oct " Nov * Dec * Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic bank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans * Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes totaling about $ billion are classified as other securities rather than as loans Beginning June commercial and industrial loans were reduced by about $ billion due to loan ^ classifications at one large bank Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Item All other nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments. Total funds raised U.S. Government Public debt securities. Budget agency issues Debt capital instruments. State and local government securities Corporate and foreign bonds Mo rtgages Home Other residential. Commercial Farm Other private credit Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total funds raised Foreign State and local governments.. Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate. Demand deposits and currency.. Time and savings accounts At commercial banks.. At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities. Less secu rity debt Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Other sources : Foreign funds At banks. Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balacne U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves. Other See footnote at end of table TABLE G-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item All other nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments. Demand deposits and currency Time and savings accounts At commercial banks. At savings institutions Total funds raised U.S. GovernmentPublic debt securities Budget agency issues Debt capital instruments State and local government securities. Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages Home Other residential Commercial Farm Other private creditBank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paper. Other By borrowing sector : Total funds raised Foreign State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate. Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors. Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors. Deposits Credit market instruments net. U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks. Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves.. Other Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits U.S. Government securities Time deposits Year and month Total liquid assets Total : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec p : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ MayJune Currency ] Demand deposits * July Aug_ Sept Oct. Nov.Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May. June Shortterm Savmarketings able bonds securities Negotiable certificates of deposit * Commercial paper ' Commercial banks1 Nonbank thrift institutions b3.6 July. Aug. Sept Oct._ Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec p Money stock components ( see Table C-52 ) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions as published in money stock statistics plus monthly-average deposits at credit unions Series E and H savings bonds held by individuals * Short-term marketable U.S. Government securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings Commercial paper held outside banks and other financial institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-56. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings Total Seasonal Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required * : Dec Dec Dec U Excess I '900 Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec * July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Beginning November includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks are allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Beginning allowable deficiencies included are ( beginning with first statement week of quarter ) : first quarter $ million ; second quarter $ million ; third quarter $ million ; fourth quarter $ mifiion Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-57. Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits [ Averages of daily figures ; i billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Deposits subject to reserve requirements * Member bank reserves Year and month Demand Total N on borRequired rowed Available Total Time and savings Private U.S Government Total member bank deposits plus nondeposit items : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Except as noted in footnote Member bank reserves series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M Reserves available tc support private nonbank deposits are defined as ( ) required reserves for ( a ) private demand deposits ( b ) total time and savings deposits and ( c ) nondeposit sources subject to reserve requirements and ( ) excess reserves. This series excludes required reserves for net interbank and U.S. Government demand deposits < Deposits subject to reserve requirements include total time and sayings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks s Total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements plus Eurodollar borrowings bank-related commercial paper ( data relate to Wednesday figures ) and certain other nondeposit items. This series for deposits is referred to as " the adjusted bank credit proxy. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-58. Bond yields and interest rates ( Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treas- month ury bills i issues Taxable year issues bonds * Aaa Baa Average High- rate on Prime Fedgrade shortFHA comeral municterm new mer- Reserve ipal bank home Bank cial bonds loans mortdis ( Stand- to busi- ' ? % gage count ard & n e s s yields rate Poor 's ) selected months cities ? ? fi ? ? 6fi ? 5n See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes O TABLE G-58. Bond yields and interest rates Continued ( Percent per annuml Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasmonth ury issues2 bills i Taxable year issues bonds Aaa Baa Average Highrate on Prime Fedgrade shortcomeral municterm merReserve ipal bank cial Bank bonds loans dis ( Stand- to busi- paper count ard & nessrate months Poor 's ) selected cities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1S72 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June FHA new home mortgage yields s Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues Selected note and bond issues * First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years * Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissible interest rate ( H percent beginning August ) Through July computed on 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages paid in years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data NOte. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE C-59. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] r ^ oninstalmentcredi Instalment credit Total Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Total End of year or month Home improvement loans * Personal loans Total Charge accounts Other Addendum : Policy loans by life insurance companies s ? ? lfi ? ? \ ? ' 13fi ? ? ? ? ? 7fiS 4f>1 i ; 3S3 ? ? ) ? \ ? ? 70S ? \ DOS ? ? n fi4 ? fi 7fiR ? in ii ? \ fi ? ? ? ? ? ? S3 57fi ? ? ? 3sn ? ifif ) ? ? * ? ? ? inn : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ? 3fi5 ? ? ? ? fi7 ? ? ? n V Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ? 3fi8 ? ? 8S9 74fi 21r ? ? ? ? ? July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 138r ? 3n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? July. Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in other consumer goods paper Single-payment loans and service credit Data are annual statement asset values. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) TABLE C-60. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Automobile paper Year or month Other consumer goods paper Home improvement loans Extended Personal loans Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid * Repaid Extended Repaid Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. MarApr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec I Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family houses prop- properties erties i Conventional * to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses * * : II III... IV : P... II * > III * IVP__ : ! * __-_ II * .__ Ill p IV * Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE C-62. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender [ Billions of dollars ] Selected financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banks i Other lenders Life insurance U.S comagencies2 panies Individuals and others * : II III IV : v II v Ill v IV v : P II p III p IV * >_ Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association and new Government National Mortgage Association as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks GNMA ( Pools ) and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE C-63. Net public and private debt * [ Billions of dollars ] Private Public Individual and noncorporate End of year Total Federal Government Federal financial agencies Nonfarm State and local governments Total Corporate Total Total Mortgage Commercial and financial * Farrrl * Consumer ? ? q q q l in ? q ? q q __ ? m ' 1957._ ? ? ? ? n _ ? ^ q ? V ? cv to a 1942_ n in n n Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " This comprises the debt of federally sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with * Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories s Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Land Banks and Federal National Mortgage Association GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE C-64. Federal budget receipts and outlays,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Receipts Fiscal year Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) I I i Estimate Note. Data for are according to the administrative budget those for according to the consolidated cash statement and those for according to the unified budget Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays beginning For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-65. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt,fiscalyears { Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) _ Federal funds. Trust funds.. BUDGET FINANCING : Total means of financing Net borrowing from the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes. Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health Income security Veterans benefits and services. Interest General government General revenue sharing... Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions : Employer share employee retirementInterest received by trust funds See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE C-65. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt,fiscalyears Con [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Description Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds.._ Trust funds BUDGET FINANCING : Total means of financing.. Net borrowing from the public or re3,814 payment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Interest General government General revenue sharing Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions : Employer share employee retirement Interest received by trust funds i Excludes changes due to reclassification and to conversion of mixed-ownership enterprises to private ownership. ( See footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " and footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " ) Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget T A B L E C-66. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Actual Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Total receipts budget EXPENDITURES Total outlays budget Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note. See Special Analysis A " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget T A B L E C-67. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Federal Government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts L941 _ * : II III IV : II III IV : ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates III i Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-68. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Expenditures Transfer payments Indi- Year or quarter Total Personal tav tax and nontax busi- ConPurchases ness tribupotions rate of tax for profits and Total i goods tax and non- social acservtax insuracance ices ceipts cruals cruCor- To persons To foreigners ( net ) Grantsin-aid to State and local governments Not wet interest paid als Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Surplus or deficit -> national income and product accounts Fiscal year : v Calendar year : v -i ! o f > Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II Ill Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of and and in the quarters of respectively Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget O T A B L E C-69. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Expenditures Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total ndirect PerbusiCorsonal porate ness tax tax profits and and tax nontax iccruals nontax eceipts accruals PurContrichases butions Fedof for eral Total goods social grantsand insurn-aid servance ices Transfer payments to persons Subsidies less current Net surplus interest of govpaid ernment enterprises Surplus or deficit <- ) national income and product accounts -LI p. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II Ill IV : I II... HI IV : L II.. Ill IV Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of ; and in the quarters of ; and and in the quarters of respectively Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-10. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source * Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function * ReveCorponue ration from net Federal income Governtaxes ment All other revenues Total Education Highways Public welfare All other * I960. ^ ; * * ' 30,32r ' i Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table C-63 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-71. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Total public debt securities End of year or month Marketable public issues by maturity class Within year to years years and over Nonmarketable public issues U.S savings bonds and notes Foreign and international Other Special issues Matured public debt and debt bearing no interest : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June 2.C 1.J l.S 2.C 2.C July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr. May.. June _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE C-72. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values,i billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors Held End of year or month Total I960.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug _ Sept Oct Nov Dec Held by Govern- Federal Reserve ment accounts Banks Total Mutual savings State Miscelbanks Other and local Comlaneous Indimercial and in- corpo-4 governviduals invesbanks surance rations ments * tors companies C C S U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table C-53 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers Federal oriented agencies not included in Government accounts and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the I nternationa I Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the International Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE C-73. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year Ito5 years to years to years Average length years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years Months g I960 o Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Mote. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE C-74 Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment r Manufacturing Y ear or q uarter All industries Total Dur- Nondurable goods able goods inindustries dustries Transportation communication and public utilities Corporate profits after taxes All other industries Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability i Total UndisDivi- tribdends uted profits Corporate capital consumption allow-2 ances Profits plus capital consumption allowances3 ? q ? ? n q ? 19S7 ? q n q i ? ? q ? ? q ? ? ? ? I960 ? ? fi ? n ? ? q ? q i ? ? ? ? j> <p ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? q ? iq q ? ? ? iq 6q qi V ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? q Seasonally adjustec \ annual rates ? ? I II Ill IV ? ? I II III : II III IV ' Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes depreciation and accidental damages Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-75. Sales profits and stockholders * equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] manufacturing \ ll corporations * Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries ^ Durable goods industries Profits Profits StockStockStockBefore After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Federal Federal equity2 ( net ) Federal Federal equity ( net ) Federal Federal equity income income income income income income taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes ? ? I960. ? ? : II III IV : II Ill IV : II III ] ? ] ? Includes newspapers beginning Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. Specific information about the effects of the more significant changes and revisions is contained in the following issues of the " Quarterly Financial Report " : third quarter third quarter first quarter and first quarter Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE C-76. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries Year or quarter All manufacturTotal ing durcor- able pora1 tions Electrical MaMoma- chintor vehi- Air- chinery ery craft cles ( exand equip- cept and equip- parts ment elecand trical ) ment supplies Fabricated metal products Primary iron and steel industries Primary nonferrous metal industries MisLumcellaInber neous Stone Furni- and stru- manclay ture wood ments ufacturand and prod- and reucts ing glass fixprod- tures ( ex- lated ( incept prod- cluducts furni- ucts ing ture ) ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent3 : I IV... : I II... III.. Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales cents : I II. III IV. : I See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-76. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Total nondurable ' Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing i Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent __ : II III... IV.... : II III _ : II... III..- IV... : IL III.. Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales cents i Includes newspapers beginning * Includes certain industries not shown separately Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See also Note Table C-75 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE C-77. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Sources Uses Externa Period Total Credit market funds InternaM Total Total Long- Shortterm term Increase in financial assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) _ _ Total Other Purchase of physical assets Seasonally adjusted annual rates : 1st half... 2d half : II III IV : II III * Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation adjustment ) and capital consumption allowances Stocks bonds and mortgages Bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans Plant and equipment residential structures and inventory investment Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-78. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter U.S Cash on GovernTotal hand and ment in securibanks1 ties Receivables from U.S Government Current liabilities Notes and InOther acvencur- Total counts tories rent receivasable sets * Advances and Notes preand acpayments counts U.S payGovable ernment3 Federal income tax liabilities Other current liabilities Net working capital All corporations ? g : I II.. Ill IV : H9.0 2C3.1 Nonfinancial corporations I Ill Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to the U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' booksor amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' IOKS hnnbe * Includes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Excludes banks sayings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Note. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually U I \ s WVlllUUlv f h/U * J \ * U Ufl VC L I I I C WVMIUIIVU Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-79. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Industry of corporate issuer Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Electric Transportations Bonds and notes Manufacturing ^ Preferred stock Communication water Other : L_ II. _ III. IV. : I II.. III. IV P v Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies com mercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to corr rr.ercial banks intercorporate transactions investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE C-80. Common stock prices \ earnings and yields and stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price indexes Margin credit at brokers and banks l Regulated5 Year or month Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratio Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) I960. : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Other security credit at banks ? Unregulated ; nonmargin stock credit at banks e Public utilities ( stocks ) Railroads ( stocks ) Total Brokers Banks Millions of dollars = : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. Monthly data are averages of daily figures and annual data are averages of monthly figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of price index for last day of quarter to earnings for months ending with that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data Margin credit includes all credit extended to purchase or carry stocks or related equity instruments and secured at least in part by stock. Credit extended by brokers is end-of-month data for member firms of the New York Stock Exchange. June data for banks are universe totals ; all other data for banks represent estimates for all commercial banks which accounted for percent of security credit outstanding at banks on June n addition to assigning a current loan value to margin stock generally Regulations T and U permit special loan values for convertible bonds and stock acquired through exercise of subscription rights Nonmargin stocks are those not listed on a national securities exchange and not included in the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 's list of over-the-counter margin stocks. At banks loans to purchase or carry nonmargin stocks are unregulated ; at brokers such stocks have no loan value Includes loans to purchase or carry margin stock if these are unsecured or secured entirely by unrestricted collateral Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System New York Stock Exchange and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE C-81. Business formation and business failures Business failuresl Index of net business formation ( = ) Year or month New business rations ( num- ness failure Liability size class Total Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Under $ and $ over Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P115.8 P26,215 P117.8 v27,683 Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data * Preliminary ; based on seasonally adjusted data through November Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Brad street Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE C-82. Income offarm people and farmers Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Year or quarter Net to farm operators Realized gross From From From nonfarm all Total farm sources sources ^ sources ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- Includreceipts penses ing net ing net from inven- invenmarkettory tory ings change change Billions of dollars Net income per farm including net inventory change Current dollars dollars Dollars M.I 1973P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IVP Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) * Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year * Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-83. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Farm output i Year Livestock and products Hay Food Vege- Fruits Feed Total grains and grains tables and nuts forage Cotton ToOil bacco crops Total Meat animals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs 9b 1973P Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules. The Department of Agriculture also estimates net farm output which excludes all quantities used for feed Includes production of seeds and of fe " ecf for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture O TABLE C-84. Farm population employment,and productivity Farm population ( April l ) i Year ber ( thousands ) As percent of total population Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Per man-hour Par Total Family Hired unit of workers workers total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre < Index = p Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table C-24 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " < Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census \ TABLE C-85. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ Index = except as noted ] Year or month All farm products Crops Parity ratio l Prices paid by farmers Prices received by farmers Livestock All items interest and products taxes and wage rates Family living items Production items Actual Adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June CD July Aug Sept " Oct Nov Dec * CO toco too Percentage ratio of index of prices received by farmers to index of prices paid interest taxes and wages rates on = base The adjusted parity ratio reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-86. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Crops Manharhours vested of ( milfarm lions work of ( bilacres ) i lions ) Year Total Farm labor Farm real estate Mechanical power and machinery Feed Fertiseed lizer and Taxes Misceland liveand liming stock interest laneous mapur- terials chases : ? v Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Nonfarm portion of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE G-87. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Financial assets MaHouseReal LiveDehold Total estate stock * chinery equip- posits and Crops ment and motor and curvehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' U.S ment debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives ? L.4 q 1962_ v : n L.I Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE C-88. U.S. balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise Year or quarter ExImports ports Net balance Military transactions Direct expend- Sales itures Net investment income Net bal- Privates U.S Government RemitNet Bal- tances travel penBalance Other and sions ance on trans- servand on goods other porta- ices curand tion ex- net uni- rent acservpendiices * lateral count transtures fers ; 4-r ^ t [ ' Seasonally adjusted : II... IV _ : II... Ill IV : I I III * IV See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-88. U.S. balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Long-term capital flows net Year or quarter U.S Government Balance on current account and longPriterm vate e capital Nonliquid shortterm private capital flows net e Altocations of special drawing rights Errors and omissions net Net liquidity balance Liquid private capital flows net Official reserve transactions balance Changes in liabilities Changes nU.S to foreign official official reserve agen- assets nets cies net ? U.S official reserve assets net ( end of period ) io-657 io-968 io-3,677 io-2 F io-2,864 io-2,713 I960... ! Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted : L II III IV : l._ II Ill IV : II. Ill * IVP H14.378 Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in timing and coverage Includes fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States Equal to net exports of goods and services in the national income and product accounts when converted to an annual rates basis Excludes liabilities to foreign official reserve agencies Private foreigners exclude the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) but include other international and regional organizations Includes liablities to foreign official agencies reported by U.S. Government and U.S. banks and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States Official reserve assets include gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF Not available separately Coverage of liquid banking claims for and of nonliquid nonbanking claims for is limited to foreign currency deposits only ; other liquid items are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims Includes gain of $ million resulting from revaluation of the German mark in October u Includes $ million increase in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December First quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis ( except reserve assets are for end of December ) i< Includes increase of $ million resulting from change in par value of the U.S. dollar on October is Includes increase of $ million resulting from change in par value of the U.S. dollar on May Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of the Treasury TABLE C-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise exports i Total including reexports * Year or quarter Merchandise imports Domestic exports General imports Total Food Crude ManFood Crude ManSeabever- mate- ufacbever- mate- ufacsonally Unad- Total ages Seaages rials rials tured tured adjusted and to- and goods * sonally Unad- and to- and goods5 justed adbacco fuels * justed bacco fuels * justed Gross merchandise trade balance seasonally adjusted : II III IV : II III IV : III IV Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind * Includes fats and oils 'includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. Import values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Commerce International Economic Policy and Research TABLE C-90. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area IMillions of dollars ] Developed countries. Developing countries. Canada * Other Western Hemisphere. Western Europe Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries i Area Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : T o t a l General imports : T o t a l Developed countries. Developing countries. Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries * Beginning January transshipments of certain grains and oilseeds through Canada are shown as exports to unidentified countries Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Beginning November crude petroleum imports are not available by country of origin but are included in the total and in unidentified countries * Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce International Economic Policy and Research TABLE C-91. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total Near East and South Asia Latin m erica East Asia and ietnam TOTAL ECONOMIC LOANS AND GRANTS ( OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS ) * average Loans. ._ .Grants Loans Grants -_ OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE TO LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES2 Obligations and loan authorizations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average Agency for International Development Obligations and loan authorizations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average Food for Peace Obligations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average _. Contributions and subscriptions to international financial institutions3 Obligations : average Other official development assistance including Peace Corps Obligations : average Other economic loans and grants to less developed countries Obligations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts average _ .ECONOMIC LOANS AND GRANTS TO DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Obligations : average Africa Europe Other and interegional Some data are preliminary Official development assistance is defined as concessional aid for development purposes. Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa Canada and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the Inter-American Development Bank the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Development Association and the Asian Development Bank < Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE C-92. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country All countries Developed areas United States United Kingdom Other Western Europe.._ Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and Canada Less developed a r e a s l November Japan Australia New Zealand and South Africa Sweden ) Spain Switzerland. Other Latin America Middle East Other Asia Other Africa Includes areas in addition to those listed All Africa except South Africa Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold Special Drawing Rights and Reserve Positions in the International Monetary Fund and convertible foreign exchange. Beginning December gold is valued at U.S. dollars per ounce and foreign exchange balances are expressed in dollars at the cross rates reflecting parities and central rates agreed on December and subsequently. Data cover all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE C-93. U.S. reserve assets [ Millions of dollars ) Gold stock i End of year or month Total reserve assets Treasury Total Special drawing rights s Convertible foreign currencies : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec e ioil,652 ioil,567 io io io Reserve position in International Monetary Fund io io Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with the right of repurchase and gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund Includes initial allocation on January of $ million second allocation on January of $ million and third allocation on January of $ million of special drawing rights ( SDR ) in the Special Drawing Account in the IMF plus or minus transactions in SDR * Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System * The United States has the right to purchase foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could purchase additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position i Includes gain of $ million resulting from revaluation of German mark in October of which $ million represents gain on mark holdings at time of revaluation Includes $ million increase in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December Includes $ million increase in total reserve assets resulting from the change in par value of the U.S. dollar on May consisting of $ million total gold stock $ million Treasury gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position in the IMF Includes $ million increase in total reserve assets resulting from the change in par value of the dollar on October consisting of $ million total gold stock $ million Treasury gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position in IMF Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Department of the Treasury and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G-94. International investment position of the United States at year-end and [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States s_ U.S. assets abroad_ Nonliquid assets U.S. Government Long-term credits Foreign currencies short-term assets and other Private long-term Direct investments abroad_ Foreign securities Other claims * Private short-term nonliquid claims 4__ Liquid assets U.S. liabilities to foreigners Nonliquid liabilities to other than foreign official agencies U.S. Government. Private long-term Direct investments in the United States U.S. securities Other liabilities <___ Private short-term nonliquid 7_ Liquid liabilities to private foreigners and liquid other readily marketable and nonliquid liabilities to foreign official agencies To private foreigners _ To foreign official agencies Liquid Other readily marketable Nonliquid reported by U.S Government Private claims * U.S. monetary reserve assets Gold SDR _ Convertible currencies Gold tranche position in IMF Data do not reflect revisions made in balance-of-payments statistics in June Preliminary Includes U.S. gold stock * Reported by U.S. banks and nonbanking concerns & Liquid claims are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims Total reserve assets include an increase of $ million resulting from a change in the par value of the U.S. dollar on May consisting of $ million total gold stock $ million SDR and $ million gold tranche position in IMF Reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-95. Price changes in international trade [ = Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade no M21 United States : Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade i Latin America : Exports Terms of trade Southern and Eastern Asia : Exports Terms of trade i World export price indexes Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Coffee tea and cocoa. Cereals Other agricultural commodities * Fats oils and oilseeds Textile fibers Wool Rubber Minerals Metal ores Manufactured goods : Total s Nonferrous base metals no no i Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports s Data are for second quarter Excludes Japan * Includes nonfood fish and forest products Data are for first quarters of Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( International Economic Policy and Research and Bureau of Resources and Trade Assistance ) TABLE C-96. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries = ] United States Period Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom Canada l * II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV For United States 12-month average ; for Netherlands January-November average ; and for all other countries January-October average October-December average for United States ; October-November average for Netherlands ; and October data for all other countries Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O