ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY 1S76 Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintx&de&t of TOc ? B ^ $ ts U.S. Government Printing Office Washington B.C. $ 8fc Price $ Stock. Number * ^ CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND DEVELOPMENTS IN CHAPTER INCOME SECURITY AND HEALTH ISSUES CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY IN APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Councils Report see page ill ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : As we enter the American public still confronts its two greatest personal concerns : inflation and unemployment. As valid as those concerns are we should not let them overshadow the very genuine progress we have made in the past year. The underlying fact about our economy is that it is steadily growing healthier. My policies for are intended to keep us on that upward path A year ago the economy was in the midst of a severe recession with no immediate end in sight. Exceptionally strong inflationary forces were just beginning to abate and the prospects for containing unemployment were not bright It is now clear that we have made notable progress. The sharpest recession in the post-World War II period hit bottom last spring and a substantial recovery is now under way. There were million Americans at work in December million more than during March of While the rate of unemployment remains far too high it is slowly moving in the right direction. There have also been appreciable advances in reducing the rate of inflation. The increase in the consumer price index was percent between December and December down from a rate of more than percent during the previous months In reviewing it is also wise to remember the large number of potentially serious economic problems that did not materialize. The financial crisis that some predicted did not occur. The recession did not deepen into a cumulative depression. There was no collapse in international trade and investment. The price of bread never rose to a dollar nor did the price of gasoline. We did not experience corrosive social unrest as a consequence of our economic difficulties. While I do not regard the events of as fully satisfactory by any measure we should find it reassuring that our economic system withstood severe strains and displayed inherent strengths during the year. I am confident that with responsible and appropriate policies we can achieve sustained economic progress in the future Unfortunately there is no simple formula or single act that will quickly produce full economic health. It has taken many years for excessive stimulation combined with external shocks like the quintupling of international oil prices to create the economic difficulties of and and it will take several years of sound policies to restore sustained noninflationary growth. I will not make promises which I know and you know can not be kept. We must restore the strength of the American economy as quickly as we can ; but in so doing we can not ignore the dangers of refueling inflationary forces because unchecked inflation makes steady growth and full employment impossible. The events of the past several years have once again convincingly demonstrated that accelerating inflation causes instability and disruptions increases unemployment and ultimately precludes real prosperity It is often said that we must choose between inflation and unemployment and that the only way to reduce unemployment is to accept chronic inflation or rigid controls. I reject this view. Inflation and unemployment are not opposites but are related symptoms of an unhealthy economy. The latter months of illustrate the relationship between inflation and unemployment. Sharply rising prices created a climate of uncertainty and were to blame for part of the massive reduction in the purchasing power of household assets placed in savings accounts and investment securities. In turn consumers cut back on expenditures ; and consequently inventories already swollen by speculative buying backed up in distribution channels. By the early months of there were sharp cutbacks in production and employment. Thus inflation played a significant part in the surge of unemployment and if we have a new round of inflation it is likely to bring still more unemployment. Chronically high unemployment is an intolerable waste of human resources and entails an unacceptable loss of material production. Clearly we must attack inflation and unemployment at the same time ; our policies must be balanced My economic program for has three parts : First a long-term continuation of the effort to revive the American economy ; second implementation of the many programs necessary to provide cushions for the unemployed during the transition to a healthy economy ; and third the elimination of Government policies and institutions that interfere with price flexibility and vigorous competition I. My key economic goal is to create an economic environment in which sustainable noninflationary growth can be achieved When private spending is depressed Government can properly absorb private savings and provide fiscal stimulus to the economy. But in the longer run a viable steady increase in prosperity is only possible if we have a vigorous private sector. My policies are designed to support the long-term growth of the economy by fostering an environment in which the private sector can flourish Increased capital formation is essential to meeting our long-term goals of full employment and noninflationary growth. Although there is no shortage of industrial capacity at the present time many of our current priorities to become independent in energy to improve the environment to create more jobs and to raise our living standards require increased investment. This means that business investment in plant and equipment as a share of gross national product must increase. We must also slow the growth of Federal spending in the years immediately ahead so that mounting claims by the Federal Government on our economic resources will not prevent an adequate flow of savings into capital investments Accordingly I am recommending that budget savings be refunded to the American taxpayer by means of tax cuts. I have proposed an annual tax cut of $ billion from levels effective July If we continue in the years ahead to pursue the kind of budgetary restraint which I am recommending another major tax cut will be feasible by I strongly believe that the individual wage earner has the right to spend his own money on the goods and services he wants rather than having the Government increase its control over the disposition of his income II. Regrettably a full recovery of the economy will take time. Overly rapid growth could lead to a renewed increase in inflation that would ultimately be self-defeating. In the interim we must be mindful of those who have lost their jobs or who are in fear of losing the jobs they hold While the problems of unemployment can be solved only by restoring the basic strength of our economy the hardships of unemployment and insecure employment require immediate treatment. In December and in March I signed into law major expansions in the duration and coverage of unemployment insurance. These changes eased the financial burden of million Americans who were unemployed for a part of last year. Programs in my fiscal budget will also provide million Americans with opportunities for training and employment These cushions to unemployment should be viewed as only temporary remedies. They are not a substitute for productive jobs in the private sector. The only way that such jobs can be produced is by restoring the vitality of private industry which today employs five out of six American workers III. Success in promoting healthy economic growth and a vigorous private economy depends to a large extent on our eliminating Government policies and institutions which interfere with competition. Tradi- tionally the American system has relied on competition to organize production and to encourage economic progress. The Government however has attempted to correct imperfections in competition by regulating prices and the quality of services in many different industries. This attempt has been less than a complete success. Regulation has been useful in curbing the pricing power of certain monopolies and in fostering the growth of new industries such as air transportation in the 1940s and 1950s. It has also helped to ensure compliance with such publicly determined social goals as clean air and safe working conditions. But in several industries regulation has been used to protect and support the growth of established firms rather than to promote competition Over the years Government regulation has also had many other undesirable effects. Besides reducing competition in many instances it has also imposed on complying firms enormous burdens which raise business costs and consumer prices Increasing competition from world markets and the need to maintain and improve the standard of living of a growing population require constant improvement of the American market system. For this reason I have asked the Congress to legislate fundamental changes in the laws regulating our railroads airlines and trucking firms. The new amendments will free these companies to respond more flexibly to market conditions. I have also urged deregulation of the price of natural gas and sought essential pricing flexibility for the oil and electric utilities industries. We will continue to improve all essential protection for public health and safety trying at the same time not to increase unnecessarily the cost to the public. My object is to achieve a better combination of market competition and responsible Government regulation. The programs I have advanced in recent months have sought such a balance and I will continue this course in Striking a new regulatory balance is likely to entail some economic and social costs during a period of transition and changes must therefore be phased in carefully. In the long run however a revitalized market system will bring significant benefits to the public including lower prices While our policies focus primarily on the economy of the United States we recognize that the range of our interests does not stop at our shores. The other major countries of the world are also recovering from the most serious recession they have experienced since the 1930s. Their first economic priority like ours is to put their economies on a sustainable noninflationary growth path. Success in this endeavor more than anything else will help developed and developing countries alike achieve higher standards of living In recent years the economies of most nations suffered from extraordinarily high inflation rates due in large part to the quintupling of the world price for oil and then moved into a deep recession. The simultaneity of this experience demonstrated once again the strong interdependence of the world 's economies. Individual countries have become progressively more dependent on each other as a freer flow of goods services and capital has fostered greater prosperity throughout the world. Because of this growing interdependence however domestic policy objectives can not be achieved efficiently unless we also take account of economic changes and policy goals in other countries In recognition of our growing interdependence I have consulted closely with the heads of other governments individually and jointly. At the Economic Summit at Rambouillet last November I met with the heads of government of five other major industrial countries. There we laid the foundation for closer understanding and consultation on economic policies. During we also began discussions on international cooperation with both the developed and the less developed countries This dialogue will assure a better mutual understanding of our problems and aspirations. Finally I have agreed with my foreign colleagues that in order to create the proper conditions for lasting and stable growth we must take important cooperative steps in monetary matters trade and energy. We have directed our trade officials to seek an early conclusion to the continuing negotiations on liberalization of trade. This month in Jamaica we reached significant agreements on strengthening the international monetary system and providing increased support for the developing countries. We have also begun to cooperate more closely with oil-consuming countries in the effort to become less dependent on imported energy. I intend to consolidate and build upon this progress in Of central concern both here and abroad is U.S. energy policy. Without a vigorous and growing industry supplying domestic energy much of our industrial development in the next years will be uncertain. And unless we can reduce our dependency on Middle East oil we will not have a sound basis for international cooperation in the development of new fossil fuel and other energy sources As an initial step toward greater self-sufficiency I signed the Energy Policy and Conservation Act in December I concluded that this act though deficient in some respects did provide a vehicle for moving us toward our energy goals. With this mechanism the price of petroleum can be allowed to rise to promote domestic supply and to restrain consumption. At the end of months under the act I may remove price controls altogether and I will utilize the provisions of the act to move toward a free market in petroleum as quickly as is possible and consistent with our larger economic goals. The act offers flexibility which I have already used to start dismantling price controls and allocation arrangements in fuel markets where no shortages exist. The legislation also establishes a national strategic petroleum reserve which will make our supply of energy more secure and give other nations less inducement to impose an oil embargo Measures crucial to our energy future still remain to be enacted however. Natural gas deregulation is now the most pressing of the issues on energy before the Congress : shortages grow year by year while the country waits for more testimony on supply and demand or waits for extremely expensive new synthetic gas plants to replace the natural gas production choked off by price controls. I urge the Congress to make deregulation of new natural gas one of its first objectives in The legislation I have proposed in order to assure adequate supplies of fuel for nuclear power plants is also critical. If we are to improve our energy situation these measures are necessary. They will also reinforce our efforts to remove unnecessary and deleterious Government interference in economic activities where the consumer is adequately protected by market forces A year ago I said " The year must be the one in which we face our economic problems and start the course toward real solutions. " I am pleased with the beginning we have made. The course is a long one but its benefits for all Americans make the journey worthwhile. The year must be one in which we will continue our progress toward a better life for all Americans JANUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January THE PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ALAN GREENSPAN Chairman Ow * ~ PAUL W. MAcAvov BURTON G. MALKIEL CONTENTS Page CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK The Need for a Durable Recovery Monetary and Fiscal Policies Energy Policies The Outlook Consumption Nonresidential Fixed Investment Housing and Residential Investment Inventories and Net Exports Federal and State and Local Government Purchases Risks in the Forecast The Inflation Outlook Wage Increases in Food Prices Will Money Supply Growth Be Appropriate ? Will Capital Requirements for the Remainder of this Decade Be Met ? An Estimate of Capital Requirements Inferences CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND DEVELOPMENTS IN Fiscal Policy Federal Expenditures Federal Receipts Balances of the Federal Sector State and Local and Combined Balances Money and Credit Monetary Aggregates The Money and Bond Markets Other Developments in Financial Markets Ranges for Monetary Growth Rates Demand and Output Consumer Income and Saving Consumer Expenditures Business Fixed Investment Residential Investment Inventory Investment Net Exports Government Purchases O CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND DEVELOPMENTS IN Continued Prices Wages and Profits Prices Wages Productivity Unit Labor Costs Profits of Nonfinancial Corporations Employment Unemployment and Income Maintenance Employment Unemployment The Mitigating Effects of the Income Transfer System... Energy Developments Prices Consumption Production Imports and Exports Agricultural Developments Adjustments to Reduced Crops The Soviet Grain Shortfall CHAPTER INCOME SECURITY AND HEALTH ISSUES Income Security Programs Aid to Families With Dependent Children AFDC-UF Food Programs Unemployment Compensation Social Security Medical Care Health Status and Medical Expenditures Health Insurance Health Expenditures and Family Income Resource Allocation and Costs Medicaid and Medicare Proposals CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY IN The Current State of the Cycle Domestic Demand External Demand The Role of External Demand in the Recovery Government Policies The General Outlook International Economic Cooperation Trade Policies Page Ill CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY IN Continued International Monetary Developments Exchange Rate Arrangements Gold Arrangements International Financial Resources The Current Financial Position of the Non-Oil LDCs Earnings Stabilization and Commodity Arrangements APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production Page LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS Tables Growth Rates of Real Business Fixed Investment and Change in its Share in Real Gross National Product in Recovery Periods Calendar of Major Private Nonfarm Collective Bargaining Activity Growth Rates of Velocity of Money Real Gross National Product and Interest Rates Selected Periods IV1973 IV Shaie of Business Fixed Investment in Gross National Product : Historical Data and Projected Requirement Selected Periods Factors Affecting the Cumulative Total Business Fixed Investment Required From Through by Major Industries Changes in Gross National Product in Constant ( ) Dollars Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Actual and Full-Employment Federal and State and Local Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis Calendar Years Selected Components of Commercial Bank Credit and Time and Savings Deposits Changes in Personal Income Measures Changes in Business Inventories Changes in Selected Price Measures Changes in Major Collective Bargaining Settlements Changes in Costs and Productivity in the Private Nonfarm Economy List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Continued Page Quarterly Changes in Labor Productivity in Postwar Recessions Private Nonfarm Economy Profits of Domestic Nonfinancial Corporations Net Funds Raised in Financial Markets by Nonfinancial Corporations Labor Market Indicators and Nonagricultural Payroll Employment by Industry Labor Turnover Rates in Manufacturing Unemployment Rates by Reason for Unemployment Age and Sex Income Transfer Programs Refiner Acquisition Cost of Crude Petroleum Changes in Wholesale Prices of All Commodities and Selected Fuels and Power Changes in Consumer Prices of All Items and Energy Items Gross Consumption of Energy by Major Source U.S. Grain Exports to the U.S.S.R. Fiscal Years Aspects of Selected Federal Income Security Programs AFDC Families Recipients and Cash Payments Selected Years Federal Food Programs Selected Fiscal Years Distribution of Food Stamp Households by Annual and Monthly Income July and March and July Beneficiaries and Cash Benefits in the Old-Age Survivors and Disability Insurance Program ( OASDI ) Selected Years Social Security Benefits for Single Men and for Manied Men With a Dependent Wife Retiring at Age Years and Age Years Labor Force Participation Rates and Social Security Benefits for Men Years of Age and Older Selected Years Total Health Expenditures and Personal Health Expenditures by Source of Funds Selected Fiscal Years Expenditures Per Person for Different Health Services by Family Income Status and Source of Payments Changes in Prices of Various Medical and Hospital Services and Expenses Changes in Industrial Production in Selected Industrial Countries Personal or Household Saving Rates in Selected Industrial Countries List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Continued Unemployment Rates Adjusted to U.S. Concepts in Selected Industrial Countries Changes in Consumer Prices in Selected Industrial Countries Merchandise Trade in Selected Industrial Countries Current Account Balances for OECD OPEC and Other Countries Current Account Balances for OECD Countries Charts Interest Rates and Monetary Growth Domestic Fuel Production Interest Rates Interest Rate Differentials Foreign Exchange Rates CHAPTER Economic Policy and Outlook T HE U.S. ECONOMY is now recovering from the most severe recession in postwar history. Spurred by a lower inflation rate tax cuts and increasing employment significant gains have already been made in the purchasing power of consumers. Production has been rising rapidly since the spring of last year. But because this recovery started from very low levels of resource utilization unemployment will almost surely remain distressingly high this year even though large gains in employment are expected during The social hardships and economic waste associated with the current level of unemployment should not be underestimated. Accordingly we must seek to lower unemployment as rapidly as is consistent with the need to ensure that the reductions will be lasting. Policies that might speed the decline in unemployment in the short run should not be so expansionary as to lead to increased instability and greater social hardships in the long run Thus policies for must attempt to sustain the recovery now in progress but at a pace sufficiently moderate to prevent renewed imbalances and a rise in inflation. They must also continue to mitigate the hardships associated with high unemployment. At the same time our present policies must lay the foundations for a long period of steady growth THE NEED FOR A DURABLE RECOVERY Because we began the present recovery with more slack than in any of the previous postwar cycles a much longer period of above-average growth will be required for a return to full resource utilization. Even under the best of circumstances the return to full .employment can not realistically be accomplished this year or next. To ensure that we return to high levels of resource utilization as is our objective the recovery must therefore be a durable one Our best estimate is that real gross national product ( GNP ) will be to 6/2 percent higher in than in This growth rate is not a goal Rather it is a projected outcome of the forces of recovery that were set in motion in by stimulative fiscal measures by a return of consumer and business confidence and by external economic factors discussed elsewhere in this Report. The availability of much unemployed labor and unused plant capacity requires that economic policy should continue to support an economic expansion at growth rates significantly above the long-term growth of capacity output. But our knowledge of the interdependence between real growth and inflation is not sufficiently precise to permit a direct translation from general goals to specific targets As a consequence policies can not be designed to reach any particular targets with a high degree of confidence. We believe however that policies consistent with a moderate but sustained recovery offer a far safer and surer route to full employment than policies which attempt to engineer a very rapid return to full capacity. What we need is a durable recovery not a boom that carries the seeds of renewed instability in prices incomes and employment. Our view is based on several considerations The difficult inflationary period through which we have come makes it likely that overly expansionary policies which risk increasing inflationary pressures will quickly influence consumers ' and producers ' expectations. It is a harsh fact of economic life that expectations of inflation are built into labor and other 'contracts in such a way as to be partly self-fulfilling Moreover increased inflationary expectations could restrain both consumption and investment expenditures and thus jeopardize long-term economic goals. High and variable rates of inflation not only create imbalances and sectoral distortions by capriciously changing the real value of existing contracts but they also raise risk premiums in investment decisions and in wage bargains. As such inflation could pose a major threat to the viability of the present recovery. Policies that are perceived to entail higher inflation risks may not therefore affect economic activity and employment in a way that would normally be expected. Even if such policies should succeed in accelerating the recovery in the short run it would be difficult to decelerate from unusually rapid growth rates to sustainable rates without running the risk of amplifying future fluctuations in economic activity There is a lesson to be drawn from past policy mistakes. The history of monetary and fiscal policies demonstrates that we have a great deal to learn about implementing discretionary policy changes. Our ability to forecast is at best imperfect especially in an increasingly complex and interdependent world and the difficulties in forecasting grow larger as we extend the period for which the forecast is made. This is a significant problem because of the time lags involved in altering the pace of economic activity through discretionary monetary and fiscal actions. There is a perception lag in diagnosing the problem a reaction lag in selecting the appropriate response and an implementation lag in having the policy prescription accepted and put into effect through our political and administrative processes We also lack reliable estimates of how long it takes before the economy responds to policies once they are undertaken and how large the response will be. This is especially true now because the high rates of inflation in recent years have made price expectations a much more important deter- minant of consumer and business behavior than they formerly were but there has not been sufficient experience to pin down how inflationary processes affect key relationships within the economy. With respect to fiscal policy there is the additional complication that countercyclical increases in Government expenditures are difficult to check during later upswings. Because countercyclical policy changes may be slow to take hold and then hard to reverse their effects may extend well past the time when they are most needed. Consequently a significant danger exists that instead of smoothing economic fluctuations discretionary changes in policy aimed at demand management may themselves become a source of economic instability The proper conclusion is not that we should forswear the use of discretionary policy. Some external shocks to the economic system can and should be offset. Furthermore provided the growth in Federal outlays becomes more moderate than in the years just past occasional discretionary adjustments of the income tax schedules are called for in order to prevent excessive growth in Federal taxes. In fact these changes may have to be more frequent if the rate of inflation continues at a somewhat higher average level than at comparable levels of economic activity in the past. Thus discretionary policies do have an important function in our economic system. But we must be mindful of the great difficulties in successfully executing countercyclical policies What is called for in our judgment is a steadier course in macroeconomic policies than has been followed in the past. We should set policies broadly consistent with sustainable long-term noninflationary growth and try to limit the size and duration of any policy deviations that promise short-term benefits but risk interfering with our long-run goals. The severity of the recent recession does call for maintaining stimulative economic policies to accommodate an expansion of real output at a rate above that sustainable in the long run. But departures from the policies that are appropriate in the long run should be moderate. If we do not commit ourselves to a gradual recovery over a period of years we may increase economic instability and lose our chance for sustainable growth which we believe offers the safest and surest route to full employment in future years MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES It is much easier to enunciate the general principle of stability in policy than to apply it to specific circumstances. The challenge to current monetary and fiscal policy is to set the stage for a gradual transition from stimulation which is still needed in the current year to a set of policies appropriate for long-run growth The monetary authorities recognize that the present levels of output and employment are still very far from satisfactory. Yet concern with the achievement of greater economic stability in future years suggests that any rate of growth in money which is at the upper limit of the tolerance range an- nounced by the Federal Reserve ( 7J/2 percent for MI 10J/2 percent for M ) could not be maintained indefinitely if progress toward lower inflation rates is to continue The thrust of fiscal policy will also have to change gradually. Fiscal policy became more expansionary when the recession worsened and unemployment mounted in and in early Over the near term these expansionary fiscal policies will be maintained as most of the provisions of the Tax Reduction Act of have been extended from the end of last year to the middle of this year through the Revenue Adjustment Act of Well before passage of that act the President directed the Office of Management and Budget to examine ways to slow the growth in Federal expenditures so as to prevent further increases in the Government 's role in allocating our resources He further directed that any savings be refunded to taxpayers in order to maintain gains in private purchasing power and employment. The budget which the President has proposed provides for a marked deceleration in the growth of Federal spending as outlays are to be held to $ billion in fiscal which ends in September of next year. Starting in July taxes are to be cut by about $ billion relative to what they would be under law Because of the recovery Federal receipts are then expected to grow over three times as fast as outlays between fiscal and fiscal causing the deficit to fall by more than $ billion. However the full-employment balance on a national income accounts basis will show little change during calendar from the $ 6-billion deficit estimated for the second half of last year. In this way the fiscal policy stimulus will be maintained throughout It will then be reduced in because of the proposed increase in social security tax rates and the much faster rise in individual income tax receipts than Federal expenditures At the present time with substantial reserves of labor and capacity available consumption and investment are complements not substitutes. Indeed public expenditures in excess of tax receipts are needed to absorb the excess of private saving over private investment demand at current levels of economic activity. In and beyond however private investment and publicly supported consumption will become increasingly competitive. To avoid inducing a policy and output mix that is incompatible with the requirements of long-term economic growth fiscal stimulus must be diminished gradually during coming years. Without greater fiscal restraint the saving flows available for private capital formation might eventually become too small. Furthermore the danger of intensifying inflationary pressures under such conditions would preclude expanding the money supply sufficiently to finance both the Government deficits and the needed improvements and growth in our industrial capacity It is this public-versus-private allocation problem to which the President 's program tying a $ 28-billion cut in the growth of Federal outlays to a comparable cut in taxes is addressed. The source of the problem has been the rapid growth in nondefense budget expenditures in recent years. During the 1960s some growth in the share of national resources allocated to the nondefense expenditures of the Federal Government was considered desirable in order to alleviate poverty and to accomplish other important social goals Further growth in the ratio of public expenditures to total output however directly bears on fundamental issues concerning the efficiency of the economy equity for the working population and the scope for private decision making in our economy ENERGY POLICIES The Energy Policy and Conservation Act enacted in the closing days of initially reduces the price of crude oil produced domestically but its immediate effect on the prices of petroleum products is still uncertain Under this act the rate of increase in the average price received for domestically produced crude oil will equal the percentage rise in the GNP deflator between preceding quarters. An additional percent increase can be granted during upon a Presidential finding that this increase will stimulate the supply of domestic petroleum. However the total price increase may not exceed percent during the first year. The act also authorizes the President to propose further oil price increases subject to disapproval by either House of Congress. Oil price controls are no longer mandated months after the date of enactment but the act itself is in force for years Government controls on the prices of individual petroleum products and on the allocation of these products among consumers can be removed under authority granted by the legislation The $ per barrel special import fee on crude oil was removed in December of last year. In conjunction with the rollback of domestic crude prices at the start of this is expected to cause the average price of crude oil entering refineries to be somewhat lower during than it was in despite the increase in world market prices. Furthermore because the initial price rollback mandated by the new law will probably not be fully offset by price increases authorized later in the average price received by domestic producers at the end of will most likely still be slightly below that received by them at the end of Whether domestic oil prices approach world market levels by when controls may be removed depends on foreign pricing behavior and on the extent to which the authority provided in the act is used to obtain higher prices for domestic production While the Energy Policy and Conservation Act clarified the near-term outlook for domestic oil prices the outlook for both the price and the supply of natural gas remains uncertain. Adequate supplies of natural gas may not be available in and beyond. Severe curtailments of gas supplies to industry were avoided in both and because unusually warm weather and the low level of economic activity reduced demand. Nonetheless the volume of curtailments rose in each of those years and will almost certainly rise in as well. When shortages do occur some of their harmful effects can be alleviated temporarily by emergency procedures adopted by the Fed- eral Power Commission but more fundamental changes are necessary Deregulation of the price of new natural gas as proposed by the Administration and accepted by the Senate in would redirect supplies toward their most valuable uses increase incentives to enlarge future supplies and lead to reduced imports of oil and liquid natural gas THE OUTLOOK The policies outlined above should sustain the recovery in the near term while providing the foundations for sound growth over the longer term With real GNP estimated to grow by 6-6/2 percent from to the unemployment rate should fall by almost a full percentage point. The rate of inflation is expected to continue with little change from late throughout this year ; and hence the GNP deflator which had risen by percent from to should rise by only about percent from to Thus far the recovery has been accelerated by a very sharp change in the behavior of inventories while real final sales have shown fairly steady growth since the first quarter of last year. As detailed in Chapter the sudden cessation of high rates of inventory liquidation in mid-1975 accounted for a substantial part of the growth in real GNP during the last half of that year. The bulk of excess inventories appears to have been worked off and more normal rates of inventory accumulation should become evident in Nevertheless year over year almost l/i percentage points of the growth in real GNP will still be due to the inventory swing. Once inventories reach desired levels the continued strength of the recovery will depend on the vigor of final demand for goods and services CONSUMPTION Personal consumption expenditures are expected to impart considerable strength to the economy. During consumption is projected to rise by almost percent in real terms compared with percent during yielding a year-to-year increase of percent. A close to percent rise during is consistent with about percent growth in real disposable income because the average saving rate is projected to fall below the abnormally high 8J4 percent level registered last year. A gradual decline in the saving rate is predicated on year-over-year declines in the rate of increase in consumer prices and in unemployment and layoff rates. Even so the saving rate for is expected to remain above its percent average for the previous cycle ( ) Recent experience suggests that consumers react to heightened inflationary expectations by saving more rather than by advancing their purchases of storable commodities. Thus we expect a fall in desired saving or a rise in the propensity to consume as lower inflation rates are incorporated into consumer expectations. Uncertainties which tend to reduce consumption are also created by high unemployment rates and particularly by high rates of job layoffs. As the unemployment rate and layoff rate continue to recede we would therefore expect an alleviation of concern about job security to manifest itself in reduced saving and higher consumption in the household sector. Increased consumer confidence and lower saving rates may also result from the partial restoration during of the real financial assets of households which had eroded severely in and Consumer expenditures on durable goods should increase much more rapidly than spending on nondurables and services. The expected rise in automobile production and purchases could become steeper in the second half of this year when models with substantially improved fuel economy and engineering features are scheduled for introduction. Sales of furniture and household equipment should be stimulated by the projected rise in housing completions In over one-third of the $ 91-billion growth in personal income from was due to the rise in government transfer payments. Disposable income grew proportionately more than personal income because of the Tax Reduction Act of From to government transfer payments and disposable income should both grow less rapidly than personal income in spite of the additional tax cuts accruing from adoption of the President 's budget program. Hence while the growth in personal consumption expenditures led the recovery in final sales that started early last year the role of continuing the recovery beyond must increasingly be taken over by fixed investment NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED INVESTMENT Nonresidential fixed investment normally lags in economic recoveries and it is likely to do so again. Nevertheless we expect some strength to develop in business investment in the course of on the assumption that substantial modernization in plant and facilities will be planned and readily financed. A sustained rise in profits retained earnings and cash flow in this year and next should allow the share of business fixed investment in GNP to continue to grow even as debt-equity ratios are reduced toward desired levels According to a recent survey conducted by the Department of Commerce businesses plan to increase capital spending by ^ percent from to Assuming that prices of capital goods rise by about percent per annum this implies a decline in real business fixed investment which is inconsistent with past behavior during comparable stages of recovery During the early stages of recoveries businesses usually underestimate the strength of final sales. Even though the present recovery started from a lower measured rate of capacity utilization than previous recoveries businesses are likely to spend more on new plant and equipment in than they expected at the start of this year and the year-to-year rise could be as high as percent in real terms or approximately percent from the second half of to the second half of While the previous cyclical lows in the Federal Reserve 's capacity utilization index for manufacturing were percent in both and this index fell to less than percent in In recent years however the rate of economic obsolescence of existing plant and equipment may have accelerated because the desired combinations of inputs outputs and production techniques have been altered by recent sharp changes in relative costs and prices. For this reason the exceptionally high level of spare capacity in the present recovery is expected to have less effect in slowing the recovery of investment spending from its current low level. Partly because of the need for modernization investment in equipment is expected to rise faster than investment in structures. In the nonmanufacturing sector public utilities believe that investment will rise significantly this year after a rapid increase in starts and in carryover of investment projects from last year Even if real business fixed investment grows by as much as percent from the second half of to the second half of this year the growth rate will be low by historical standards. Table shows that the ratio of real business fixed investment to GNP would grow no faster than in preceding recoveries and would still be only percent in the second half of This is particularly disappointing since it is shown later in this chapter that higher ratios of business fixed investment to GNP are likely to be necessary in future years if the capital required for an eventual return to high employment greater energy independence and a cleaner environment is to be in place by the end of Some further growth in the share of profits in national income may be required before the share of business fixed investment in GNP can rise The cyclical rebound in the profit share that started in is expected to continue in ; and equally important the share of book profits accounted for by inventory profits will remain low. Since inventory profits which are realized mainly by firms using the first in first out ( FIFO ) method of inventory accounting are part of taxable book profits their taxation reduces TABLE Growth rates of real business faced investment and change in its share in real gross national product in recovery periods Annual growth rate of real business fixed investment ( percent ) Period From a year earlier to : 1955IV-1956I : III-IV : ll-lll : ML : III-IV Shares of real business fixed investment in real GNP Actual share * ( percent ) Change in share ( percentage points ) to to to to to .'3 '.2 i Change from half year following cyclical trough quarter to corresponding period a year later The following quarters are those designated as cyclical troughs by the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) : III 1958II and Subsequent trough quarters are assumed to be 1970IV and 1975II as NBER has not designated these quarters as cyclical troughs Shares for the two half years used in computing the growth rates in column Projection Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and National Bureau of Economic Research cash flow available for the expansion of both fixed and working capital. If inventory profits should be more than $ billion lower in than in as we expect nonfinancial corporations will save at least $ billion in taxes or about three times as much as the annual tax savings from the higher investment tax credits provided in and Even more important operating profits may be increasing by over percent from to more than twice as fast as national income while dividends will rise less than profits. The resulting level of corporate cash flow excluding inventory profits may be about equal to the total fixed investment in depreciable assets projected for nonfinancial corporations in Adjusted for inventory profits the contribution of cash flow has not been this high since although internally generated funds generally matched annual purchases of physical assets from to The gain in cash flow would be all the more impressive since net interest paid by nonfinancial corporations is expected to be about six times as large in as it was in This rapid growth in interest payments is attributable to higher inflation premiums in interest rates and to the sharp expansion in corporate debt over the past decade HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT In the past changes in the supply of mortgage credit rather than changes in demand have frequently dominated short-run movements in housing starts. But in demand factors not the unavailability of mortgage credit weakened the recovery in housing. In spite of large savings inflows into the thrift institutions mortgage interest rates have declined little during the past year. The liquidity of the thrift institutions is expected to remain high in but the high stock of unsold new single-family homes and rapid cost increases particularly in the land and materials components of home prices suggest that there may be only a small further rise in single-family starts. On the other hand the recovery of multifamily siarts from the extremely depressed levels of should begin to accelerate in spurred in part by the $ billion in mortgage commitment funds at ] /2 percent interest released by the Government National Mortgage Association in January Thus total housing starts should reach a level of about % million units by year-end and the real value of residential construction is expected to rise by about percent from to on the strength of an almost percent rise in housing starts Household formation rates the demographic structure of households and prospective attrition in the existing housing stock are the factors most important to the long-run outlook for housing starts. During the first half of the seventies the average annual increase in the number of households was approximately million. According to the Census Bureau 's middle projection ( Series B ) the number of households is expected to continue to grow at this rate during the remainder of the seventies. The demand for new dwelling units will be raised further by normal growth in the number of vacant units and second homes by the demolition of old units and by other losses including conversion to other uses It has been estimated that since the Korean war percent of the housing stock has been replaced each year on the average but in recent years existing units have become more profitable to retain. The costs of new construction and new financing have risen faster than most other costs ; and sewer moratoriums land use controls and zoning and environmental restrictions have also limited new supplies. Thus the million starts projected for the end of may not be far below what may become normal levels if replacement demands should decline Most of the growth in housing starts during the current year is projected to come from multifamily starts. In future years such starts could account for percent of the total excluding mobile homes compared with only about percent in The proportion of households and primary individuals owning homes may grow only slightly in coming years and the replacement rate of multifamily units may be larger than that of single-family units. Moreover the declining average size of households and the continuing adjustment to sharply higher energy and land prices will favor the growth of multiple-dwelling units over single-family homes By the end of multifamily starts may still account for less than percent of total starts because a large overhang of foreclosed or delinquent projects has depressed prices and discouraged construction financing in many parts of the country. Sales of newly constructed condominium units have been slow and the profitability of new apartment houses has remained low because rents have risen far less than other prices Federally assisted starts under the Section leasing program and the Section homeownership program of the Housing and Urban Development Act are expected to raise total starts by percent this year. Over a period of years any increase in federally assisted housing starts would be largely offset by a decrease in unassisted starts but this factor will not be important in INVENTORIES AND NET EXPORTS The extraordinary reduction in inventories in the first half of last year together with the faster growth in final sales which began in the second quarter restored inventories to more normal levels. By the end of the ratio of real business inventories to final sales was the same as the average for and lower than the ratio for when large inventory accumulations had occurred. The ratio of inventories to sales is expected to decline a little more in early We estimate that the stock of inventories will grow at about the same rate as final sales after the middle of During the first half the annual rate of growth in GNP should exceed the growth in final sales before the return to normal rates of inventory accumulation is completed. The growth in domestic sales should be greater than the growth in total sales because net exports are expected to decline throughout this year from their recent high levels. In the first half large shipments of agricultural commodities particularly to the Soviet Union should offset part of the increased imports that normally accompany the growth in domestic income and production. Thereafter we expect the growth in exports to fall farther below the growth in imports because the U.S. recovery started earlier than those of most of our major trading partners. The structure of foreign sales is such that our exports particularly those of capital goods are unlikely to rise rapidly until the recoveries abroad have become more advanced. One should point out however that movements in both inventories and net exports have proved extremely difficult to forecast FEDERAL AND STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PURCHASES In real terms Federal purchases are expected to grow by only percent from to and State and local government purchases by percent. Purchases of goods and services currently account for about percent of total Federal expenditures but for over percent of the total expenditures of State and local governments Mainly because of diminishing defense expenditures the real value of Federal purchases declined in every year from to ; and Federal purchases in will still be one-fourth below their peak. The average annual growth rate of real State and local government purchases however was about percent from to This rate then declined by almost half largely as a consequence of the recession of and the financing difficulties experienced by some State and local units of government Owing to measures already taken and to longer-run factors that will help to slow expenditure growth most State and local governments will be able to cope with expenditure pressures without adding unduly to the tax burdens of their citizens in this and the coming year. The growth rate of State and local government employment remained moderate in if one excludes expanded public service employment and summer youth employment funded through Federal grants. Furthermore the growth in construction expenditures by State and local governments is expected to continue to decline as the school-age population falls and as the interstate highway building program approaches completion. Higher-density residence patterns and more concentrated commercial development projects will tend to reduce the growth in local expenditures because they lower the demand for new access roads municipal utility lines and related facilities. Higher municipal bond rates due to inflation and to the larger risk premiums which some units of government have encountered are also restricting construction in some cases because the maximum interest rate that State and local governments can pay is limited by law Slower growth in purchases by State and local governments tax increases and the beneficial effects of economic recovery on State and local receipts helped eliminate the operating deficit of these units in the second half of O Assuming that purchases of goods and services will continue to advance by less than percent a year in real terms compared with more than percent in most years from to the operating budget of State and local governments as a group should be in surplus in if the recovery continues as expected. The surplus could be quite large if those governmental units whose credit rating and borrowing ability have been impaired in recent years continue to retrench and if their savings are not matched by more expansionary policies on the part of governmental units which have remained fiscally sound. State and local governments sometimes accelerate expenditure growth during the advanced stages of recovery but they will probably wait longer than usual to do so in the current upturn particularly if the rate of growth in Federal grants is reduced below the high rates that have prevailed so far in the seventies The general revenue sharing program which provided for $ billion of grants to State and local governments from through is expected to be renewed in When it was introduced in a period of high and rising economic activity it may have encouraged State and local governments to overextend themselves during that expansion. Failure to renew the general revenue sharing program in however could weaken the fiscal stability of State and local governments just when they have adjusted to the loss in receipts resulting from the recession The Federal Government during the budget crisis of New York City indicated a determination not to underwrite continued massive growth in local spending. Aided by those redistributional mechanisms already built into the established Federal grant programs State and local governments are now likely to provide for cyclical fluctuations by accumulating more reserves during periods of high economic activity than they have done in the past. In Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are budgeted to rise by about $ billion compared with more than $ billion from to Thus at least percent of the expected growth in the expenditures of State and local governments in will have to be financed from their own sources RISKS IN THE FORECAST THE INFLATION OUTLOOK Although a sustained expansion in production and employment is expected with current policies as always a number of factors could throw the recovery off track. The most important would be a resurgence of inflation We have projected that the rate of price increase will not accelerate and will even decline somewhat from to If this price forecast should be too low both consumer and business spending could be adversely affected As noted above recent experience suggests that consumers react to heightened expectations of inflation by increasing their saving and reducing their consumption even of those durable goods that might be expected to provide an inflation hedge. Furthermore the rise in interest rates associated with higher rates of inflation could induce disintermediation and threaten the projected recovery in housing starts. A sustained rise in the rate of inflation would also undermine the prospect for gains in business investment. Under current tax laws inflation raises the real tax liabilities of corporations both in the present and in future years. Moreover the increased macroeconomic instability invariably associated with high rates of inflation drives up risk premiums in financial markets. Hence the outlook for prices has a crucial bearing on whether the output forecast can be realized The past year has shown once again that the rate of change in product and factor prices is not permanently insensitive to reductions in demand However it has also shown that inflationary expectations once aroused acquire a powerful momentum that can be reduced only gradually and then at great social cost and economic hardship. As the Government adheres to a policy designed to prevent a resurgence of inflation the behavior of the private sector helps determine how large or how small the costs of holding down the rate of inflation will be In the short run " cost push " factors can influence the rate of inflation and unemployment and thereby set in motion Government policies that may have lasting effects. When such external shocks as the rise in international oil prices or other cost push factors increase the rate of inflation Government authorities are faced with a painful dilemma. If they do not accommodate cost push factors by letting aggregate nominal demand rise sufficiently then real output will fall and unemployment will increase to the extent that other prices resist downward pressure. On the other hand if these shocks are fully accommodated forces may be set in motion which perpetuate and even increase the inflation rate. Should the rate of inflation accelerate heavier costs in unemployment lower output and forgone opportunities would eventually have to be incurred to bring it under control. For this reason it is important to examine the probable cost push pressures on prices over the near term The projected percent rise in the price level from to is combined with a percent increase in unit labor costs of private employees in the forecast. Since compensation per hour is projected to grow by percent the growth in output per hour is estimated to be at least one-third of this rise. Unit labor costs actually ceased to rise in the first quarters of the present recovery as productivity gains matched the rise in compensation per hour. In however somewhat faster growth in compensation per hour and slower productivity growth will push the rise in unit labor costs close to the inflation rate expected for the year Because unit labor costs are the largest component of cost and because income shares tend to change rapidly only within but not between cycles the rate of price increase and the rise in unit labor costs tend to converge in the long run. If changes in compensation per hour should accelerate beyond percent in the near term inflationary pressures could be intensified As a consequence inflation rates higher than percent could be built into the economy for some years to come. By the same token if firms should attempt to raise prices more rapidly than expected in the absence of any acceleration of either wages or the prices of materials in world markets they too could jeopardize the process of recovery. Such price increases would initially slow the growth in real earnings of labor and then stimulate an acceleration of wage demands. Combined with the trend rate of growth in productivity these accelerated wage increases would assure either a continuation of the increased pace of inflation or a lower real output level or both WAGE INCREASES IN Forecasting short-run changes in nominal or real wages is particularly risky in because of uncertainty about the rate of inflation and about the effect of the high although declining rate of unemployment Normally the pressure for job applicants to accept lower wages would be expected to rise with increases in both the level and duration of unemployment. On the other hand there may be less willingness to accept lower real wages because income maintenance programs which have expanded rapidly in the last years replace a greater portion of income lost from unemployment than in previous cycles. Moreover because of the rise in labor force participation by married women a higher proportion of the unemployed belong to families in which at least one person is still working For these reasons real wages may not rise any less than they did at comparable stages of previous recoveries in spite of the high level of the unemployment rate Nominal wage rate changes depend in part on the actual rate of price increases in the recent past and on the rate of inflation anticipated for the near future. If the rate of inflation had been approximately stable for a period of years and if this were expected to continue it would not be difficult to forecast the inflation component of nominal wage increases. We have however experienced several years of very high and unstable rates of inflation and we lack good estimates of how the greater variability in inflation rates will be reflected in wage bargains. If for example a random burst of inflation occurs just prior to a wage settlement it may have a significant effect on the size of the wage increase negotiated. We estimate however that with a forecasted percent increase in the consumer price index ( CPI ) the rate of increase in nominal wages will be percent from to about the same as the rise in compensation per hour in the private sector Wages for most private sector jobs are not determined by a formal collective bargaining process but are rather the result of informal wage determination that is influenced but not exclusively determined by the competitive forces operating in labor markets. It is widely believed that major collective bargaining settlements have demonstration effects on wages throughout the economy. For instance the wide publicity they receive may influence the wage and price expectations of other workers and these workers will attempt to maintain their relative position in the wage structure. Money pro- visions of collective bargaining agreements may also be formally or informally extended to nonunionized workers in the same plant or industry Thus the forecasted increase in nominal wages could be upset if substantially higher wage settlements were received by workers in large unions. For these reasons it is important to examine the collective bargaining situation in About one-fourth of all civilian employees are members of labor unions and about million union members are under major collective bargaining agreements ( those covering or more workers ) About four-fifths of these contracts consist of or 3-year agreements which are heavily frontloaded that is contracts in which first-year increases are considerably larger than those scheduled in the later years of the contract. Nearly 4J/2 million workers or about percent of all employees are under a major contract that expires or is scheduled for reopening in ( Table ) while only % million workers negotiated new contracts in Hence a significant proportion of the million workers under major collective bargaining agreements will be receiving first-year increases in Last year first-year increases of slightly more than percent were received by more than onefourth of the workers under major agreements and deferred increases averaged percent for the remaining percent. Cost-of-living adjustments ( COLA ) are not included in this comparison. If the new collective bargaining agreements for are similar to those of on balance % million workers would thus obtain wage increases about percentage points higher TABLE Calendar of major private nonfarm collective bargaining activity Contract expirations Scheduled wage reopenings Principal industry Month Number All years : Total Electrical equipment Food ( meat packing ) Motor vehicle and farm equipment Food stores Services Electrical equipment ; food stores. and beyond Year unknown or in negotiation * July August September October November December Apparel Apparel- services Trucking Construction ' rubber Construction ; apparei Electrical equipment * food January February March April May June _ _ Workers covered ( thousands ) Number Workers covered ( thousands ) ' i Bargaining units for which necessary information was not available include agreements which expired prior to Oct. ( when these data were tabulated ) covering workers and contracts which expired between October and December covering workers Note. Major agreements are those affecting or more workers Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics than those they received in In the course of this alone would add about seven-eighths of a percentage point to the 8-81/3 percent average increases received by the million workers under major collective bargaining agreements during but the effect would be only about half as large year over year A detailed tabulation of the deferred wage increases ( excluding COLA ) scheduled for the 5/2 million workers in the second and third year of their contracts shows an average increase of percent during almost the same as the percent for such agreements in Escalator or cost-ofliving clauses last year added approximately percent to the base wages of all workers under major collective bargaining agreements. If the CPI rises by approximately percent from December to December the addition to wages from cost-of-living adjustments in should be slightly lower than in because of somewhat lower inflation Assuming that there is a percent increase in the CPI and that first-year settlements will be similar to those negotiated in the million workers under major collective bargaining agreements will therefore receive wage increases of approximately 8/2 to percent from to Wage rate gains for the nonunionized workers are more sensitive to the business cycle and likely to be slightly less than those of union workers because of the continued high level of unemployment. Thus we do not expect wage increases for workers covered by major collective bargaining contracts to upset our overall wage forecast The translation of wage rate changes to changes in compensation per hour for all private employees requires an analysis of interindustry shifts of employment and of shifts between wage and salary workers in the composition of employment as well as the addition of fringe benefits. Our analysis indicates that these factors are likely to be largely offsetting this year and hence that increases in employee compensation per hour from to should average percent in the private sector FOOD PRICES Food prices are the most visible and best publicized of all the components of the CPI. For this reason they may be especially important in determining the wage demands of labor and the inflationary expectations of all consumers Predicting price changes however is even more hazardous for food than for most other goods because of the inelastic demand and supply functions for agricultural products and the possibility of large weather-induced shifts in supply The current outlook on the supply side is for increased production of meat and dairy products in There is evidence of larger placements of cattle on feed for fattening and of increased hog farrowing in early These developments should yield more fattened beef in the first half of and more pork by the second half. Milk production is beginning to show year-toyear increases. The supply of most vegetables for processing was up this past fall. Although dry weather during the seeding period in parts of the winter wheat area has reduced the chances for a wheat harvest larger than that of the size of crops is impossible to forecast accurately at this time The already evident increased supplies and lower prices for fertilizers should help crop yields compared to The demand for food should rise as a result of economic recovery in the United States and abroad. Because the demand for most foods is relatively insensitive to changes in income however the demand for food should increase substantially less than that for most other goods Futures market prices tend to reflect all the information available on supply and demand to date. In early futures prices for agricultural products implied that wholesale commodity prices were expected to be little changed through mid-1976. Futures prices can of course change rapidly as economic conditions and expectations about future conditions change. In addition the prices of processing and marketing services are not captured in futures prices. The cost of these services will probably increase more nearly in line with the general rate of inflation. On the whole in contrast to the past years food prices are not likely to add to inflationary pressures during the first half of The same will be true of energy prices as was already pointed out in the discussion of energy policy. These favorable developments should help prevent a rise in the expected rate of general price inflation above the percent level in WILL MONEY SUPPLY GROWTH BE APPROPRIATE ? Another question about the forecast is the amount of money needed to support the expected growth in nominal GNP. This question has been widely aired in the quarterly discussions of monetary policy instituted by the Congress last year. Some have wondered if monetary growth within the Federal Reserve 's announced tolerance range would be adequate to support a sustained recovery even if inflation moderates as expected In May the Federal Reserve announced explicit 1-year ranges of tolerance for the growth rates of the monetary aggregates : MI M2 M3 and the bank credit proxy. MI is the narrowly defined money supply currency plus demand deposits. M additionally includes commercial bank time and savings deposits other than large negotiable certificates of deposit. M3 is a still broader measure obtained by adding time and savings deposits held at nonbank thrift institutions to M2. Finally the bank credit proxy is a measure of member bank loans and investments. The present base for the 1-year growth rates is the average level of the aggregates for the third quarter of ; hence the period for which the ranges now apply extends to the third quarter of The range of growth rates for MI is currently 5-71/2 percent ; for M2 it is 7/2-10/2 percent ; for M3 percent ; and for the bank credit proxy percent. Neither the bases nor the ranges are immutable. Both have been changed in the past and the Federal Reserve has emphasized that it will change them in the future if circumstances require The concept of the demand for money provides a useful analytic framework for examining the adequacy of these money growth rates since it supplies an important link between money on the one hand and income and expenditures on the other. There has been a great deal of discussion of which monetary aggregate should be used to measure the demand for money The consensus seems to be that either MI or M will do but Mt has generally been the preferred definition Much of the theory and most of the postwar evidence on the demand for money have been couched in terms of M T However there is some recent evidence although still quite tentative that the demand for M ! may have shifted down for given levels of income and interest rates. Hence it is possible that the way in which money was related to income and interest rates in the past will not hold in the future. However some of the reasons given below why the demand for Mx may have shifted down can provide clues to how it will behave in the future. It is therefore still useful to focus on MI growth although it must be recognized that a fuller analysis of monetary policy should include some reference to the broader aggregates like M2 and M3 The question about what is an appropriate expansion of the money supply can be expressed in terms of velocity growth. The growth rate of nominal GNP is the sum of the growth rates of the money stock and velocity. Consequently if we take the price path as given the appropriateness of various monetary growth paths in achieving various real growth objectives depends on the growth in velocity. The question then is whether the velocity growth implied by the forecast is consistent with what the past behavior of velocity would predict A large body of evidence has pointed to the stability of the long-run demand function for money on which the ability to predict movements in velocity from cycle to cycle depends. However the evidence that the function is stable in the short run is much less clear cut. Considerable controversy still surrounds the behavior of money demand in the short run and velocity movements do exhibit considerable variation over short periods of time The figures in Table illustrate this distinction. The second column shows the average rates of growth of velocity from peak to peak in each of the five previous postwar business cycles. The differences in the average rates of growth of velocity over the various cycles are consistent with a stable longrun money-demand function. The successive declines in the average from cycle to cycle do not reflect autonomous secular declines but result rather from either lower real income growth or lower interest rate growth as one would expect from estimates of the long-run demand function for money The shorter-run movements in velocity within the cycle are less predictable. Average rates of velocity growth during each of the successive years following a business cycle trough are shown in the first column of Table The changes in velocity within cycles are less systematically related to income and interest rate changes. On the other hand some of the variations in velocity movements within cycles are consistent with lags or delays in the adjustment of actual money balances to their desired level. Thus velocity grows rapidly when income grows rapidly or money growth slows abruptly while its rate of advance is more moderate when changes in income and money growth are smaller Nevertheless such explanations do not account for all of the observed short-term variations in velocity and the unexplained variation makes it difficult to predict short-term movements with a high degree of reliability It is therefore not easy to interpret the rapid rate of velocity growth in the last quarters of when MI velocity grew by annual rates of and percent respectively. Only in the comparable stage of the recovery from the recession a period which includes the beginning of the Korean war did velocity expand more rapidly The important question is whether these recent high rates of growth can be taken to mean that velocity will grow faster on average in the future than it has in the past. One answer is that they are random events that are unlikely to repeat themselves in the near future but such an interpretation doubtless goes too far. Part of the rapid increase in velocity may derive from the incomplete adjustment of money balances to the sharp acceleration in income in the second half of However that explanation would suggest slower growth of velocity in the future as money balances are adjusted to the higher rate of income growth TABLE Growth rates of velocity of money real gross national product and interest rates selected periods 1948IV-1973 IV [ Percent change ; annual rate ] Period Growth rate of velocity after cyclical trough Peak-to- peak growth rate Complete cycle peak to peak Velocity of money ( Mi ) Real GNP 3-month Treasury bill rate IV to IV_ IV to IV IV to II III to III III to III II to III to II to I I I to II to \ to to IV IV to IV IV to IV IV to IV s. i Except as noted quarters designated as cyclical trough or cyclical peak by National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) were used in computing growth rates for velocity of money and real GNP. Specific peaks of the Treasury bill rate were used in computing its growth rates. These peaks are II II III IV IV and III z Market yield J Trough and peak quarters of real GNP ( IV and IV respectively ) used as NBER has not designated these quarters as cyclical trough or peak quarters Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce Department of the Treasury Council of Economic Advisers and National Bureau of Economic Research Another explanation for the recent rapid increases in velocity is that the demand for MI has shifted down. This interpretation is consistent with recent financial innovations which may have increased the efficiency of the payments mechanism and made savings deposits and other nearmonies closer substitutes for demand deposits. Those innovations include telephonic transfers from savings to checking accounts ; NOW accounts which are essentially savings accounts on which c'checks " can be drawn ; the ability of individuals to write " checks " on some so-called money market mutual funds ; electronic funds-transfer schemes ; and allowing State and local governments and corporations in November of and respectively to hold savings deposits at member banks Another reason advanced for a shift down in the demand for MI is the " shock " of the extremely high interest rates in late and Because high interest rates made asset holders more aware of the costs of holding idle balances and of the benefits of managing cash more efficiently they may have permanently reduced the demand for money for given levels of interest rates and income These are all plausible explanations for a downward shift in the demand for money. If the demand for money has been reduced either by technological factors or by changes in the attitudes of asset holders the result will be to reduce the rate of increase in the money stock that is consistent with any given path of GNP over the coming year. Nevertheless the conclusion that MI demand has shifted down should be treated with some caution. Past experience indicates that it is very difficult to identify shifts in the demand for money soon after they are reputed to have begun. At this point conclusive evidence of a shift is still lacking. Moreover if the shift is a once-and-forall shift in the level of Ma demanded all that one can say with certainty is that velocity growth will be higher during the transition period. The growth of velocity will not be permanently increased unless the interest and income elasticities of the demand for money are affected and there is no evidence so far on this point. Perhaps the most that can be said is that past experience suggests a decline in the growth of velocity as the recovery proceeds though the growth rate may remain for a while at a higher level than before Our forecasts of nominal GNP and a growth rate for MI of * percent ( the midpoint of the Federal Reserve 's range for MI ) imply increases in velocity that are consistent with this conjecture. The implied growth in velocity for the quarters ending with the second quarter of is percent ; for the year following it is percent These rates show a decline in velocity growth in the second quarters which is consistent with the past intracyclical behavior of velocity. The decline is smaller than in previous recoveries but it can be partly explained by the fact that the forecasted deceleration in nominal income is smaller than the decelerations in income during comparable stages of previous recoveries. On the other hand the average rates of growth in velocity in each of the quarters are significantly higher than past relationships would have led one to predict Whether or not one concludes that this cycle has brought structural changes in the demand for money in relation to changes in activity levels is clearly crucial in determining the appropriate rate of increase in the money stock Even if a structural change has occurred the increase in velocity is unlikely to continue at recent rates and monetary policy needs to take account of this slowing This does not mean that the current ranges of tolerance are inappropriate It is not possible to say with any assurance what growth rates of money are necessary to allow real GNP to grow by 6-6/2 percent from to Setting an upper limit on the growth rate however should reduce the prospects for a rekindling of inflation. At the same time the lower limit provides assurance of continued growth in the money supply if the recovery should turn out to be much weaker than expected. In that event it would be very important for money supply growth to be maintained so that interest rates could fall and shore up the recovery. However interest rates would be unlikely to fall if the lower-than-expected output growth were due to price acceleration Hence the ranges of tolerance are useful in both directions. On the one hand they dampen inflationary expectations ; on the other they indicate a firm commitment to lend support to the recovery and to make it more durable. This should contribute greatly to more confident and better-informed decision making by the private sector. Clearly however the targets must be administered with flexibility as the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board has pointed out on several occasions WILL CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE REMAINDER OF THIS DECADE BE MET ? Apart from the risks to the durability of the recovery described in the preceding sections there is the possibility that the structure of final demand may remain too consumption-oriented and business fixed investment too weak to permit adequate economic performance during the remainder of the seventies. Capacity bottlenecks were encountered in a number of basic commodities in and giving rise to concern that a shortage of capacity may materialize well before we reach an acceptably low level of unemployment Such a shortage could intensify inflationary pressures in the later stages of recovery retard long-term economic growth and make the achievement of environmental and energy goals more difficult At first sight the concern with shortages appears misdirected. In an economy in which the prices of all inputs and outputs and the composition of final demand are free to adjust there is no reason to expect a chronic shortage of any type of productive facility. To be sure temporary bottlenecks may occur in a dynamic economy because future demands can not be anticipated perfectly and because there are lags in the adjustment process But in time such bottlenecks would be eliminated as investment shifted toward the most profitable areas of resource application In what sense then can there be a valid concern with inadequate capital formation ? One way of looking at the capital formation issue is to ask whether the investment spending expected under current conditions is likely to be adequate for the attainment of certain longer-term economic and social objectives such as full employment greater energy independence and a cleaner environment Even before the recession idled large amounts of productive capacity investment incentives may have been reduced by some of the factors enumerated below. Several of these factors are related to inflation and if they recur or persist they may inhibit investment in the present recovery The bef ore-tax rate of return that business requires to undertake new investments has been driven up by several forces while actual rates of return at least on past investments have lagged behind. Risk premiums have risen to reflect the increased amplitude of macroeconomic disturbances and the greater instability of relative factor and product prices in the last few years. Experiments with wage-price controls have lessened the incentives to invest. Moreover compliance with changing environmental and safety regulations requires increased investment creates some uncertainty and adds to the cost of production. At the same time despite changes in the corporate tax laws general price inflation has raised corporate taxes more than in proportion to the bef ore-tax return on fixed capital because inventory profits have boosted the tax base and because the real value of historical-cost depreciation allowances has declined The increase in debt-equity ratios during recent years has made business more vulnerable to the vicissitudes of the credit market and to unanticipated changes in the rates of inflation and profits. The tax treatment of interest payments as a deductible business expense makes debt financing particularly attractive when inflation premiums are included in interest rates. Nonetheless debt-equity ratios have probably reached higher levels than firms would like to maintain under present conditions. While unanticipated increases in the rate of inflation have lowered the real cost of amortizing old debt this gain has not been reflected in a higher valuation of corporate equities in periods of rising inflation. The resulting unfavorable structure of business liabilities may have created some structural financing problems and it may have increased default risks the costs of financing and the cutoff rate of return on new projects Fiscal policies may have been biased against private investment. In periods like when the economy was already approaching its capacity limits government transfer payments continued to increase rapidly. Then in periods of slack changes in Federal tax and expendi- ture policies have emphasized the stimulation of consumption rather than investment. A policy mix that relies more on monetary stimulus than on the types of fiscal stimuli which have predominated in the past may be expected to alter the composition of output in favor of private investment. In recent cycles however investment was the last sector to be stimulated by expansionary fiscal policies and the first to suffer when these policies were maintained too long and led to either more inflation or to offsetting monetary restraint. Cyclical recoveries of investment may therefore have been incomplete with cumulative effects on the size of the capital stock The long-term savings incentives of persons may have been reduced through government policies favoring consumptibn. The scope of government transfer programs and the level of social insurance benefits have increased rapidly in recent years. This development may eventually encourage less reliance on personal savings to protect a future standard of living. Moreover although firm evidence is not available incentives to save may also have been reduced because Federal interest rate controls on many types of savings have become more restrictive as a result of inflation and because nominal interest receipts are fully taxed without allowing for inflation. On the other hand individuals have increased their saving rate in reaction to the diminution of the real value of their financial assets and the greater insecurity about future living standards that the high rates of inflation and unemployment of the past few years have caused. Thus substitution effects which discourage saving may not begin to dominate the actual savings behavior of persons until the income and wealth effects stemming from the most recent inflation and recession have been reduced much further AN ESTIMATE OF CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS The actual business fixed investment that is likely to be forthcoming during the remainder of this decade under the existing structure of tax laws and economic incentives is difficult to forecast. If we had a perfect long-term forecast we could directly assess the adequacy of the expected investment provided the investment required to meet certain objectives by a given date could be deduced with a high degree of reliability from these objectives Since this is not possible a much more modest approach will be followed in assessing the capital formation issue. This approach involves estimating the capital stock that may be needed to achieve certain goals and then comparing the implied investment requirements with recent trends in the share of investment to GNP. Given the large number of conditions and qualifications that must be attached to any statistical estimate of future input requirements no such exercise can be conclusive. If this exercise suggests that increased rates of capital formation are desirable what is called for is not increased Government controls or directives but in all likelihood a shift in the monetary- fiscal policy mix and reconsideration of the existing tax laws and incentive structures To throw some light on the question of capital adequacy which has been widely debated during the past year the Council of Economic Advisers commissioned the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce to conduct a study of the capital that would be required to achieve a real output level presumed to be consistent with approximately full employment in * The level of real GNP selected for that year was $ billion in dollars ( $ billion in dollars ) The GNP target implies an average annual growth rate of about percent in real GNP and percent in output per employee in the private sector from to a condition which is estimated to move the unemployment rate below percent by the end of the decade. Figures for industry outputs compatible with the specified level of GNP were derived by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor. They were generally at the 80-industry level of input-output aggregation The capital stock necessary to produce the output levels specified for is assumed to include facilities to meet certain environmental standards currently in effect and to allow the greater degree of energy independence which has been advocated by the Federal Government. Estimates were prepared of the investment in pollution control facilities necessary to meet the requirements of the Clean Air Amendments of and the Federal Pollution Act Amendments of Furthermore an attempt was made to estimate the additional investment required in the mining of coal crude petroleum and natural gas and in electric utilities using fuels other than oil and gas to prevent the share of imported crude and refined petroleum products from exceeding its level of percent of total domestic consumption ( in barrels per day ) This percentage would otherwise rise to percent under the " business as usual " scenario in the Project Independence Report of the Federal Energy Administration. All of these estimates may be subject to errors which could bias in either direction the estimate of total investment requirements Many assumptions must be made before gross investment requirements can be arrived at from the output targets. Capital services need not normally be used in fixed proportions with other factors of production to obtain a given level of output first because there are possibilities for factor substitution over time and then because there are distinct trends in factor proportions associated with changes in technology within particular industries which may or may not continue. To narrow the range of possible estimates for links between industry outputs and capital stocks were established by assuming either that the adjusted capital-output ratios remain constant at * The full study is available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The basic estimates were developed in the summer and fall of and do not reflect the benchmark revisions of the national income accounts and the economic assumptions and projections published in the budget. The differences however are relatively small their levels or that observed trend rates of growth or decline in such ratios persist. The extrapolations are based on annual capital-output ratios available for and for each year from through which are adjusted to normal operating conditions by dividing actual industry output by the ratio of the actual utilization rate to the preferred utilization rate. If the adjusted capital-output ratios have shown a consistent tendency to grow or to decline over this period the annual trend rates of change estimated from either or were generally continued from to * Finally it is necessary to specify a discard pattern ( i.e. a pattern of retirements and other deletions from the capital stock ) to estimate the amount of gross investment that would produce the net additions to the capital stock obtained in the previous step. For those industries whose capacity utilization rate was percent discards are assumed to grow at the same rate as the adjusted capital stock from to In industries whose capacity was not fully utilized discards are assumed to grow faster on the assumption that more obsolete capacity will be eliminated through replacement investment before full capacity operations are approached by all industries simultaneously in The discard rate is also assumed to rise in gas utilities ( including gas pipelines ) as a result of rapid shifts in the location of producing wells Since so many specifications and data adjustments are necessary to obtain numerical estimates of capital requirements these estimates are not definitive. Their usefulness depends on the descriptive realism of the assumptions employed in deriving them. These include the degree of labor force utilization and the composition of output and final demand in as well as the links from specified output targets to capital " requirements " and the link from " required " capital to investment. The data on capital stocks and discards by industry are weak. Moreover a number of unspecified economic assumptions have to be made to ensure that the implied accumulation process is consistent with a movement toward economic equilibrium and stable real rates of return The results are highly sensitive to changes in the output mix for instance between manufacturing and other more capital-intensive sectors such as agriculture mining transportation communication and utilities. The direct and indirect capital requirement per dollar of output from petroleum and natural gas mining for example is about four times as high as the corresponding coefficient for manufacturing. Estimates of capital requirements are less sensitive to shifts between broad end-use categories like consumption and business fixed investment than to shifts between particular output sectors but the composition of final demand still matters. For instance the capital required per dollar of final demand is percent greater for personal consumption than for private fixed investment * One of the most significant exceptions is the electric utilities industry in which the past trend of rising capital-output ratios was not projected to continue in the absence of " Project Independence " objectives Subject to all these qualifications certain conclusions can be drawn from the estimates reported in Table The table shows that a share of business fixed investment in GNP as low as percent in is estimated to be compatible with the output level specified for if capital-output ratios remain at their level and the energy and pollution abatement goals previously specified are left out of account. Hence without the additional requirements attributable to changing technology and to government policies the share of business fixed investment in GNP could actually be lower than the percent that prevailed during the period from through This result is obtained in spite of a slight acceleration in the actual and projected annual rates of discards ( from around percent of the capital stock in to percent in and percent in ) because it is estimated that the changing industrial composition of GNP reduces the cumulative investment required However the ratio of required investment to GNP would be lifted from to percent in and cumulative investment would have to rise percent more than previously estimated if the legal technological and energy-related factors that raise investment requirements in the current decade are to be allowed for. Together these additional requirements add $ billion in dollars to the cumulative investment total for the decade TABLE Share of business fixed investment in gross national product : historical data and projected requirement selected periods Item Billions of dollars Cumulative gross national product ( GNP ) : Actual Projected s Cumulative business fixed investment : Actual Projected capital-output ( c/o ) ratios Fixed c/o ratios : Actual law2 Pre-1970 Iaw2 _ Percent Business fixed investment as percent of GNP : Actual Projected c/o ratios Fixed c/o ratios : Actual law Pre-1970 law Derived from GNP projections in dollars provided by the Department of Labor Division of Economic Growth " Actual Law " contains pollution control expenditures pursuant to the Clean Air Amendments and to the Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments while " Pre-1970 Law " does not contain these expenditures Derived by subtracting actual investment in from the estimate of investment required during Note. The data in this table have not been revised to the new benchmark data used elsewhere in this Report since the projections were made before the new data were available. However using the new data business fixed investment as percent of GNP would have been the same for as shown in the table ( percent ) and slightly lower for ( percent instead of percent ) Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Division of Economic Growth ) TABLE Factors affecting the cumulative total business fixed investment required from through by major industries [ Billions of dollars ] Factor Fixed capitaloutput ( c/o ) ratios pollution control requirements limited to pre-1970 law Add for actual Pollution Control Laws passed in and Add for industries with c/o ratios increasing for reasons other than the achievement of greater energy independence Add for industries with decreasing c/o ratios Add for additional capital required for greater energy independence Add for increase in pollution control investment induced by additional investment in energy Total business fixed investment required Total Agriculture forestry and fisheries Manu- struction fac- turing Transportation munication Com- gas water and Services2 Others sanitary services * Electric Con- Mining Includes production by both public and private enterprises Consists of hotels and lodging places personal and repair services business services automobile repair and services amusements and medical educational services and nonprofit organizations Consists of wholesale and retail trade and finance insurance and real estate * Increase in discard rate in gas utilities due to energy considerations would produce this decline unless offset by $ billion higher investment required for greater energy independence fi Although the outputs and capital-output ratios of petroleum refining and related industries are not assumed to change in the process of achieving greater energy independence the substitution of lower-grade domestic crude for higher-grade imported crude causes some additional pollution control expenditures in petroleum refining Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis As shown in Table there are three major reasons for the need to devote an increased share of GNP to fixed investment : Investment in pollution abatement equipment as a consequence of legislation relating to " clean air " and " clean water " is estimated to add about $ billion ( dollars ) to the base level investment total. This base level which is estimated on the assumption of fixed capital-output ratios in all industries is identified as " pre-1970 law " in Table Less than half of this additional requirement is believed to have been met by O Changing technology in selected industries such as agriculture ferrous mining and nonferrous metals manufacturing communication equipment manufacturing transportation business services and auto repair in all of which capital-output ratios have been increasing is estimated to add about $ billion to the cumulative investment required from to while industries with declining capital-output ratios subtract about $ billion To meet the goal of greater energy independence increased investment in petroleum mining electric utilities and other energy-related industries is required. This is estimated to add about $ billion to the investment total. Another $ billion is required for the induced increase in pollution control expenditures by energy-producing or processing industries. If the decline in the capital-output ratio of petroleum mining continues the cumulative investment could be $ billion less. Any further decline in capital-output ratios in petroleum mining however would be inconsistent with the assumption of increased domestic energy output INFERENCES Although these estimates are by no means definitive they do allow some cautious inferences. Because the ratio of business fixed investment to GNP in continued at the percent level that prevailed from to the business fixed investment to GNP ratio may have to average percent from to to meet the capital requirements projected for Since investment is expected to amount to less than percent of GNP in these estimates suggest that investment ratios even higher than percent may be necessary in the next years to put enough capital in place by the end of to meet the goals previously stipulated If ratios of fixed investment to GNP substantially in excess of percent are unattainable full employment can not be achieved by at capitaloutput ratios and productivity growth rates as high as those projected with the assumption that the environmental and energy goals are to be met Whether full employment can be achieved at all by under these conditions depends first of course on the reliability of the previous estimates and then on the ease of input substitution and on the flexibility of relative factor prices. If the estimated capital requirements are not met the output level could be lower than projected owing to lower productivity or lower employment or both. Alternatively goals concerning pollution control and energy independence might have to be scaled down. Either of these possibilities seems far less desirable than providing incentives to raise the share of investment in GNP To achieve this goal increased savings incentives may have to supplement increased investment incentives once the economy 's resources are utilized more fully. Whether an increased saving rate may be required however depends not only on the potential demands for business investment but also on the demands for residential construction and net foreign investment Furthermore there may be no need to maintain higher business fixed investment to GNP ratios than in previous periods of high employment beyond because the required additions to capacity are bound to decline sharply if output growth falls to its long-term sustainable level and no new policy initiatives are developed that would require extra investments in areas such as energy safety or the environment beyond At the present time macroeconomic policies that continue to stimulate the economy to a fuller utilization of its resources will also encourage investment. But for reasons indicated above a steady and sustained expansion will provide a far better economic climate for investment than a path of excessive expansion followed by another cycle of inflation and recession Moreover a policy mix that relies less on consumption-oriented fiscal expansion and more on monetary stimulus would be more conducive to high rates of private investment. During the initial phases of the recovery a slower rate of increase in Federal outlays and a reduction in the budget deficit would permit a more expansionary monetary policy to be carried out with less risk of inflationary pressures. Such a policy mix would tend to shift the composition of output toward investment. If Government deficits do not decline rapidly enough as the recovery proceeds the savings necessary to ensure a satisfactory rate of private investment may be preempted and the expansion could stall some time before employment returns to an acceptable level. The President 's program of reducing the growth in Federal outlays in this and in coming years is designed among its other goals to avoid such an impasse CHAPTER Economic Policy and Developments in D URING THE FIRST PART OF the economy moved rapidly through the final stages of the most severe recession of the postwar period. Real gross national product ( GNP ) fell at an annual rate of percent in the first quarter and then began to increase ( Table ) In addition the rate of inflation fell rapidly in the first half of the year from the high rates of Economic policy shifted early in the year to counter the decline in output. The President proposed a $ 16-billion tax reduction in the State of the Union message in January and the Congress enacted a $ 21-billion net reduction in March. Because of these tax cuts and associated one-time social security payments real disposable personal income rose sharply in the second quarter. At the same time the monetary aggregates expanded rapidly as the Federal Reserve accommodated the temporary buildup in the public 's holdings of currency and bank deposits caused by the tax cuts and social security payments GNP rose sharply in the second half of the year ; and by the end of the year the initial phase of a recovery was clearly evident although both unemployment and inflation remained distressingly high Measured by the declines from peak to trough in real GNP and real disposable personal income ( DPI ) the recession was the most severe of the postwar period. Real GNP fell percent from its peak in the fourth quarter of to its trough in the first quarter of Real DPI cushioned by increased transfer payments and other built-in stabilizers fell percent during the same period. The recession became more severe in the last quarter of ( Table ) Real final sales decreased at an percent annual rate in the fourth quarter as both personal consumption expenditures and fixed investment expenditures dropped sharply. Real GNP declined at an annual rate of percent in the fourth quarter after a percent annual rate of decline in the third quarter Changes in the level of economic activity during were dominated by an exceptionally sharp inventory cycle. The large reduction in real final sales in late produced a large and unexpected accumulation of inventories which were then liquidated in Real final sales which had declined since the end of stabilized in early and then rose steadily TABLE Changes in gross national product in constant ( ) dollars [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Component III IV II III IVi Percent change in dollars : Total GNP Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Business fixed investment. Residential investment Government purchases Federal purchases State and local purchases Addenda : Final sales Domestic final sales Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis during the balance of the year. Accelerating inventory liquidation kept industrial production declining until April when the Federal Reserve 's index bottomed out percent below its level in September While nonfarm inventory decumulation continued through the year the rate of liquidation slowed dramatically by the third quarter. As a result production rebounded sharply and in December the index of industrial production was percent above its April low. The unemployment rate increased from percent in the third quarter of to a peak of percent in the second quarter of By the fourth quarter it had fallen to percent The rate of inflation was lower in than in As measured by the consumer price index ( CPI ) inflation dropped from a percent annual rate during to a percent rate during Two principal factors accounted for this improvement. First the weakened state of demand and the reduction of inventories put downward pressure on prices at the same time that more moderate wage increases and gains in productivity were limiting the rise in unit labor costs. Second the waning influence of the explosion of food and fuel prices in and also contributed to the moderation of inflation. Although energy prices continued to rise in the increase was much more moderate than it was following the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) oil price increases. The upward pressure on food prices which stemmed from heavy world demand and the sharp reduction in the U.S. grain crop also eased during National Income and Product Accounts ( NIPA ) Revision The Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce has just completed revisions of the national income and product data for all years after These revised data which are described in the January issue of the Survey of Current Business are used throughout this Report. The new data are the result of a major benchmark revision of the statistical data and the introduction of about definitional changes which improve the conceptual framework of the accounts. In addition, the base period for constant dollar GNP estimates has been advanced from to The most significant of the definitional changes are a new treatment of depreciation and the shift of mobile home purchases and purchases of consumer durables by landlords from consumption to residential investment While it will be some time before many of the implications of these revisions are known there are noticeable changes in some series. Nominal GNP has been revised upward by amounts generally less than percent. For nominal GNP was revised to $ billion a revision of percent. However the revisions generally show more weakness in the economy in the second and third quarters of Because of the new treatment of depreciation capital consumption allowances have been significantly revised. For example the new estimate for is $ billion compared to $ billion on the old basis. Employee compensation and gross output in the corporate sector have been revised upward progressively since to reflect an upward reappraisal of the importance of corporate activity in several sectors Thus for employee compensation in the corporate sector is now estimated to be $ billion compared to $ billion on the old basis and gross corporate product is now $ billion in compared to $ billion on the old basis. Related to these revisions are decreases in corporate profits and in noncorporate sector employee compensation and gross output Because the increases in corporate employee compensation exceed the declines in the noncorporate sector total employee compensation has been revised significantly upward FISCAL POLICY Fiscal policy was expansionary in compared to what it had been in ( Unless otherwise stated reference is made to calendar rather than fiscal years throughout. ) The growth in Federal expenditures which had accelerated in remained high through mid-1975. The tax cuts added to the stimulus with the result that the sharp rise in the fullemployment surplus from the end of to the third quarter of was entirely reversed in After passage of the Tax Reduction Act of in late March an $ 8-billion rebate of taxes was paid. At an annual rate this represented a $ 32-billion tax reduction in the second quarter of From May the amount of individual income taxes withheld was $ billion lower at an annual rate. This came about because tax liabilities were reduced through a $ credit for each taxpayer and each dependent claimed on tax returns and through increased standard deductions and low-income allowances The tax credit for purchasing a new principal residence and the earned income credit will reduce Federal receipts by approximately $ billion and raise transfer payments by $ billion in the first half of when these credits are claimed on tax returns. An estimated percent of the earned income credit which is given to certain workers who earned less than $ in will be in excess of any tax liability otherwise owed and will thus be a transfer payment rather than a tax refund The Tax Reduction Act cut corporate tax liabilities by a gross amount of $ * billion. The net reduction was only $ 25/2 billion however because percentage depletion for oil and gas was curtailed and because foreign tax credits and deferral of taxes on incomes earned abroad by certain U.S. corporations were limited. The largest of the corporate tax reductions amounting to $ % billion in resulted from liberalization of the investment tax credit. The rate of this tax credit was increased from to percent for utilities and from to percent for all other businesses on equipment acquired after January and placed in service before January The doubling of the surtax exemption from $ to $ and the lowering of the regular corporate income tax rate on the first $ of taxable profits from percent to percent decreased liabilities by $ 1J/2 billion In all the Tax Reduction Act of lowered receipts by around $ billion at an annual rate in the second quarter of but most of this drop was temporary. The tax cuts that remained in effect during the last half of amounted to around $ billion ( annual rate ) or percent of the total Federal receipts otherwise obtained. By comparison the tax cut that went into effect in and lowered Federal taxes by over percent On a unified budget basis the deficit in fiscal was $ billion $ billion larger than estimated in February Outlays in fiscal were $ billion $ billion above the February estimate. Only a fourth of the increase in outlays is attributable to departures from the legislative program assumed in the February budget. Receipts were $ billion $ billion higher than projected even though the Tax Reduction Act of reduced receipts in fiscal by $ billion more than the budget proposed Most of the $ 6-billion difference is explained by higher individual income tax receipts since refunds of the tax liabilities were $ billion less and final settlements $ billion more than had been anticipated FEDERAL EXPENDITURES On a national income accounts ( NIA ) basis Federal expenditures increased from $ billion in to $ billion in a rise of percent compared to the percent increase the year before. Because the recently released revisions of NIA data have altered the measured level and composition of Federal expenditures precise comparisons of actual expenditures with the expenditures projected in the budget are difficult. Nevertheless if the budget numbers are roughly adjusted to the new benchmark basis a comparison can be made. Table shows that Federal expenditures rose $ billion more than was projected in February with defense purchases $ billion grants $ billion and transfer payments to persons over $ billion higher than projected Production and deliveries on defense orders outstanding accelerated as they have done repeatedly during previous recessions because of the slack in the suppliers ' other business. As a result NIA expenditures rose more rapidly than anticipated. In addition defense purchases were raised by unexpectedly large cost increases attributable in part to the high inflation of recent years Nevertheless the share of defense purchases in total Federal expenditures declined. Federal employee compensation both civilian and military was not much higher than projected since the proposal in the President 's budget to place a percent cap on the October pay raise of Federal employees was sustained by the Congress. Federal purchases other than compensation were about $ % billion above the February estimates even though energyrelated spending was $ lj/a billion lower because domestic crude oil prices were not decontrolled as expected Grants were $ billion higher than estimated last February even though State and local governments did not receive the President 's proposed $ ^ billion offset for increased energy costs. Higher public assistance payments TABLE Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income accounts calendar years 197tf-7& basis ( Billions of dollars } Receipt or expenditure category Federal Government receipts February budget projections l Actual > Surplus or deficit ( ) Purchases of goods and services National defense Nondefense _ Transfer payments to persons Transfer payments to foreigners Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Wage accruals less disbursements Federal Government expenditures Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance i Data on a basis comparable to the new benchmark revisions have been estimated by adding to the budget data of last February the changes in actual receipts and expenditures that resulted in and from the recent conceptual revisions calculating percentage changes for the conceptually revised components and applying these percentage changes to the revised actual data > Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget education grants which were drawn down in rather than in and congressional inaction on Presidential reform proposals for medicaid accounted for most of the increases in grants Over half of the $ 6-billion underestimation of transfer payments to persons is traceable to differences between expected and actual legislation with the remaining underestimate distributed among a number of programs. Congress failed to enact the proposed percent caps on automatic cost-of-living increases for transfer programs linked to the consumer price index or linked to an index of food costs alone. Social security recipients for example received an percent increase in benefits on July equal to the rise in the consumer price index from the second quarter of to the first quarter of according to the automatic cost-of-living formula adopted in The extra spending for this and other indexed programs such as supplemental security income Federal employee retirement and disability military retired pay railroad retirement and food stamps amounted to $ ^ billion. In addition $ % billion was paid to certain social insurance beneficiaries in the second quarter of as a result of the $ bonus provided for each recipient by the Tax Reduction Act of Over the past decade Federal transfer payments to persons have grown at an increasing pace. Between and both years of high resource utilization the fraction of Federal expenditures accounted for by transfers to persons rose from percent to percent. Since then this share has grown to percent Only part of the recent rise has been due to higher rates of inflation the direct Federal funding of certain welfare programs previously financed through grants and the low levels of economic activity in the past years One-third of the $ 3ly2-billion growth in transfer payments to persons from to can not be explained by such factors. In unemployment benefits increased by $ billion over with $ ! /2 billion of this rise attributable to higher covered unemployment $ 5/2 billion to higher average weekly benefits in response to wage inflation and the remaining $ billion to new legislation extending the scope of unemployment insurance Since the consumer price index rose percent from to additional expenditures of $ billion were required to hold the real value of Federal transfer payments unchanged. Most of the remaining $ 10/2 billion resulted from noncyclical growth in real transfer payments FEDERAL RECEIPTS Federal receipts ( NIA ) declined in as a result of the tax cuts that went into effect at the low point of the business cvcle and produced an $ 185/2billion reduction in receipts ( excluding secondary effects ) While nominal GNP rose by 6/2 percent in spite of the recession receipts fell by percent dropping from $ billion in to $ billion in ( Table ) The overall decline in receipts closely matched that estimated in February since larger tax cuts were offset by upward reestimates of receipts even though the underlying economic developments were not significantly different from those assumed in last year 's budget. The composition of receipts was quite different however since the President 's energy program was not passed and since his program to provide economic stimulus was changed The President 's energy program included decontrol of all domestic crude oil prices by April coupled with higher import fees excise taxes on domestic oil and natural gas and a windfall profits tax on domestic producers of oil. In these additional indirect business taxes were estimated at $ ^ billion $ billion of which was to be returned to individuals and $ billion to corporations through income tax reductions. Unlike the energy program the President 's program to stimulate the economy involved a reduction rather than a rearrangement of taxes. It provided for $ billion in tax rebates to individuals and a 1-year increase in the investment tax credit for businesses ( mostly nonfinancial corporations ) costing approximately $ billion. Hence the President 's entire program would have lowered personal tax and nontax receipts by $ billion and corporate profits tax receipts by $ billion compared to the receipts estimated if the tax laws were applied unchanged to the income levels projected for The actions actually taken however lowered taxes by $ billion for individuals and $ 2/2 billion for corporations in Differences in legislation alone would thus have caused individual income tax receipts to be $ billion higher corporate income taxes $ ^ /2 billion higher and indirect business taxes ( including the $ 25/2-billion import fees on crude oil and products ) $ billion lower than in the February estimates. These program changes accounted for most of the differences among the receipt components shown in Table BALANCES OF THE FEDERAL SECTOR The Federal sector deficit ( NIA ) rose from $ billion in to an estimated $ billion in Less than half of the $ 61-billion increase was due to the loss of receipts and the increase in expenditures directly caused by the cyclical downturn since the decline in the full-employment balance equaled more than half the increase in the deficit ( Table ) Full-employment surpluses or deficits are the differences between what receipts and expenditures are estimated to be if the economy were operating at the potential output level consistent with percent unemployment. * The * Until a formal reappraisal of potential output growth over the past decades can be completed in the light of the benchmark revisions and other factors the following provisional procedure is used to estimate potential GNP in dollars : The percentage output gap is assumed to be percent in the fourth quarter of the same as it was on the old basis ; and potential output is projected to grow subsequently at a percent annual rate the same rate used before. On the new basis the gap in the third quarter of is estimated to be percent the same as on the old basis but differences of more than percentage point are observed in some earlier quarters TABLE Actual and full employment Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income accounts basis calendar years ^ [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Federal Government Calendar year Receipts Expenditures State and local government Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Combined surplus or deficit C- ) Actual : : II III IV : II HI : II Ml IV : II III Full-employment : Preliminary The $ billion estimated increase in overwithholding of personal income taxes is not included in full-employment receipts Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers measurement of these balances has been complicated by several factors in recent years. If they are computed on a consistent basis however changes in the full-employment balance can be used to indicate changes in the thrust of fiscal policy. Unlike the levels of these balances the changes from year to year are not sensitive to the choice of the unemployment rate used to adjust actual receipts and expenditures for cyclical effects. If the calculations are based upon a percent rate Federal expenditures must be reduced by the difference between actual unemployment benefits and the unemployment benefits that would be paid at percent unemployment under continuing programs. ( An analogous adjustment is made to bring unemployment insurance taxes down to a level consistent with percent unemployment. ) In computing the full-employment balance the introduction of new unemployment benefit programs during the comparison period is handled by treat- ing all expenditures under these programs as if they were included in fullemployment expenditures. By this procedure the change in fiscal stimulus which stems from the adoption of new policy measures can be gauged correctly even though the additional spending from these programs would not have occurred if unemployment had not risen. Thus full-employment expenditures for include the Federal supplemental benefits resulting from the increase in the maximum duration of unemployment benefits in December and March They also include expenditures under the special unemployment assistance program which was enacted on a temporary basis in December to cover some unemployed wage and salary workers who are ineligible for the regular Federal or State programs solely because part or all of their employment was not in the covered sector The $ 33-billion decline in the full-employment balance from to a reduction which approached percent of potential GNP was the largest since the Council 's series began in Full-employment expenditures which rose percentage points faster than potential GNP in current dollars and the statutory tax cuts contributed about equally to this result. The swing between individual quarters was even greater. For instance at an annual rate the actual deficit was $ billion higher and the full-employment balance $ billion lower in the second quarter of than in the third quarter of when the full-employment budget surplus was at a peak. For both measures however $ billion of the swing was due to the one-time individual income tax rebates and to the special payments to certain social insurance recipients that were made in the second quarter of The stimulus to the economy resulting from the temporary tax measures was probably far less than that resulting from the reduction in withholding rates. Although the dollar amounts of temporary and permanent individual income tax cuts were roughly equal in a one-time increase in consumer income is generally expected to raise spending by less than would result from an equal increase in current income which is expected to be maintained The fiscal stimulus that remained in place during the second half of shows that the increases in the full-employment budget surplus which occurred from to have been completely offset. Between and increasing rates of inflation raised full-employment receipts proportionately more than full-employment expenditures. The decline in the rate of inflation in may have reversed the operation of this process since the higher past rates of inflation still contribute to the current growth of fullemployment expenditures while they have little effect on the current growth in full-employment receipts The effect of declining inflation on actual and full-employment corporate tax receipts has been particularly striking. Inventory profits decreased from $ billion or percent of the book profits of corporations in to $ billion or percent of book profits in Because of this decline the share of profits in GNP used to estimate corporate profits tax accruals at full employment fell from * percent to 9l/ % percent Personal tax and nontax payments also respond disproportionately to changes in the rate of inflation. At full employment the base of the personal income tax ( which is approximated by personal income plus personal contributions for social insurance and minus transfer payments and other labor income ) is estimated to be percent of potential GNP. The average tax rate applied to this base rises over time as a result of inflation and growth. When the rate of inflation is about percent as it was from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of and the full-employment tax base is growing by percent per annum in real terms the overall elasticity of personal taxes is between and with respect to the personal income tax base. If the nonrebate features of the Tax Reduction Act of or the provisions of the subsequent Revenue Adjustment Act were extended without change beyond the middle of this year the average tax rate on the base which was percent in and in the fourth quarter of would again reach percent by the middle of assuming percent potential growth and percent inflation per year. Under these assumptions it would thus take only about 1J/2 years to reverse completely the reduction in the average tax rate resulting from the legislation. Provided that the growth in full-employment expenditures does not exceed that of potential GNP as it did in a gradual rise in the full-employment surplus is built into the tax system STATE AND LOCAL AND COMBINED BALANCES The full-employment surplus of State and local governments rose by $ billion from the third quarter of to the corresponding quarter of offsetting over a third of the downswing in the Federal full-employment balance during this period. State and local governments shifted to greater restraint in their fiscal operations to prevent operating deficits from increasing as much as would automatically result from the recession State and local governments incurred operating deficits for successive quarters starting in the second quarter of The operating deficits are not shown in Table but they can be obtained from the NIA surplus or deficit by subtracting the surplus of the social insurance funds of State and local governments. From the start of to the middle of this surplus grew from $ billion to $ billion. The operating deficit reached a peak of $ billion ( annual rate ) in the first quarter of in spite of progressive increases in the full-employment surplus during By the third quarter however the operating deficit was eliminated after the economic recovery had begun. Toward the end of State and local governments had a small operating surplus the first such surplus since late when the unemployment rate was less than percent The swing in the fiscal position of State and local governments has been much more pronounced and procyclical in the last recession than in earlier ones. Though aided by an unusually large increase in Federal grants of $ billion from to many State and local governments were unprepared for the depth and duration of the last recession and hence were forced to adjust to new economic and financial realities. They did so by keeping the rate of growth of expenditures well below the rate of growth of potential GNP and by enacting tax increases of over $ billion MONEY AND CREDIT The monetary trends established in the second half of continued during the first quarter of as the economic decline intensified. Shortterm interest rates fell sharply continuing the steep decline that had begun in August During the same period the growth in monetary aggregates slowed with the narrowly defined money stock ( Mi ) actually declining slightly In the second and third quarters short-term rates of interest and the monetary aggregates exhibited behavior that is typical around a business cycle trough. Thus the monetary aggregates accelerated sharply just before the turnaround in production that started in April and they continued to grow rapidly throughout the second quarter. Short-term interest rates reached a trough in June shortly after the recovery had begun and then rebounded fairly sharply in the third quarter However neither of these patterns was sustained. Short-term interest rates peaked in September and by December had fallen back to their May levels The growth in the monetary aggregates which had fallen off sharply in the third quarter remained sluggish through the end of the year. In spite of this return to patterns reminiscent of the first quarter of the year however GNP continued to grow rapidly from the third to the fourth quarter of the year MONETARY AGGREGATES The steep decline in output in the first quarter of contributed to a significant slowdown in the rate of growth in the monetary aggregates. The decelerations show up even in 3-month growth rates ( Chart ) The rate for MI turns negative in February while that for M2 drops by over percentage points from December to January In the second quarter of this pattern was reversed. The money stock increased strikingly as the Treasury paid out nearly $ billion in special tax rebates and special payments to certain social insurance recipients. The Federal Reserve did not move to offset the large increase in the money stock and the aggregates expanded at substantial and accelerating rates. From the end of the first quarter to the end of the second MI grew by percent per annum while M2 advanced at a percent annual rate During the third and fourth quarters of nominal GNP increased at a rapid rate as the recovery progressed. However the fast growth in the monetary aggregates typical of the early stages of previous recoveries was not sustained this time. In fact monetary growth decelerated sharply in the second half of the year exactly at the time that income was accelerating. Growth in velocity hence accounted for a larger share of the increase in nominal GNP than has been the case at comparable stages of the Chart Interest Rates and Monetary Growth PERCENT PER ANNUM PRIME COMMERCIAL PAPER ( months ) FEDERAL FUNDS III IV IV 3-MONTH GROWTH RATES ( PERCENT ) IV SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM last four postwar recessions. Moreover the large increase in velocity in the fourth quarter occurred when short-term rates of interest were actually falling Over the third quarter M ! grew at a percent annual rate M by percent. These represent significant drops from the corresponding rates for the months before : a decline of percentage points in the MI growth rate points in the M2 growth rate. These decelerations were large enough that the growth rates of the two aggregates for the 6-month period from March to September fell within the Federal Reserve 's prescribed ranges despite the fact that in May and June the aggregates had grown well above the prescribed ranges The growth in the aggregates did not recover significantly in the fourth quarter of however. From September to December MI grew at a percent annual rate M2 by percent. Because of this persistence of sluggish monetary growth in the fourth quarter growth in the aggregates for all of remained moderate. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Mx grew by percent M2 by percent Despite the fact that was partly a recovery year the growth in M ! was somewhat lower than the percent rate recorded in the recession year while the growth in the broader definition of money M2 was only a percentage point higher than in THE MONEY AND BOND MARKETS In early short-term interest rates continued the sharp decline of the last half of reflecting weak short-term credit demands and reduced inflationary expectations. Yields on new issues of 3-month Treasury bills declined full percentage points from December reaching a low point of percent in June Over this same period yields on to 6-month prime commercial paper fell from percent to percent During the summer short-term rates rose significantly and monetary growth decelerated. Bill rates were near 65/2 percent in August and September ; commercial paper rates peaked at percent in September. This rise in interest rates following a turnaround in business activity was completely in keeping with the behavior of interest rates at comparable stages of previous recoveries. In that sense it was not unexpected but in another sense it was. In previous recoveries the rise in short-term rates of interest has been associated with a rising private demand for credit. In the third quarter of however private demand for credit remained relatively weak despite the rise in output in part because inventories continued to be liquidated. It is therefore hard to argue that interest rates rose in the third quarter because of the quickening pace of economic activity A second explanation is the sharp decline in monetary growth in the third quarter. But if that is the reason why did the decline in interest rates moderate in the second quarter when the monetary aggregates accelerated sharply ? Moreover the slow growth in the aggregates during the summer may have represented the winding-down of a temporary buildup in cash balances due to the rebates and if so it should not have put upward pressure on interest rates. Finally if slow money growth explains the rise in interest rates in the third quarter how are slow money growth and falling interest rates in the fourth quarter to be reconciled ? A third explanation is that the sharp increase in the CPI in June and July caused inflationary expectations to be revised upward which in turn led investors to demand higher nominal rates of interest. This reasoning can also explain the reversal of rates in the fourth quarter : the slow rate of price rise in August and a return to the more moderate rates of inflation of the first half of the year led inflationary expectations to be revised back down again Rates of interest on long-term securities were much more stable than short-term rates as is typically the case. Moody 's Aaa corporate bond yield which stood at percent in October declined only to percent in February and fluctuated slightly below percent for most of the rest of the year. A large volume of new issues of long-term corporate debt in the first half of helped to hold up long-term yields. Because the drop in long rates from their highs was much less than the fall in short rates the large premium of short over long rates that had developed in the summer of was reversed. In July the to 6-month commercial paper rate was basis points above Moody 's Aaa corporate bond yield. In October of last year it was nearly basis points below Yields on municipal bonds also displayed a noticeable upward trend for most of the year although they too fell at year-end. Events in the municipal bond markets were dominated by the financial difficulties of New York City The uneasiness created by the New York situation raised a general question about the solvency of State and local governments and agencies in the minds of many investors. As a consequence the yields on prime municipal bonds rose moderately relative to both U.S. Government issues and high-grade corporate bonds from June to November as investors demanded increased risk premiums to buy municipals. Much greater yield increases developed for less highly rated municipals Municipal bond markets became more orderly after the November announcement of the President 's program of conditional loans to New York City. The spread between interest rates on prime municipal bonds and high-grade corporate bonds promptly returned to approximately what it had been during the summer. However the yield spread between prime and medium-grade municipal bonds remained at the high levels reached during the New York crisis ( roughly basis points ) reflecting continued concern by investors about the credit worthiness of some issuers OTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS Continued economic uncertainty coupled with declines in market rates of interest contributed to strong inflows of funds into time and savings accounts at commercial banks and into nonbank thrift institutions in O This trend was accentuated in early summer by the deposit of tax rebate checks and one-time social security payments. From December to July commercial bank time and savings accounts grew at an annual rate of percent while deposits in thrift institutions increased at nearly an percent rate ( Table ) In the last months of these flows abated somewhat especially in the early fall when short-term rates reached their peaks for the year. The inflows stepped up again however as rates receded in the autumn. Growth for the last months of the year was at an percent annual rate for time and savings deposits in commercial banks and percent for deposits in nonbank thrift institutions Commercial and industrial loans at commercial banks declined by $ billion from January to June as business inventories were liquidated at unprecedented rates market yields fell more sharply than bank lending rates and firms attempted to reduce short-term debt and improve liquidity positions. The decline in total loans was even larger $ billion. The figures show modest growth in loans after June. However this may be somewhat misleading because part of the increase represented bankers ' acceptances which are more like short-term money market instruments than loans Paralleling the large decline in loans was the sharp runoff of large negotiable certificates of deposit ( CDs ) From January to August large CDs fell by $ billion a percent decline at an annual rate. With loan demand weak and deposit inflows strong commercial banks increased their investments principally in Treasury securities by $ billion from January to December. The shift toward investments and away from loans and the substitution of other time and savings deposits for large CDs have produced TABLE Selected components of commercial bank credit and time and savings deposits [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted ] Commercial bank credit1 Bank time and savings deposits Month Commercial Holdings of U.S and industrial Government loans securities Large CDs Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions June July August September October November December * : July December * January February March April Mav _ End of month data Averages of daily figures Excludes loans sold * Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System a significant restructuring of bank balance sheets. Banks were clearly far more liquid by the end of than they were at the outset The stock market registered a sizable gain during but still remained substantially below the high levels achieved in the winter of Standard and Poor 's index of common stocks rose percent from December to July fell about 8J/2 percent from July to September but recovered about half of this loss by December RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH RATES In May the Federal Reserve announced ranges of tolerance for the growth rates of M3 M2 M3 and the bank credit proxy for the coming year. This step is potentially quite significant for promoting greater economic stability In the first place explicit ranges of tolerance for monetary growth rates may reduce uncertainty about one important aspect of monetary policy : the growth in the money supply however defined. By announcing ranges of tolerance the Federal Reserve has indicated that it does not intend to permit growth rates of the aggregates to deviate too far or too long from a longer-range path The new policy may also affect inflationary expectations. By choosing ranges which encompass moderate rates of growth for the aggregates the Federal Reserve signaled its intention to contain the rate of inflation Indeed the Federal Reserve has indicated on several occasions that even the present ranges of tolerance for monetary growth can not be continued indefinitely if further progress is to be made against inflation The base for measuring the rate of growth of each aggregate was initially its March average. Because month-to-month movements in the aggregates have a large random component the base was subsequently changed to the second-quarter average. A further revision was made in November when the Federal Reserve updated the base to the third-quarter average In every case the period for which the ranges were to apply was a year Hence the ranges currently apply through the third quarter of The range for Mt growth rates has been ^ /2 percent since the ranges were announced in May. For M2 the range is currently 7/2-105/2 percent that for M3 percent. The range for the credit proxy is currently percent As has been pointed out by the Federal Reserve the revisions in the base have had the effect of raising the ranges of tolerance measured from the original March base for all the aggregates except the credit proxy. The reason is that all of the aggregates except the credit proxy grew near the upper end of the ranges between each of the revisions. Since the third-quarter base was established however all of the aggregates have grown below the announced ranges DEMAND AND OUTPUT CONSUMER INCOME AND SAVING Real disposable personal income increased percent during after a decline of percent during that was about three times more severe than the decline in any otv ^ r postwar recession. After decreasing slightly in the first quarter real disposable income grew at a percent annual rate during the last quarters of The increase was due to the real growth of GNP after the first quarter and the tax reductions stemming from enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of This act provided $ billion in cash rebates and lowered withholding by $ billion for the year as a whole although reduced withholding did not begin until May The act also included $ billion in one-time $ payments to social security and certain other pension recipients The composition of personal income growth shifted as the economy moved from recession into recovery in ( Table ) Transfer payments rose rapidly in the first half of the year while income gains in the second half were largely due to increases in wages and salaries. At an annual rate transfer payments rose $ billion in the first quarter of $ billion in the second quarter and $ billion in the third. About half of the secondquarter increase was due to the one-time $ social security payments whose later absence was largely offset by a $ 6.7-billion cost-of-living increase for social security recipients in the third quarter. At an annual rate wages and salaries increased by only $ billion in the first half of and then increased by $ billion in the last half of the year as the recovery progressed. Proprietors ' income was affected most by changes in farm income which fell sharply in the first half and rebounded in the second half For the year as a whole personal saving averaged 8J4 percent of disposable income higher than the percent average from to and the percent average from to The saving rate rose sharply to percent in the second quarter largely because of the tax rebates and onetime transfer payments. Many consumers apparently made their spending decisions on the basis of longer-run expected income and so a large portion of this temporary increase in income was saved. If the percent saving rate which was the norm over the preceding cycle had applied in the second quarter of consumer expenditures would have been about $ billion higher than they actually were. This suggests that roughly percent of the one-time Federal payments including both the rebates and the social security bonuses was saved during the quarter. In the last half of the saving rate averaged percent While data limitations make empirical analysis difficult a number of hypotheses have been advanced to explain the generally higher saving rates of the 1970s relative to those of the 1960s. One set of explanations has focused on the effects of real household net wealth on personal saving rates. If consumer spending depends positively on wealth a fall in wealth relative to TABLE Changes in personal income measures [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income measure Personal income2 Labor income Proprietors ' income3 Property income4 Transfer payments i II III IV i Disposable personal income : Total current dollars Total dollars Per capita dollars. o Preliminary Includes personal contributions for social insurance not shown separately With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Rental income ( with capital consumption adjustment ) dividends and personal interest income Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis income will reduce the average propensity to consume and hence raise the saving rate. One important difference between the 1960s and the 1970s has been the much higher inflation rate in the later period. If the higher inflation rate produced a decline in real household net wealth saving rates may have been raised. Corporate equities are one important component of household financial assets and it is revealing to examine their behavior during the 1970s In Standard and Poor 's composite price index for common stocks averaged The index peaked in early at and declined more or less continuously through the end of Despite a rise during the index stood at at year-end percent below its level in By contrast the price level rose continuously throughout the period : the consumer price index rose percent between and the end of Taken together these data imply that the real value of equities declined percent from to the end of Another explanation of the higher saving rates during the 1970s is that high and variable inflation and unemployment rates have created an unusual degree of uncertainty for consumers. This uncertainty may have reduced expected real income and hence raised saving rates CONSUMER EXPENDITURES Real consumption declined to a trough in the fourth quarter of percent below its previous peak. In the fourth quarter real outlays for nearly all categories of consumer goods fell sharply. This was a major reason for the involuntary buildup of inventories that depressed production in early Although the severity in the total decline of consumption during the recession was tied to the extraordinary decline in real disposable income from late the decline in demand at the end of was unexpectedly large. Judging from monthly retail sales data the pace of con- sumption began to increase early in the first quarter of last year and remained strong through midyear. During the last half of the year the growth of consumption slowed somewhat. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of real consumption rose percent while the average was percent above the average. Not surprisingly during this cycle purchases of durable goods declined most severely and showed the sharpest recovery while nondurables fell off less and most services were fairly stable Durables fell percent from their prerecession peak and then rose percent during last year. This decline was much greater than in any previous recession while the magnitude of recovery was representative of past cycles. Automobile sales dominated both the sharp decline in durables in late and their recovery during New car purchases collapsed in the fourth quarter of declining by percent. Some of the sharpness of the drop in late reflected a concentration of auto sales in the third quarter of when consumers increased purchases of models to avoid the large price increases announced for the models. The impact of the price increases was accentuated by several factors. The list price increases were exceptionally large because of several factors including newly required safety and air pollution control equipment. In addition the price increases were concentrated on smaller and medium-sized models which have the greatest price sensitivity. Furthermore the increases followed a series of extraordinary rises in the course of the model year The auto manufacturers introduced sizable rebates as well as other discounts in mid-January of last year. These remained in effect for the most part through March. Sales of domestic new cars improved from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of % million cars in December to a * 4-million rate in February After the end of the rebate period in late March sales fell back to about million. Both the first-quarter surge and the second-quarter slowdown in sales were dominated by movements in the sales rate of small domestic cars which were the principal beneficiaries of the rebate discounts of the first quarter. Sales followed a moderately upward trend during the balance of the year reaching an annual rate of about million by the fourth quarter Real outlays for nondurable goods increased by more than percent during after a reduction of nearly percent during Previous postwar declines exceeded percent only once during the recession. Reduced real outlays for clothing food house furnishings and miscellaneous items dominated the fall-off while increases in food and clothing led the recovery in nondurables. About percent of the total decline in real consumption of nondurables from the third quarter of to the last quarter of was a result of smaller energy purchases Personal consumption expenditures for energy in constant dollars rose percent last year over but were still percent lower than in By the end of real consumer outlays for gas and electric utility services were slightly higher than their peak in the third quarter of while real outlays for gasoline and motor oil declined by about l /z percent over the same period. On the other hand real outlays for fuel oil and coal declined over percent from their peak in the last quarter of to the end of partly because of warmer than average weather BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Business fixed investment was almost unchanged in in current dollars but was down percent in real terms. This drop in real investment outlays reflected the combination of recession and inflation in which lowered capacity utilization and operating profits and raised the replacement cost of plant and equipment. In addition the declines in common stock and bond prices through most of depressed the market values of corporate stocks and bonds to a level below the replacement cost of the underlying assets thereby discouraging investment expenditures Real investment outlays fell rapidly through the second quarter of In the third quarter a sharp rise in car and truck purchases largely offset declines in other producers ' goods while nonresidential construction was unchanged. By the fourth quarter there were widespread increases in purchases of producers ' durable equipment At the start of several industries notably materials producers planned year-to-year increases in real investment. There were real increases in investment by the steel petroleum refining and mining industries while investment by the paper and chemical industries was about unchanged. These are all industries in which capacity constraints existed in This investment strength is significant because all of the manufacturing industries in the group except petroleum refining were experiencing lower rates of capacity utilization early in than the average for manufacturing as a whole. Nonelectrical machinery another industry in which some shortages were apparent in slowed its rate of real investment somewhat in This industry had increased real investment substantially in however. Other industries reduced their investment as utilization of capacity dropped last year. Among these were electrical machinery autos and trucks textiles and rubber manufacturing Improving profits and sales after the first quarter of were reflected in new orders for nondefense capital goods. From their trough in the first quarter new orders rose percent to the third quarter and then grew more slowly in the fourth. However indicators of planned commercial and industrial construction showed slow growth from their early lows RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT The annual rate of total private housing starts increased to million units by the fourth quarter of last year from a 1.0-million rate in the fourth quarter of While both single and multifamily starts increased over percent during the share of multifamily starts in the total remained below the average of the early 1970s. Real residential investment. which lags housing starts by or quarters bottomed out in the first half of and then began to rise appreciably from $ billion in the second quarter to $ billion in the fourth. Nevertheless for as a whole real outlays were percent below their level. A discussion of the factors affecting residential investment appears in Chapter INVENTORY INVESTMENT During the first quarters of firms increased their inventories in response to earlier shortages and expectations of future price and sales increases. The ratio of nonfarm inventories to final sales rose to in the third quarter of from a level of a year earlier. In the fourth quarter the decline in real nonfarm business final sales at an annual rate of percent produced a further largely involuntary inventory accumulation. The nonfarm inventory-sales ratio increased to in the fourth quarter the highest level of the postwar period. Of the $ 9.0-billion annual rate increase in real nonfarm inventories in the fourth quarter $ billion was due to increased automobile inventories In response to the large accumulation of inventories purchases from manufacturers were reduced. As a result real retail and wholesale trade inventories declined at an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarter of including a $ billion annual rate decline in new car stocks Manufacturing inventories were not reduced rapidly until the second quarter. This pattern in which changes in trade inventories lead changes in manufacturing inventories is a typical cyclical one ( Table ) The real nonfarm inventory decumulation slowed to a $ 3.3-billion annual rate in the third quarter. Inventory reductions continued in the fabricated metals and machinery sectors and began in the primary metals sector where TABLE Changes in business inventories [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Type IV III Total business inventories Farm Nonfarm __ ._ Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods _ __ __ Wholesale trade Durable goods Nondurable goods Retail trade Durable goods _ Nondurable goods__ _ All other II IV i inventory accumulation had continued through the second quarter. In most other industries the inventory correction was largely ended as rising sales and the preceding inventory decumulation brought inventories closer to desired levels. The ratio of nonfarm inventories to final sales fell to in the third quarter of the lowest level since the first quarter of The ratio declined further in the fourth quarter largely as a result of accelerating final sales NET EXPORTS On an NIA basis nominal net exports rose by $ billion during Real net exports increased $ billion the result of a percent decline in real exports and an percent decline in imports. Both real imports and real exports began to increase in the second half of the year. Most of the increase in real net exports reflected shifts in merchandise trade flows which were dominated by cyclical developments here and abroad On a balance of payments basis the volume of merchandise imports fell at an annual rate of percent between the fourth quarter of and the third quarter of This fall largely mirrored the inventory decumulation which characterized most of For example imports of industrial supplies other than petroleum which are particularly sensitive to inventory shifts fell at an annual rate of almost percent during the first quarters of Imports of finished goods also reflected inventory shifts especially in the case of automobiles and the weakness of final demand. Toward the end of the year as the inventory adjustment tapered off the volume of imports particularly of consumer goods began to increase Export volume remained stable during the year despite the recession in most industrial countries. This stability resulted mainly from a rise in agricultural exports which partly offset a decline in other merchandise exports Exports of capital goods stabilized at a rather high level partly because delivery of these goods tends to lag behind the cycle and partly because shipments to oil-producing countries increased. In addition the relative improvement in price competitiveness resulting from the exchange rate changes that occurred in earlier years helped to keep export and import flows above their cyclically expected level. This fact was particularly noticeable in the exports of consumer goods which had been increasing steadily from through and which remained fairly stable in the first quarters of despite depressed consumption demand abroad In the services category of the balance of payments accounts services other than investment income showed a percent annual rate of growth from the fourth quarter of to the third quarter of Receipts of investment income from other than direct investments abroad declined slightly during the same period. On the other hand income from direct investments abroad dropped sharply : the average for the first quarters of was roughly one-half the average of This drop is tied to what may be a structural shift in favor of self-financing by overseas entities of U.S. firms GOVERNMENT PURCHASES Real Federal purchases of goods and services declined percent during the year ending in the second quarter of In part this resulted from a rate of inflation that was higher than expected and thus meant that budgeted levels of nominal spending were translated into lower real purchases. As inflation slowed real Federal purchases rose in the second half of last year Real State and local government purchases increased percent last year a somewhat slower rate than the average of the early 1970s and a much slower rate than the average of the postwar period. The slowing of the rate of growth in the early 1970s below its postwar average was primarily the result of longer-run factors which are described in Chapter In the last years the depressing effects of the recession on receipts and the difficulties in borrowing encountered by some jurisdictions further reduced the rate of growth of real outlays The growth of State and local purchases was sustained in by a large rise in Federal grants-in-aid. The increase in grants contributed nearly half the increase in total receipts $ billion in a total increase of $ billion even though grants account for less than one-quarter of total receipts PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS PRICES Inflation moderated in from the near-record rates of but remained very high by any other historical standard ( Table ) The slowing of inflation in early was due both to the sharp reduction in aggregate demand and to smaller increases in energy and food prices. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of the implicit price deflator for GNP rose percent. This rate was percentage point less than the rate during and only slightly more than one-half the rate during The easing of inflation in was about the same when measured by the deflator for nonfarm business gross product which increased percent during compared to percent during The deflator for farm output declined percent during largely as a result of the sharp downturn of farm product prices in the first quarter The behavior of some final demand deflators in is particularly noteworthy. After increasing approximately percent in the deflator for exports rose only percent in This deceleration reflected the sharply reduced world prices of food grains feed grains and oilseeds in Although the price deflator for the fixed investment component of GNP rose at a percent annual rate in the first quarter it slowed to less than percent during the last half of the year. The persistence of high inflation rates in investment goods during the first quarter reflected sharp increases in prices of producer finished goods particularly machinery and transportation equipment at the end of and early in as well as rising residential construction costs TABLE Changes in selected price measures [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] j._ IV IV IV IV i i II III IV i GNP implicit price deflator : Total GNP Business Nonfarm___ Farm __ _ Consumer price index : Food Directly purchased energy All other items All items Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Energy _. preliminary Gas and electricity fuel oil and coal and gasoline and motor oil Fuels and related products and power Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Consumer Prices The quarterly movements of the CPI roughly paralleled those of the GNP deflator in During the first months consumer prices increased at approximately half the percent annual rate during the last months of In the third quarter of the rise in the CPI accelerated to percent largely because of increases in food and energy prices but then moderated somewhat in the fourth quarter. Prices increased in the second half of at an annual rate of about percent considerably less than the rate experienced in Energy prices in the GPI accelerated rapidly in the first quarters of before slowing in the fourth quarter. The rise in energy prices reflected the effects of the imposition of import fees on crude oil a 60-cent import fee on refined petroleum products and the pass-through of higher costs of energy materials by utilities. Nevertheless the percent rise in the energy price component of the CPI for the year as a whole was much less than the percent advance in Petroleum products remained under price controls in although authority for economy-wide controls had expired in Separate authority for petroleum price controls was extended temporarily in September and November and then for years in December Among CPI components food prices showed the most significant deceleration in the first half of slowing from an annual rate of increase of percent in the fourth quarter of to a percent annual rate by the second quarter of This behavior reflected sharply reduced prices at the wholesale level. As a result of increases in the price of meats especially pork and of fresh vegetables the CPI food component accelerated in the third quarter. In the fourth quarter increases in food prices were smaller than in the third but were still above the average increase in the first half of the year. Although the rate of increase in food prices slowed in from the double-digit rates of the previous years it was more than twice as high as the average yearly increase since Wholesale Prices Average prices of industrial commodities increased percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of less than one-fourth the percent rate during The price deceleration was evident in the commodity groups comprising percent of the industrial commodity index Wholesale energy prices rose percent during but only percent during Price movements of industrial commodities during generally coincided with the dominant economic pattern of recession in the first half and recovery in the second half. Seven of the major commodity groups showed seasonally adjusted price declines in the first or second quarter ; prices in the metals and textile groups fell in both quarters. The industrial commodity price index registered its lowest rate of increase in the second quarter. The rate then more than doubled in the third quarter and increased further in the fourth quarter to a percent annual rate Such wide fluctuations in the rate of increase of wholesale industrial commodities are not unusual particularly near a cyclical turning point After increasing about percent during the index of farm products and processed foods and feeds rose only percent during Following a decline in the first quarter this index rose in the second and third quarters because of reduced supplies of some livestock products and unexpectedly high foreign demand for grains. In the fourth quarter however a record U.S. grain crop put downward pressure on wholesale food prices Nonfood crude materials prices increased percent during after a percent rise during and a percent average annual increase for the past years. These prices however fluctuated from month to month during the year WAGES The rate of increase in nominal wages slowed from to The average hourly earnings index of all production workers in the private nonfarm economy adjusted to exclude the effects of interindustry shifts in employment and overtime in manufacturing decreased from an annual rate of percent during to percent during Real wages which had been declining since the third quarter of began to rise in the first quarter of For the last quarters of real wages rose at a percent annual rate. The large decrease in real wages in was partly the result of a much greater rate of inflation than was expected. The sharp rise in unemployment from late to mid-1975 however probably had a depressing effect on nominal wage rates in Wage increases for the percent of the labor force who are covered by major collective bargaining agreements ( covering or more workers ) exhibited a similar pattern ( Table ) In the second and third quarters of the effective change in wages was slightly less than that of a year earlier. The decline in the-effective wage rate change relative to was not due to slower increases in first-year wage changes for new contracts but to a substantial decrease in the proportion of workers under major contracts expiring in Wage increases due to escalator provisions were larger in than in A broader measure of labor costs compensation per employee hour in the private nonfarm sector covers all employees and includes supplements to wages and salaries. The pattern of compensation per hour during the last years has also been similar to that of the adjusted hourly earnings index TABLE Changes in major collective bargaining settlements [ Percent ] i Type of change and industry group 1S73 II III IV II III IV Wage settlements : First-year wage change ( annual rate ) Percent of workers covered by current quarter settlements Effective wage rate changed Total effective changes Adjustment resulting from : Current settlement Prior settlement _ Escalator provision I'.l l'.5 Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing excluding contract construction Construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Services Preliminary Percent of estimated number of workers under major collective bargaining settlements. Individual quarterly data for are based on preliminary estimates that do not add to the current total for the year s Effective wage rate changes are wage rate changes actually going into effect per worker under major contracts in the respective quarters resulting from major collective bargaining settlements made that calendar year plus deferred increases in accordance with prior-year contracts plus escalator adjustments Note. Data relate to settlements covering or more workers in private nonfarm industries Effective wage rate adjustment for the year is the total of the four quarterly changes except as noted Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTIVITY Labor productivity in the private nonfarm sector increased percent during after dropping percent during the previous year. Productivity declined at a percent annual rate in the first quarter of and then increased at an annual rate of percent in the following quarters ( Table ) This pattern is typical of business cycles ( Table ) in that labor productivity grows at a low rate or declines in a recession increases sharply as the recovery begins and then increases at a slower rate as recovery continues The data in Table suggest that the magnitude and the duration of the decline in labor productivity in the recent downturn were greater than in other postwar recessions including the most severe previous recession of During a downturn in economic activity firms reduce current production at a rate faster than they reduce hours worked. The reason is that there are costs associated with hiring ( or rehiring ) and training workers and some workers on layoff may move to another area or take a job with another firm in the same area and not be available when the layoff is over. In addition a decline in hours of work need not result in a proportionate decline in labor costs because some employer-paid fringe benefits like health insurance may continue for several months after the start of a layoff. There is therefore reluctance on the part of firms to adjust the work force fully during the initial stages of a recession when they are uncertain about the extent and duration of the downturn. This " retained " labor is not necessarily idle but may rather be working at a slower rate or engaging in maintenance work that may increase future output In the most recent recession the cyclical adjustment of employment may have been slower than is typical because of the great uncertainty during about the future course of output As recovery begins the currently employed workers return more intensively to production tasks. There is a less than proportionate increase in employment so that output per hour worked increases sharply. As it beTABLE Changes in costs and productivity in the private nonfarm economy [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted annual rate ) Adjusted average hourly earnings1 Quarter : _ Ill IV : II III IV Compensation per hour Output per hour Unit labor costs Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and interindustry shifts Note. Data for adjusted hourly earnings relate to production or nonsupervisory workers ; all other data relate to all employees Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE Quarterly changes in labor productivity in postwar recessions private nonfarm economy [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Recession year Trough quarter l recession years average III... T-4 T-l Trough T+l T+2 T+3 T+4 19701V... recession T-2 T-3 19491V... _ Percent change from previous quarter The following quarters are those designated as cyclical troughs by the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) : IV III II and I. Trough quarters of real GNP were used for IV and II as NBER has not designated these quarters as cyclical troughs Quarters before trough are minus and quarters after trough are plus Note. Data relate to all employees Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and National Bureau of Economic Research comes clearer that the recovery is widespread and will be sustained employers are more willing to incur the costs of expanding employment. Further increases in output are then accompanied by increased hours of work and measured labor productivity changes converge to the long-term trend rate UNIT LABOR COSTS The change in output per hour was the most important determinant of the change in the unit labor cost of output in ( Table ) Unit labor costs in the nonfarm economy rose at extraordinary rates during as productivity declined throughout the year. Severe employment cuts in the first half of and then sharply rising output in the third quarter raised productivity changes to well above trend. Unit labor costs actually declined in the second and third quarters. Unit labor costs rose percent in the fourth quarter as the growth of productivity slowed. This rate of increase of unit labor costs appears to be near the longer-term trend given current rates of increase in wages PROFITS OF NONFINANCIAL CORPORATIONS Although profits before tax declined some significant measures of corporate profitability improved in ( Table ) Operating profits corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments increased by percent from $ billion in to $ billion in Largely because of increasing prices and decreasing unit labor costs the share of operating profits in the net product of nonfinancial TABLE Profits of domestic nonfinancial corporations [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments II III Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments as percent of net domestic product Inventory valuation adjustment Capital consumption adjustment Profits before tax Addendum : Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis corporations rose markedly from percent in the first quarter to percent in the second reaching a level higher than the percent share for as a whole. This increase of the profit share accounted for $ billion of the $ 20.4-billion annual rate increase in profits in the second quarter. In the third quarter the share increased to percent accounting for $ billion of the $ 17.0-billion annual rate rise in profits. Another measure of the share of income accruing to capital may be obtained by expressing net interest and operating profits less profits tax liability as a proportion of net domestic product. This share had declined almost continuously from 12J/2 percent in to percent in before increasing rapidly to over 11J/2 percent by the third quarter of Despite a decline in profits before tax of nonfinancial corporations aftertax profits changed little from because of the provisions of the Tax Reduction Act of The act reduced general corporate taxes by $ % billion but raised $ % billion in new revenues by curtailing percentage depletion and restricting foreign tax credits. The revenue-raising features of the Tax Reduction Act chiefly affected the petroleum industry. The corporate tax reductions helped to reduce the effective total tax rate on domestic nonfinancial corporate profits from percent in to percent in The recovery of operating profits and rapid disinvestment in inventories during the first half of the year allowed nonfinancial corporations to reduce their dependence upon external financing and to alter the structure of their liabilities. As Table shows corporations borrowed at an annual rate of $ billion through the first quarters of a rate far below those of the previous years. In addition corporations were able to lengthen the maturity of their debt by reducing bank loans at an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarters of the year the largest decline in loan demand during the postwar period. Finally some corpora- TABLE Net funds raised in financial markets by nonfinancial corporations IBillions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item 1Q7A Total funds raised Net new equity issues Debt instruments Tax-exempt bonds Corporate bonds Mortgages Bank loansl Other II III Not elsewhere classified Consists of commercial paper acceptances finance company loans and U.S. Government loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System tions relied more heavily on equity financing in as new issues reached an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarters the highest level since EMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT AND INCOME MAINTENANCE EMPLOYMENT Total civilian employment estimated from household survey data averaged million in million below the level of the previous year ( Table ) From a peak of million in the third quarter of employment fell to a low of million in the first quarter of and then rose to million by the fourth quarter The number of nonfarm payroll jobs estimated from establishment survey data averaged million in This represents a 1.4-million drop from the level a slightly greater decline than the drop in employment on the household basis. Nearly all of the change in payroll employment from its peak in the third quarter of to its trough in the second quarter of was in the goods-producing sector where the number of jobs declined by million ( Table ) The reduction in employment was substantial in all of the major goods-producing industries except mining where employment continued to increase. There was some recovery in employment in the goods-producing sector in the second half of the year although by year-end the level remained substantially below its peak in the third quarter of Employment in the service-producing industries remained stable at about million during the period when goods-producing employment declined. It then increased during the second half of The decline and subsequent rise in payroll employment in manufacturing from the third quarter of to the end of are reflected in data on labor turnover ( Table ) The seasonally adjusted layoff rate layoffs per workers doubled in the fourth quarter of compared to the pre77 O TABLE Labor market indicators and [ Seasonally adjusted ] Indicator IV ' II IV Millions of persons Civilian labor force Employment Unemployment _ Percent Civilian labor force participation ratez UNEMPLOYMENT RATES All civilian workers Unemployed weeks or longer ^ Demographic groups Men years and over Married men spouse present Women years and over Both sexes years Occupation White-collar workers Blue-collar workers Industry Nonagricultural private wage and salary workers Construction Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance and service industries Government workers Agricultural wage and salary workers Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified except as noted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Includes mining not shown separately Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics vious quarters and was substantially in excess of the average layoff rate of from to The layoff rate remained at unprecedented levels until production began to rise rapidly in the third quarter of By the last quarter however layoffs had declined to more normal levels Much of the unemployment associated with job layoffs in a recession is followed by reemployment in the same firm. While the total accession rate declined in manufacturing during the recession the rehire rate increased sharply : from an average of in 1974to in the first and second quarters of From to rehires were percent of accessions but in they were percent TABLE Nonagricultural payroll employment by industry [ Millions of persons ; seasonally adjusted ] Industry III Total nonagricultural employment IV II III IV i Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods... Contract construction Mining Goods producing Service producing Private Government Federal State and local Preliminary Transportation and public utilities ; wholesale and retail trade ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE Labor turnover rates in manufacturing [ Per employees ; seasonally adjusted ] Accession rates Separation rates Period New hires Total Total Quits Layoffs average average II Ill IV average II III IVJ i11-month average for the year and 2-month average for fourth quarter Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics UNEMPLOYMENT The unemployment rate averaged percent in sharply above the percent rate in and the previous post-World War II high of percent in The unemployment rate increased rapidly from percent in the third quarter of to percent in the first quarter of and reached a peak of percent in the second quarter. By the fourth quarter the rate had declined to percent As in past recessions the sharp rise in unemployment was widespread among major demographic groups ( Table ) The rate for married men who typically have the lowest unemployment rate increased from percent in to percent in Most other demographic groups experienced a similar or slightly larger percentage point increase in unemployment rates but a substantially smaller relative increase The increase in the unemployment rate was largely a consequence of unemployment arising from the loss of a job particularly among adult men and women ( Table ) The unemployment rate for job leavers ( unemployed persons who quit their jobs expressed as a percentage of the labor force ) was essentially unchanged from Unemployed new entrants and reentrants increased as a percentage of the labor force in The increase in the unemployment rate among labor force entrants likely reflected a greater difficulty in finding a job that is a longer duration of unemployment rather than a greater influx of entrants since the new-hire rate declined and the labor force participation rate did not change from to There was a large increase in the number of persons unemployed weeks or longer as a percentage of the labor force. The long-duration unemployment rate increased from percent in to percent in a much higher level than the-previous postwar peak of percent in This sharp increase compared to past recessions was due partly to the severity and duration of the most recent recession and partly to wider coverage and longer duration of unemployment compensation benefits than in the past Under legislation enacted in December and amended in March the maximum duration of unemployment compensation benefits for workers covered under the regular Federal and State programs was increased from weeks to weeks by adding a 26-week program called Federal supplemental benefits ( FSB ) This program expires at the end of March Another temporary program special unemployment assistance ( SUA ) was also enacted in December to provide unemployment compensation coverage for an estimated million wage and salary workers employed in industries not covered by the regular Federal and State programs. These TABLE Unemployment rates by reason for unemployment age and sex [ Percent of civilian labor force ) Both sexes to years Women years and over Men years and over Reason for unemployment Total unemployment rate Job separation Job losers Job leavers Previously out of labor force Reentrants New entrants Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics are largely State and local government workers farm workers domestics and employees of small nonprofit organizations. In June the duration of benefits under SUA was extended from to weeks There is now considerable research suggesting that a longer maximum duration of unemployment benefits tends to lengthen the duration of actual unemployment by discouraging some from withdrawing from the labor force and some from accepting reemployment in a less attractive job. While the exact magnitude of any increase in measured unemployment is unclear these studies suggest that interpretation of unemployment statistics has become more complex THE MITIGATING EFFECTS OF THE INCOME TRANSFER SYSTEM Unemployment compensation and other income maintenance programs have had an important dual role as automatic stabilizers and as a means of providing income to those who have lost earnings because of the recession Data on the major programs are given in Table Largely because of these programs per capita real disposable income did not decline in despite a decline in real output per capita. Because the number and size of countercyclical programs have increased over time the extent to which consumer income was maintained was greater in this recession than in past ones. In this recession per capita real disposable income fell from peak to trough by one-half of percent compared to a drop of percent in per capita real disposable income net of transfers. By contrast in the recession per capita real disposable income fell by percent from peak to trough while per capita real disposable income net of transfers declined percent The extent to which transfer payments replace family earnings lost as a result of unemployment varies with eligibility for the different programs as well as with past earnings. It has been estimated for that a family of four headed by an insured unemployed worker who had previously worked at the minimum wage could be entitled to about percent of previous after-tax earnings through unemployment compensation public assistance and food stamps. For a head of family who had earned high wages however benefits replace a smaller percentage of after-tax earnings. For example it has been estimated that an unemployed worker who earned $ a week before taxes could receive benefits that replace about one-third of his after-tax earnings The most important countercyclical program is unemployment compensation which in the first months of paid an estimated average weekly benefit of about $ per worker. As of January the maximum weekly benefit ranged from $ in Indiana and Mississippi to $ in Washington D.C. As unemployment increased during the recession the ratio of beneficiaries to persons unemployed rose sharply from percent in the fourth quarter of to percent in the second quarter of This pattern is partly due to changes in the composition of unemployment that usually TABLE Income transfer programs ) Unit Program IV II III IV II III g IV Unemployment : Millions _ Beneficiaries : Total Permanent programs FSBandSUA2 Millions ^ Benefit payments : Total3 Permanent programs .__ FSB and SUA Billions of dollars * .do Total number of persons Unemployment Compensation : do do do Food Stamp Program : Beneficiaries Benefit payments Aid to Families with Dependent Children : Beneficiaries ' Total Unemployed fathers Benefit payments Millions Billions of dollars4 Millions do Billions of dollars4 Old-age Survivors and Disability Insurance : Beneficiaries : Total Retired workers _ _ Disabled persons and beneficiaries Millions s do Benefit payments Billions of dollars _ Millionss Billions of dollars4 Billions of dollars do Medicaid : Beneficiaries Benefit payments Medicare : Benefit payments Supplemental Security Income : Beneficiaries Benefit payments Millions5 Billions of dollars4 Weekly average Federal supplemental benefits ( FSB ) and special unemployment assistance ( SUA ) a Includes State as well as Federal payments Annual rate Monthly average Total also includes survivors and special beneficiaries years and older In current payment status Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Health Education and Welfare and Department of Labor occur during a downturn and partly to legislated program extensions ( FSB and SUA ) Largely because of these new programs a larger proportion of the unemployed received benefits in than in any prior recession. The new programs have therefore more than offset the secular decline in the proportion of the unemployed receiving benefits ( estimated to be percent in and percent in ) a decline which is attributable to the disproportionate increase in the share of unemployment caused by entry into the labor force. The proportion of the unemployed receiving benefits was estimated to be percent in and percent in the first quarters of In the second quarter of there were about million food stamp recipients percent more than in the fourth quarter of Approximately half the increase is attributable to the recession and half to the extension of the program to areas which had not previously offered food stamps ( including Puerto Rico which added million new recipients ) and to increases in participation among formerly eligible households. A survey taken by the Bureau of the Census in April showed that percent of the families in which the head of the household was unemployed were receiving food stamps. Among families with an unemployed head of household and income under $ percent received stamps. The average monthly food stamp bonus ( the Federal subsidy ) which is not taxed as income was $ for families with an unemployed head of household. A further discussion of income maintenance programs is contained in Chapter ENERGY DEVELOPMENTS The economy continued to adjust to higher world oil prices during though at a rate constrained by Government action. Price controls were maintained on some domestically produced crude oil and natural gas liquids but a special fee ( later removed ) imposed on imported crude oil and petroleum products raised the prices received for uncontrolled oil. The net effect of these actions was to hold average oil prices in the United States below world levels reduce the total revenues of domestic petroleum producers slow the rate of increase in petroleum product prices to consumers increase petroleum imports and retard structural adjustment to higher world oil prices The relative price of energy continued to increase but not at the rate which brought the adjustment problems of and The consumption of energy remained below its peak and well below its previous long-term growth path. Long-term adjustments in the capital stock toward lower use of petroleum were in evidence. Output of oil and natural gas continued to decline bituminous coal production reached an all-time high and nuclear power production again rose substantially. The Energy Policy and Conservation Act discussed in Chapter was enacted late in the year PRICES The price of domestically produced petroleum products was affected by price ceilings on some of the crude oil entering refineries and by margin controls at all processing and marketing stages. Approximately percent of the domestically produced crude entering refineries was controlled at a wellhead price of about $ per barrel bringing the blended price of domestic crude some $ to $ per barrel below the price of imported crude oil. Movements in the price of petroleum products were largely determined by changes in the composite cost of all crude imported and domestic ( Table ) That cost rose about percent in the months ending October largely because of the special import fee TABLE Refiner acquisition cost of crude petroleum Cost ( per barrel ) Month Composite : September. ._ October November December ' January February March April Domestic $ _ Imported $ $ ' $ _ June ' July August September October November December ^ Mav May June : January February March April July August September October1 Preliminary Source : Federal Energy Administration The average price of coal sold under long-term contract continued to increase during but the price of coal sold in spot markets ( WPI for coal ) declined substantially from the peaks reached during the coal strike of late Movements in the average price of all coal are reflected in the prices paid for coal by steam electric plants. Those prices reached a peak of cents per million B.t.u. in November The average price was only cents per million B.t.u. in the first months of lower than the previous peak but still higher than the cents per million B.t.u. average for Coal used for electricity generation still commands a price less than half that of its major substitute residual fuel oil when they are compared on an energy-equivalent price basis. Legal technical and utility capacity constraints on the use of coal have prevented further displacement of oil in the utility market Natural gas prices in continued to be dominated by regulatory institutions and by the long-term contracts characteristic of gas sales. Regulated gas prices rose pursuant to actions of the Federal Power Commission which increased the base ceiling rate for to cents per thousand cubic feet of natural gas that had begun to flow in interstate commerce after December The rate was cents from June until early December of that year when the rates were revised. Additionally special provisions designed to induce movement of more gas into interstate regulated markets to meet emergency conditions brought some increase in average regulated prices. The prices remained well below the market clearing level however leading to continuation of the natural gas shortage in the interstate pricecontrolled market. The average price paid by interstate pipelines for gas produced in the United States rose from cents per thousand cubic feet in September to cents in September The average price of imported gas entering the regulated interstate pipeline system about percent of consumption rose from cents to $ per thousand cubic feet over the same period. The unregulated natural gas market primarily gas consumed within its State of origin also experienced price increases. The major increases in the price of unregulated new gas contracts occurred in but the average price of gas sold in unregulated markets continued to rise because a larger proportion of it was sold at the higher prices as old agreements expired or were renegotiated and as depletion occurred in reserves sold under lower-priced contracts Continued advances in the wholesale price of energy ( Table ) carried through to consumers but the increases to consumers were smaller than in The price of gasoline to consumers rose cents per gallon or about percent in the months ending in December while fuel oil went up percent. The price of residential electrical service rose percent and that of residential gas service percent during the same period ( Table ) TABLE Changes in wholesale prices of all commodities and selected fuels and power [ Percent change ; seasonally unadjusted annual rates ] Selected fuels and power Period All commodities Coal Natural gas Refined petroleum products Electric power Average annual change : : II ill IV : II III IV to 1969tol972._ to Change from preceding quarter : : II Ill IV example the first-quarter prices as used in the above table are the reported indexes for March through May for natural gas and February through April for refined petroleum products and electric power Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE Changes in consumer prices of all items and energy items [ Percent change ; seasonally unadjusted annual rates ] All items Pprinrl Energy All items less energy Total * Electricity Fuel oil Gasoline Gas Average annual change : to to to ^ Change from preceding quarter : II Ill IV | | III IV | if Ill IV Also includes coal and motor oil not shown separately Fuel oil No. ' Regular and premium gasoline Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics CONSUMPTION The combination of increasing relative prices of energy ( for the third consecutive year ) a low level of economic activity mild winter weather and conservation measures left energy consumption in lower than in In energy consumption fell for the first time since ; there is no previous record of energy consumption 's remaining below previous peak levels for consecutive years The total effect of higher relative energy prices on energy consumption has not yet been felt because adjustments in energy use patterns and in capital stock are not yet complete. For example model automobiles averaged an estimated rated miles per gallon while model automobiles are estimated to have averaged a rated miles per gallon. The models will probably be even more fuel efficient averaging a rated miles per gallon according to estimates. Motor vehicle fuel consumption however responds to the average composition of the total vehicle fleet which is still dominated by automobiles produced before energy prices rose The low level of economic activity in reinforced price effects in restraining energy use. Conversely the expected recovery of is likely to lead to growth in energy consumption despite the continued restraining influence of past increases in its price The consumption of electric power rose only about percent in and percent in much below the percent annual increase for the previous years. This slowdown in demand growth has contributed to the decision of some firms to delay completion of additional generating capacity and has brought about a reassessment of future industry capacity requirements How greatly electricity consumption will be affected by the higher relative price of electricity is not yet known. Also unknown is the extent to which the movement will continue toward peak-load pricing of electric service and how much this movement will affect generating capacity requirements and the optimal mix of generating equipment. It is expected however that the results of the change will be toward reducing the quantity of fossil fuel consumed per unit of electricity generated and shifting the mix of energy sources toward coal and nuclear power Petroleum consumption did not increase despite some substitution of petroleum for natural gas. The increased price of petroleum lagged effects of earlier price increases the low level of economic activity and a milder winter explain this consumption pattern ( Table ) The only unlocalized fuel shortage during was of natural gas. The shortage was greater in than before despite relatively warm weather and the recession. The quantity of gas that would have been consumed at then existing prices if that gas had been available is unknown because potential consumers have been denied access to supplies. However the quantity which was not delivered by interstate pipelines despite contractual requirements to do so is reported to the Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) Curtailments of firm ( guaranteed ) supplies amounted to percent of requirements by the reporting pipelines in the months ending August compared to percent during the months ending August The FPC expects these curtailments to reach percent in the months ending August When curtailments of interruptible ( nonguaranteed ) supplies are considered the proportion of requirements curtailed rose from percent in the earlier period to percent in the months ending in TABLE Gross consumption of energy by major source Total energy consumption Percent of total energy consumption Year Amount ( quadrillion Btu 's ) Percent change Petroleum Total Natural gas Coal Hydropower Nuclear 1CO.O 1CO.O Based on unrounded data Preliminary Preliminary estimate by the Council of Economic Advisers Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of the Interior Bureau of Mines ( except as noted ) August Lower gas use fpr space heating and greater than expected success in filling storage will probably reduce the actual firm curtailments from those projected for the months ending August Petroleum inventories were adequate to meet normal emergencies throughout Inventories of natural gas liquids especially propane were at record highs toward the end of and no shortages were anticipated Coal stocks were satisfactory after the buildup period following the strike. Interstate pipelines reported that working natural gas storage balances at the start of the winter heating season were nearly percent higher than at the outset of the previous heating season Unfortunately the adequate petroleum inventory position which existed in is fragile. Petroleum inventories may be drawn down rather quickly in response to a change in price expectations or to a change in conditions in the world oil market. There is little incentive for commercial firms to maintain inventories solely for use during an embargo because the emergency allocation and pricing authorities granted by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of take away much of the potential profit from doing so PRODUCTION Investment in the domestic energy industry continued to grow in response to the higher relative prices of energy over the past years. The uncertainty about prospective rates of return that resulted from the lack of a settled and supportive Government policy undoubtedly kept investment flows below the limits set by available manpower and equipment. In contrast to late and there were no reports of widespread shortages of essential equipment and supplies and the few spot shortages were minor Crude oil production in totaled just over billion barrels nearly percent less than in and percent less than the peak production of Marketed production of natural gas in is estimated to be percent lower than its peak. Preliminary estimates show a percent decline in the production of natural gas liquids in from the figure The level of exploration and development drilling continued to rise but wells drilled increased at only roughly half the percent increase of over and wells drilled during amounted to only percent of those drilled during the record drilling year. Output responds only slowly to changes in drilling rates however and the recent increase has not been large enough to prevent the continued decline in the production of crude oil and natural gas. Domestic petroleum output may stabilize or even rise in or when North Slope Alaskan reserves begin to produce but no turnaround can be expected before then. North Slope Alaskan natural gas resources will not be produced before the 1980s when access to pipelines may be available. Domestic natural gas production will probably decline at least until then. Oil and gas production rates at the end of this decade however will be strongly influenced by Government policy and by price behavior during and Consequently pricing decisions under the recently enacted Energy Policy and Conservation Act will have an important effect on oil supplies just as action to decontrol the price of natural gas will bring forth increasing quantities of this fuel especially to the interstate market. The pattern of fuel production since is shown in Chart Bituminous and lignite coal production reached an all-time high of million tons during surpassing the million tons of Output of the bituminous coal industry rose percent over The labor contract of late did not eliminate strikes unauthorized walkouts idled some mines for several weeks. Output per hour worked continued to decline Nevertheless record production was achieved a consequence of high levels of output from established mines and continued production during much of the year from high-cost mines that were opened or reopened in response to the coal price increases of and Progress toward full exploitation of Western low-sulfur coal reserves fell below expectations partly because of legal actions that slowed development and partly because of the moratorium on leasing of Federal coal lands Output of the other major sources of energy nuclear power plants and hydroelectric generating facilities was constrained by capacity limitations and operating problems. Hydropower and nuclear power represent about percent of the electric power produced in the United States. The nuclear component of the total is growing rapidly and its output approached percent of U.S. production during Chart Domestic Fuel Production INDEX,1967 = l l l I l i l i SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM IMPORTS AND EXPORTS The United States a net importer of petroleum and natural gas and an exporter of coal has been a net importer of energy for two decades. Gross imports of petroleum and petroleum products rose from about percent of consumption in to about percent in both and In absolute terms gross imports in were approximately million barrels per day There has been a decline in refined petroleum products as a proportion of total petroleum imports. They averaged percent of the total for the years from to but then fell to percent in percent in and about percent in This decline is due largely to price controls administered by the Federal Energy Administration which provide a large measure of protection against most imports of refined petroleum products Coal exports amount to about percent of total production. They rose percent in and increased another percent in Natural gas is imported mostly by pipeline and Canada is the dominant source. Canadian gas imports have played an important role in the natural gas supply of some regions but according to recent Canadian policy announcements these imports ( as well as imports of oil from that nation ) will be restricted in the future AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS The most notable development in agriculture in the first half of was the extent of reduced feeding of livestock in response to the poor feed grain harvest of Most noteworthy in the second half was the reentry of the Soviet Union as a large buyer of U.S. grain and the resulting policy measures in the controversial areas of export controls and long-term grain sales agreements between governments ADJUSTMENTS TO REDUCED CROPS The United States entered with the lowest supply of feed grains ( corn oats barley and grain sorghum ) since Adverse weather caused production to be percent below that of the previous year. The shortfall was especially serious because U.S. grain stocks were already much below customary levels An unexpectedly large response to high grain prices by livestock producers resulted in a larger decline in feed use in than had been anticipated in late Farmers economized on feed use by selling cows and calves fattening fewer cattle and hogs on grain adjusting livestock rations and marketing cattle at lower weights. The resulting reduction in feed demand contributed to a decline in feed grain prices of approximately percent between the fourth quarter of and the second quarter of At the same time the liquidation of cattle inventories increased beef supplies. Declines in the first quarter of in both crop and livestock prices brought about a sharp decline in the net income of farm operators and reduced the rate of increase in retail food prices. These developments helped to bring about the ending early in March of a system under which exporters reported planned large sales of grains and soybeans to the Department of Agriculture for approval prior to finalizing such sales. Monitoring of export sales however was continued In the second half of price consequences of reduced feed supplies were passed through to consumers as supplies of most livestock and livestock products declined. Decreased slaughter of hogs led to record hog and pork prices. Consumption of pork per capita fell to the lowest level since the 1930s Prices of wholesale dairy products increased sharply following a small decline in milk production. While cattle slaughter remained high because of heavy marketing of cows and other cattle not fattened on grain steer and beef prices rose well above first half and year-earlier averages because of strong demand. These events together with increased grain prices as the Soviet Union entered world grain markets generated higher retail food prices and improved farm incomes. Net farm income ( including inventory change ) rose from a $ 20.7-billion annual rate in the first quarter to an average $ 27.8billion annual rate for the remaining quarters. The resulting $ 26.0billion net income for all of is less than percent below that of and it is the third highest on record THE SOVIET GRAIN SHORTFALL When the rumored decrease in grain harvests in the U.S.S.R. was confirmed by large Soviet purchases in early July world prices of wheat feed grains and soybeans increased rapidly. During the month beginning July prices of U.S. new crop futures increased percent for wheat percent for corn and percent for soybeans. Grain sales from the United States to the Soviet Union in July totaled about million metric tons four times the quantity sold in the preceding fiscal year. The combination of the surge in Soviet demand reduced crop prospects in both Eastern and Western Europe low U.S. carryover stocks and the difficulty of knowing how the U.S. corn and soybean harvest would be affected by the drought in the western Corn Belt created an extremely uncertain price situation. Because of questions regarding the size of further Soviet purchases with their potentially disruptive consequences given the uncertain supply situation a temporary suspension of further U.S. grain sales to the U.S.S.R. was announced by the Secretary of Agriculture on August Under unrestricted market conditions the suspension of U.S. sales to the U.S.S.R. should have had only transient if any effects on grain prices. The Soviets would simply have shifted their demands to other countries and U.S. sales to the U.S.S.R. would have been replaced by sales to other importing countries at the same world and U.S. prices as if the suspension had riot been imposed. Supply conditions and restrictions in other important grain-exporting countries however limited the extent to which Soviet demands could be shifted. Even so a hold was placed on sales to Poland during September to help prevent Soviet demands on world markets from being transmitted to the United States indirectly As it turned out U.S. grain prices peaked during August soon after the suspension of sales to the Soviets. In October when it had become clear that there would be bumper U.S. crops of feed grains as well as wheat additional sales to the U.S.S.R. from grain crops of up to million metric tons through September were permitted without further consultation with the U.S. Government. Through the end of the year million more tons of corn but no additional wheat were sold to the Soviet Union Despite the fact that estimates of the Soviet grain harvest in were further reduced in December ( to million metric tons percent below target production ) purchases of grain by the U.S.S.R. have been less than they were generally expected to be in October. The smaller than expected sales may be attributable to constraints on grain imports caused by Soviet port and handling capacity. In any event the absence of strong demand together with excellent world rice and good Southern Hemisphere grain prospects led to a substantial decline in grain prices. From their August peaks to the end of the March futures prices of wheat and corn declined percent and percent respectively At the time that sales to the U.S.S.R. were reopened a 5-year agreement for the purchase of U.S. corn and wheat was announced. The intention of this agreement is to eliminate the erratic fluctuations that have characterized past Soviet purchases from the United States ( Table ) The agreement specifies that the Soviet Union will purchase at least million metric tons of corn and wheat in each of the next years. The United States reserves the right however to limit Soviet purchases to million tons in any year and to reduce purchases below million tons if estimated U.S. production plus carryover stocks of wheat and feed grains fall below million tons in any given year a level which would be million tons less than the large supply and million tons below the sharply reduced level. The agreement is unlikely to generate significant net additions to the demand for U.S. grain because the Soviets can resell or store any of the required million metric tons not needed for domestic use. Soviet storage however would help achieve the objective of smoothing out demands on world grain markets TABLE U.S. grain exports to the U.S.S.R. fiscal years U.S. grain exports to U.S.S.R. as percent of total U.S grain exports U.S. grain exports to U.S.S.R Fiscal year Total grains Wheat and rye Feed grains Millions of metric tons i * Fiscal export commitments as of January Source : Department of Agriculture CHAPTER Income Security and Health Issues T HE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT over the years has undertaken and expanded a wide range of programs in pursuit of social objectives related to the health and welfare of society. Many have benefited from the programs. The elderly have gained a measure of income security Low-income families have been able to supplement their purchasing power with food stamps and public assistance. The poor aged and disabled have improved their access to medical care. However the growing scope and cost of these programs have begun to attract serious analysis of their impact on the allocation of resources the distribution of income and the general wellbeing of the public. This chapter brings together analyses measuring the effects and identifying the problems of a number of Federal income security and medical care programs The first section considers several welfare and social insurance programs which provide income security to the poor the retired and the unemployed In the second section we examine several government programs related to medical care. Although these are also income security programs the role of the government in this area is broader and more complex. Thus medical care is the subject of a separate section This chapter relies heavily on the research of economists and statisticians employed in government universities and private nonprofit research firms Although the policy of not citing individual authors or research papers in the Economic Report of the President is being continued documentation may be helpful. Therefore on request the Council of Economic Advisers will send interested readers a bibliography of the external sources used for the preparation of this chapter INCOME SECURITY PROGRAMS Income security programs redistribute income in cash or in kind to individuals and families. Some may have the effect of increasing future earning potential but that is not their primary purpose. The Federal programs having that purpose such as those for schooling job training and rehabilitation are not considered in this chapter Income security programs have been a major factor in the growth of the Federal budget. As classified in the national income accounts ( NIA ) O Federal transfer payments to persons ( excluding Federal pensions for military and civilian Government employees and for veterans and railroad workers ) amounted to $ billion in percent of Federal expenditures. As a source of income to persons. Federal State and local government transfers ( again excluding all the above items and their State counterparts ) accounted for percent of disposable personal income. The magnitude of income transfers in was of course unusually high because of the recession during which earnings were depressed and the cyclically responsive transfers high. But even in net Federal transfers were percent of Government expenditures and net Federal State and local transfers percent of disposable personal income. This represents a substantial growth from the middle 1950s. In these percentages were percent and percent respectively Although all the income security programs involve the redistribution of income they differ considerably in their specific goals the people they serve and their sources of funds ( Table ) Some programs are related to need and provide or supplement income so that particular groups may attain a higher level of purchasing power supplemental security income ( SSI ) and aid to families with dependent children ( AFDG ) Others attempt to ensure an adequate or more nearly equal level of consumption of particular TABLE Aspects of selected Federal income security programs Fiscal Program Basis of eligibility Source of funds Form of aid Expenditures i ( billions of dollars ) Beneficiaries ( monthly average ; millions ) OASDI Age disability or death of parent or spouse Individual earnings Federal payroll taxes on employers and employees Cash Supplemental security income ( SSI ) Age or disability Income Federal revenues Cash AFDC2 Certain families with children ncome Federal-Statelocal revenues Cash and services Food stamp Income Federal revenues Vouchers Unemployment compensation Unemployment State and Federal payroll tax on employers Cash Medicare Age or disability Federal payroll tax on employers and employees Subsidized health insurance Medicaid Persons eligible for AFDC or SSI and medically indigent Federal-Statelocal revenues Subsidized health services Expenditures by Federal and State and local governments ; excludes administrative expenses Families with children deprived of support because of death absence from home or incapacity of parent or in some States in certain circumstances unemployment of father ( AFDC-UF ) Estimated number of enrollees Source : Council of Economic Advisers ( based on program information ) goods or services that are considered essential. Thus some programs supplement income with in-kind transfers of food medical care or housing. Another category of programs is not directly based on need but replaces a proportion of wages lost as a result of retirement disability death or unemployment. Included in this group are the unemployment insurance programs and the largest of all income transfer programs old-age survivors and disability insurance ( OASDI ) commonly referred to as social security The sources of funds and administration of the programs differ. Social security is entirely federally funded and administered. The funding and regulations in the food stamp program are Federal but the regulations are implemented by the States. AFDC is funded by the Federal Government and the States but is largely State administered. There are in addition some programs not considered in this chapter that are State funded and administered in particular general assistance and emergency assistance Forty years ago there were virtually no Federal income security programs. The programs that have since been introduced have expanded in number ; coverage has been extended to additional groups in the population ; and real benefit levels have increased. As a result of the program growth a substantial proportion of the needy have been able to improve their level of consumption It has however been difficult to measure the precise contribution of the programs to reducing poverty. Many of the programs provide benefits in the form of medical care food or other in-kind services whose value to the recipient is not easy to determine. For this reason in-kind benefits are not counted as income for purposes of determining poverty status or for purposes of determining eligibility for other programs. However in Federal State and local spending on medicaid food stamps and child nutrition programs came to $ billion. These programs are not intended exclusively for those in poverty although they are means tested and targeted to lowerincome people. The combined outlays for these programs however were equivalent to about percent of the gap between the aggregate incomes of those below the poverty threshold and what their incomes would be at the poverty threshold. This figure is raised to percent if Federal subsidies for public housing and rentals are included. The Bureau of the Census has recently started collecting data on the Federal food stamp subsidy received by different families in the population. But additional work is needed before we can fully evaluate the contribution of the in-kind programs to the poor and their effects on the overall distribution of income It would appear that we have made substantial progress in providing resources to those in need. We are now in the process of evaluating our programs with respect to how they have affected individuals and how equitably they have distributed benefits. For some of the programs new Federal legislation is proposed such as in food stamp and social security financing Other long-run problems do not have easy solutions at this time nor do we even have all of the evidence necessary to propose alternative solutions This section discusses four income security programs two of which are means tested ( AFDG and food stamps ) and two of which are social insurance programs ( unemployment compensation and social security ) Other programs such as supplemental security income housing subsidies and veterans ' benefits are not discussed AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN The AFDG program is administered by the States with Federal guidance while funding is shared by the Federal Government and the States. In some States a part of the State portion is funded by local governments. Benefits are provided to families in which dependent children are deprived of the support of a parent usually the father through death disability or absence In States 'benefits are also available under some circumstances if the father is present but unemployed Benefit Levels and Participation The level of income now available to AFDG families although low compared to that of the average family is high relative to the potential earnings of AFDG participants. For example in a sample of representative counties in -a hypothetical AFDG family of four ( consisting of a woman and three children ) with no earnings or other income was eligible for an average of $ in AFDC benefits and $ in food benefits. Since benefits are not taxedj this would be equivalent to $ in taxable earnings if the families viewed the food benefits as equal to the same amount of cash. There were also medical care services available for virtually all AFDC participants. Although the average medicaid payment per AFDG family was $ a low-income family might not value such care at that amount. Adding only $ for medicaid results in a taxable equivalent income of about $ This does not include any housing subsidies or child care services that might have been received but does include greater benefits than would have been received if the family had earnings or other income. Moreover as with all averages these data mask considerable variation among States. Thus in percent of the poor lived in counties where AFDG cash 'benefits and food benefits were $ $ a year ( before taxes ) for a family of four with no private income ; but percent were in counties providing $ $ in benefits and percent in counties providing over $ in benefits Since AFDC and food program benefit levels have increased. Incorporating increases in benefits for these programs and retaining the same medicaid benefits results in an equivalent taxable income of $ in and $ in for the hypothetical fema'le-headed family considered above. This is not high compared to the median income of all families which was $ in But on the whole these benefit levels compare favorably with what many women earn. In women with the same level of education as those on AFDC but who worked full time year round earned $ As indicated in Table the number of families in the AFDC program has increased substantially over time with the sharpest rise between and when the number of AFDG families almost tripled. Several complex factors seem to have contributed to the program 's growth. First information about the program became widespread in part because of the efforts of various organizations concerned with poverty. In addition participation in the program was facilitated by changes which raised the income eligibility standards and liberalized other provisions for eligibility ( e.g. residence requirements ) As a result the proportion of families eligible for the program increased as did the proportion of applicants accepted. The rising level of benefits also made participation more attractive. Between and AFDC payments per recipient adjusted for changes in the consumer price index ( CPI ) increased by percent compared with the percent increase in hourly earnings ( deflated by the CPI ) over the same period. The introduction of medicaid in and the growing availability of food stamps after also added to the benefits that could be obtained particularly since AFDC families gain automatic eligibility for these additional benefits After the rate of increase in the number of AFDC families slowed as a result of several factors. No substantial gains could be achieved from the spread of information which was already widely disseminated by the early 1970s. There was a slower rate of increase in the combination of real cash and in-kind benefits available to AFDC participants. In addition the liberalization of eligibility provisions that occurred in the 1960s appears to have ended. A few States including California and Michigan have instituted programs to locate absent parents who are liable for a child 's support TABLE AFDC families recipients and cash payments selected years AFDC cash payments AFDC families i Year AFDC recipients ( thousands ) Number ( thousands ) Percent of all femaleheaded families with children Annual total ( millions of current dollars ) Monthly average per recipient2 December dollars Current dollars _ Excludes families with unemployed fathers. The number of AFDC families is for December of each year except which is for September. The percents are based on the number of female-headed families in March of each year except for which refers to April Data are for December of each year except which are for September Deflated by the consumer price index Note. AFDC refers to the " aid to families with dependent children " program Sources : Department of Health Education and Welfare and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) ( This type of program is to be made nationwide by the summer of under the Child Support Program enacted in ) Since the early 1960s there has been a rapid increase in families headed by a woman with children. It is possible that the rising benefit levels and more liberal standards of eligibility in the AFDG program made it easier for women to form their own households. Studies have found that women tend to form their own households when their earnings opportunities improve while some respond in a similar fashion to increases in the AFDG stipend However AFDC provides an additional incentive for women to remain family heads since eligibility for AFDC is conditional upon the absence of a husband. This may help explain why women on welfare have been observed to be about half as likely to remarry within a 4-year period as all women heading families with children Work Incentives In response to the rapid growth in the AFDC program various measures were taken to encourage AFDC mothers to work and to become selfsupporting. Starting in the early 1960s training was made available and pecuniary incentives were granted through a modification in the reduction in benefits that occurred when an AFDC participant worked. Prior to this time in many States a dollar of benefits was lost for each dollar earned a percent marginal tax rate on benefits The Work Incentive Program ( WIN ) a result of the Social Security Amendments further modified the implicit marginal tax rate the amount by which benefits would be reduced when earnings increased by providing that the first $ of monthly income ( net of work-related expenses ) be disregarded after which cash benefits were to be reduced by cents for each additional dollar earned. Some States however allow a monthly income disregard greater than $ and there is also considerable variation between States in allowable deductions for work-related expenses. For these reasons marginal tax rates are discontinuous as income rises and vary substantially between States. On average however the effective tax on AFDC cash benefits appears to be considerably below percent and even after taking account of additional in-kind benefits the tax on total benefits has fallen below that of the pre-WIN era. By the study of counties noted above indicated that an AFDC family consisting of a mother with three children could retain in terms of a gross taxable equivalent $ in basic AFDC and food stamp 'benefits out of a potential basic benefit of $ if the mother 's earnings were as much as $ for the year an implicit average tax rate on benefits of percent. If she earned another $ she would lose $ in benefits a percent marginal tax rate Additional measures to encourage work among AFDC recipients were introduced as a result of legislation implemented in June This program known as WIN II requires all employable AFDC recipients to register for training or placement services as a condition for receiving welfare payments AFDC recipients aged or more who are neither disabled nor students under years and women who do not have a child under years are generally classified as employable. WIN II provides child care services for trainees as well as training employment placement services employer subsidies and public employment. The WIN II program costs were about $ million in fiscal The effect on employment of the various work incentive programs appears to be very slight although a full evaluation has not been made Periodic surveys of mothers in the AFDG program have shown that the percentage who were employed fluctuated between and percent from to ( the latest available data ) although the proportion employed full time as opposed to part time has increased. These are low rates of employment compared to those for all women with children of whom percent were employed in The percentage of all AFDC mothers who were in the labor force but unemployed jumped from percent in to percent in even though was a year of lower unemployment for the population as a whole. This increase in reported unemployment which resulted from a change in status from outside the labor force to unemployed appears to be related to the provisions of WIN II requiring registration for job placement or training The weak response to the work incentives introduced over time is likely to have been the net result of different and offsetting factors. There is evidence that AFDC mothers respond to changes in benefit tax rates : holding benefit levels and labor market conditions constant employment rates are higher in States where the effective benefit tax rate is lower. But the effect is not very strong. It is estimated that holding other things constant even with an effective tax rate on benefits of zero the percentage of the current population of AFDC mothers who would work is unlikely to exceed percent compared to the percent employed in However benefit levels were not held constant during the late 1960s. While the effective tax rate was being reduced rapidly rising cash and in-kind benefits were increasing the income level available to AFDC participants who did not work. It appears that the negative effect of these rising real benefits on employment almost completely offset the positive effect of lower marginal tax rates An increase in employment it may be noted would not necessarily lead to a reduction in AFDC participation since liberalized marginal tax rates make it possible to remain on AFDC with fairly high earnings. The shift to more full-time employment among AFDC mothers does suggest that some AFDC participants possibly those with higher earnings opportunities did increase their work effort and remained in the program after an increase in work effort in response to the lowered tax rates on earned income. On the other hand a substantial proportion of AFDC mothers either coming into the program or already there may have decreased their work activities. Indeed there is evidence that during the period of increasing work incentives to the largest increases in female heads of families who were economically eligible for AFDC were among those with no earnings and those with earnings above $ with virtually no increase among families in the $ $ range The generally weak work attachment of AFDC mothers would appear to be related to factors which contribute to their being on AFDC in the first place. One factor is their low level of education in only percent were at least high school graduates compared to percent for women to years old with children. Studies have also found a higher incidence of physical and mental disabilities among women on AFDG compared to all women. Thus as indicated above considering taxes child care and other work-related expenses an unskilled woman with two or more children may well find that the cash and in-kind benefits available through AFDG provide her with nearly as large an income as work Several aspects of the AFDC program have led to concern including the uneven treatment of single-parent and intact families. Some of the disparities between States in AFDC benefit levels and between single-parent and intact families are mitigated by the food stamp program which is available in all areas and to all families. Because the same schedule determining benefits applies to all localities low-income families entitled to smaller or no AFDC benefits as a consequence of their State of residence or their family composition are eligible for higher food stamp benefits. Because the basic benefit level provided by food stamps is low and the marginal tax rate on benefits is low work disincentives from the food stamp program alone are probably not substantial AFDC-UF The AFDC program for unemployed fathers ( AFDC-UF ) provides aid to intact families with a nondisabled father who is unemployed as long as other conditions of AFDC eligibility are satisfied. In the States which have elected to participate the father must have been unemployed for at least days have had sufficient work experience to satisfy a minimum requirement be seeking and available for work and be unemployed or working less than hours per month. In addition until a June Supreme Court decision a family was categorically ineligible for AFDC-UF benefits if the father was eligible for benefits under a Federal or State unemployment compensation program. Most of the approximately participating fathers in and had exhausted their unemployment compensation benefit entitlement or were in an uncovered sector In July families received AFDC-UF benefits and an average monthly cash benefit per family of $ in addition to categorical eligibility for food stamps and medicaid benefits for dependent family members. There is no limit on the duration of AFDC-UF benefits. The average AFDC-UF cash benefits are about the same as the average monthly benefit to a worker under unemployment compensation ; but for low-wage fathers particularly in families with several children and no other income AFDC-UF benefits could be substantially greater than unemployment compensation The June decision can be expected to increase AFDG-UF participation. This may create problems because of the potential work disincentives for low-income intact families. In addition some of the cost of unemployment will be shifted from the employer-financed trust funds to general Federal and State revenues. However the opportunity for this aid does provide more ample income maintenance for more low-income intact families FOOD PROGRAMS Concern about hunger or inadequate nutrition has led to the development of an array of programs which supplement income by providing either meals or vouchers to buy food. Benefits from these programs are not counted as income either by the Bureau of the Census in its income and poverty statistics or in determining eligibility for other income maintenance programs Spending on the major food programs has increased from $ million in to about $ billion in with the most rapid increases occurring since ( Table ) Food Stamps The food stamp program is the largest of these programs. It was set up in as an alternative to the direct distribution of surplus food commodities The stated intention was to provide for " improved levels of nutrition among economically needy households. " Because of the difficulties in estimating nutritional levels the effect of the program on the health of the poor has not been established. Food stamps have however become an important part of our income maintenance system In fiscal the food stamp and food distribution programs together served a monthly average of million people at a total Federal cost of $ million or a cost per participant of $ By calendar the food stamp program alone served a monthly average of close to million Americans at a total Federal expenditure of about $ billion and a subsidy per participant of $ A major factor in the growth of program participation has been its expansion by to all counties and U.S. territories Eligibility for food stamps is based on the " net income " a household expects to receive during the coming month ( prospective accounting ) A family 's net income is its gross income less Federal State and local income taxes social security taxes retirement contributions and union dues. Some other allowable deductions are medical expenditures exceeding $ a month ; child care when needed for work ; expenses related to fire theft or other disasters ; educational expenses for tuition and fees ; alimony rent and utilities ; and mortgage payments above percent of income after all other deductions have been subtracted. A household is excluded if it has liquid assets or certain property valued at $ or more. The asset limitation is $ for house- TABLE Federal food programs selected fiscal years Program Food distribution program for needy families : Number of participants Federal cost : Total Per participant Food stamp program : Number of participants Federal cost : Total Per participant National school lunch program : Number of children participating Pe rcent of en rolled child ren : Total number of participants Participants receiving free lunches or lunches at reduced prices Federal cost Special milk program : Federal cost School breakfast program : Number of children participating Federal cost Special preschool food service program : Number of children participating Federal cost Special summer food service program : Number of children participating ^ Federal cost Unit Millions Millions of dollars Dollars Millions Millions of dollars Dollars Millions s Percent Millions of dollars Millions of dollars Thousands Millions of dollars Thousands Millions of dollars Thousands Millions of dollars Percent Preliminary estimate Monthly average Daily average Note. Federal cost excludes administrative expenses Source : Department of Agriculture holds with a member aged years or more. The value of a home a car and any other personal effects is not considered in determining eligibility The stamps are vouchers which can be used to purchase most food items sold in grocery stores. The stamp allotment for a family is based on the current market cost of the foods that make up the Thrifty Food Plan developed by the Department of Agriculture to meet their nutritional standards. The cost of this food plan and therefore the food stamp allotment is equivalent to about percent of expenditures made by the average U.S. consumer for food at home. The allotment is changed twice a year to reflect changes in the price of foods that make up the food plan. The permissible amount of stamps a household can purchase varies with the number of household members. In January the allotment for a four-person household was $ a month in food stamps The amount a household pays for the stamps depends on its net monthly income. The difference between the food stamp allotment and the purchase price is the " bonus " or Federal subsidy. Families with less than $ net in- come pay nothing ; that is their bonus is equivalent to the entire food stamp allotment. Households of four receiving AFDC or SSI are automatically entitled to a monthly subsidy of at least $ regardless of their income On the whole the food stamp program reaches relatively low-income households ( Table ) It is estimated that the benefits have been sufficient to raise the mean income of the recipient families by about percent. The food stamp program however has been criticized because it provides income supplements for some who do not have low income and because it distributes resources in a way that many consider inequitable. The deductions allow some families to qualify who have large discretionary expenditures on items such as housing education and child care while other families with the same income but with different consumption patterns for deductible items do not qualify Another important inequity follows from determining eligibility on the basis of income in a single month. As a result some households qualify during a portion of the year although their income over the year as a whole is sufficiently high to exclude them by any comparable annual standard ( Table ) For example while only percent of households in the program had a monthly income of $ in July percent had annual incomes of $ over the year ending in July Because of the 1-month accounting period the food stamp program provides benefits to both the long-term poor and those whose incomes are temporarily low because of unemployment sickness a strike or other reasons The food stamp program provides countercyclical income maintenance benefits for the unemployed and participation rises with seasonal unemployment TABLE Distribution of food stamp households by annual and monthly income July and March and July Percent of total food stamp households Income class July March July Annual income : Less than $ $ $ $ $ $ $ ! $ and over Total food stamp households Monthly income : Less than $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ and over Total food stamp households i Annual income is for months ending in July March and July Households include single-person households. Annual income shown here may be understated compared to data derived from more detailed surveys of income Note. Monthly income data were not collected for March Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Health Education and Welfare Although the family income of many of the unemployed may be low enough to qualify for food stamps during a month of unemployment their income over a longer accounting period covering months with employment may be substantially above the food stamp eligibility level. The annual income of food stamp recipients in March was higher than in July or July partly because March was a month of high cyclical as well as seasonal unemployment In the President proposed the National Food Stamp Reform Act which directs the program benefits toward those with low income over a period of time and curtails the provision of benefits to higher-income families. The proposal would change the method of determining eligibility by averaging actual income received over the past days rather than using the applicant 's estimate of next month 's income. It is estimated that the change from prospective to retrospective monthly accounting would save about percent of the program 's cost because of a better reporting of income. Lengthening the accounting period would save an estimated additional percent of program costs since families with high income over days but temporarily low monthly income will not participate. Families with a 90-day income just above eligibility levels would quickly qualify in the event that their income deteriorated. Families whose usual incomes are sufficiently high that they would not qualify if their income declined for only month are more likely to have assets that they can draw upon Another proposed change is to replace the present itemized deduction for determining net income with a single standard deduction of $ a month except for households with a member years old or more when the deduction would be $ a month. As a result of the standard deduction some families will be ineligible who now qualify because of large expenditures on certain deductible items. However the deduction of $ is higher than the present total deduction for the average family. This will benefit families with low incomes who formerly did not have many itemized expenditures Another feature of the proposal is to cut off all benefits for families whose income over the past days after the standard deduction exceeds the equivalent of the poverty line. Thus under this proposal a family of four with a 90-day income in excess of $ would be ineligible in The proposed National Food Stamp Reform Act is expected to result in reductions of Federal outlays of $ billion ( percent ) compared to present levels. Approximately percent of the current monthly case load would become ineligible and another percent would receive reduced subsidies chiefly those at higher income levels and those who tend to receive small subsidies. However benefits will increase for approximately percent of present participants mainly at the lowest income levels There had been substantial concern that youths from high-income families were qualifying for food stamps while they were away from home at a college or universitv. A new regulation requires that when a student 's parents claim him as a deduction on their Federal income tax the family not the student himself is the relevant filing unit for food stamp purposes. In addition the proposed changes from itemized deductions including school fees and tuition to a standard deduction will provide a more equitable treatment of families Food Programs for Schoolchildren The Federal Government provided about $ billion in fiscal in subsidies for meals provided to children in nursery primary and secondary schools and in some summer programs. These programs are implicitly based on the two presumptions that an adequate diet for children is important for their ability to learn and that many children are not able to obtain a nutritionally adequate diet at home In the Government contributed cents in cash and cent in commodities for each lunch served to any child regardless of income. About percent of all schoolchildren participated in the program of whom about percent received a free lunch subsidized by State and local sources. Until the middle 1960s program growth was due mainly to increases in school enrollments and less to increases in participation rates. The Federal share in funding dropped during the period while State local and student shares increased Starting in the Federal Government began additional subsidies to the lunch program targeted to children from lower-income families. As a result the share of Federal funds increased sharply and the percentage of students in the school lunch program increased. In fiscal the Federal Government contributes cents in a cash grant and cents in a commodity grant to all school lunches regardless of the family income of the children. In addition the Federal Government contributes almost cents per lunch in cash for children who receive a free lunch and cents for children receiving lunch at a reduced price The lunch program provides a free lunch to children from families whose income is at or below percent of the poverty threshold. In about percent of all schoolchildren received a free lunch Several new and potentially expensive programs have been introduced recently to expand the child nutrition programs. The Government school breakfast program is one example. It now provides an average subsidy of cents per breakfast. If all eligible students participated the annual cost would be $ billion. Another is the Federal subsidy of cents per lunch and supper provided to summer camps and day care institutions on the condition that the children come from an area defined as one where at least 33/3 percent of the children are eligible for free or reduced-price school meals. Since percent is the national average a substantial proportion of institutions will qualify for the subsidy regardless of the family income of the participating children Legislation enacted in would further increase Federal expenditures on the programs. Eligibility for the reduced-price lunch was extended to percent of the poverty line ( the equivalent of an income of $ for a nonfarm family of four using the poverty threshold ) and it was made mandatory that all schools receiving Federal lunch money provide such a program. As a result about percent of children would become eligible for a free or reduced-price lunch. Participation is also likely to increase because of the mandatory provisions of the program. As a result of the new legislation Federal expenditures are expected to increase by $ billion more in fiscal than the $ billion that was anticipated under the old legislation It is estimated that percent of the Federal expenditures of $ billion on the programs went to children from families above percent of the poverty line in In addition there is duplication of Federal benefits with different programs subsidizing the same meal To provide for a more rational distribution of child nutrition funds the Administration is proposing a single block grant to the States to replace the programs discussed above as well as several other categorical food programs for children and mothers. The proposed legislation would eliminate food subsidies to children above the poverty line allow the States greater flexibility in determining the needs of the children from low-income families and simplify program administration UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION The recession of has again demonstrated that the unemployment compensation system is one of our most effective countercyclical tools. As workers are placed on a layoff benefits begin immediately thereby providing financial assistance to those families most severely hurt by the fall in employment. This provision of purchasing power to the unemployed is of substantial importance in promoting economic recovery and in more equitably distributing the economic hardships of a recession. As the unemployment rate increased from the second quarter of to the second quarter of for example the average weekly number of beneficiaries under all unemployment compensation programs increased from million to million. As the recovery continues the size of the unemployment compensation programs will decrease when persons receiving benefits gain employment This section reviews the main features of the unemployment compensation system and considers some of its implications for income maintenance and efficiency in the long run Program Characteristics The nationwide unemployment compensation system had its origins in the Social Security Act. It is a joint program administered by the States within Federal guidelines. In addition direct Federal unemployment programs cover four special groups : railroad workers recently discharged members of the Armed Forces Federal civilian employees and those unemployed as a consequence of imports. A temporary federally funded program special unemployment assistance ( SUA ) was introduced in January to provide benefits for wage and salary workers not covered by a regular Federal or State program. In addition temporary Federal programs to extend the duration of benefits have been in effect in all recessions since The legal rules and administrative practices of the unemployment compensation system vary substantially from State to State. There are however certain basic features. Generally to be eligible for benefits a person must have had sufficient work experience and earnings in covered employment in a recent 1-year period prior to the onset of unemployment. As a result of the work experience requirement new entrants and most reentrants to the labor force do not qualify for benefits. Nearly all workers on a job layoff but with work experience in a covered industry can qualify so that total expenditures for unemployment benefits are highly sensitive to cyclical movements in the economy Eligibility also depends on the cause of unemployment. In all States persons unemployed because of a job layoff are eligible for benefits. Persons who voluntarily quit without " good cause " are subject to disqualification ; however the definition of good cause varies substantially among the States For example mandatory retirement loss of transportation to work or a change in location because a spouse changes jobs constitute good cause in some States but not in others. Unemployment without good cause can still lead to compensation under the program in States but only after a disqualification period and the length of the period varies widely. Strikers can receive unemployment benefits in New York and Rhode Island after a disqualification period. Thirteen States reduce or deny benefits to persons receiving social security retirement benefits As a further condition to receive benefits the unemployed claimant must be able to work be available for and actively seeking employment and can not reject a " suitable " job offer. The administration of the work test varies among the States. It also varies over the business cycle. The work test is harder to administer during a recession than when jobs are plentiful. Some States require weekly or biweekly visits to the local unemployment office to file a claim and collect benefits and the claimant must present specific proof of job search. Other States require periodic interviews ask for little or no documented proof of jdb search and permit the mailing of benefit checks to the claimant 's home In States the duration of benefit entitlement under the regular program increases with the amount of work experience during the base period generally up to a 26-week ceiling. Weekly benefits for these States are about onehalf of the worker 's pretax wage up to a ceiling that varies among the States from $ in Indiana to $ per week in the District of Columbia as of January The other seven States have a fixed-duration program in which all eligible persons receive benefits for the same number of weeks but the weekly benefit is itself determined by work experience and weekly earnings prior to unemployment. States where the maximum is $ a week or more contain percent of covered workers. Twelve States supplement the benefit check with a small dependency allowance for a spouse or dependent children who are not working Benefits have increased at about the same rate as wages in covered employment. There has however been an increase over time in the extent to which income maintenance benefits from other programs particularly food stamps are available to supplement unemployment compensation. Some unemployed fathers in low-income families will receive larger benefits because of the June court decision which allows them to accept AFDCUF benefits instead of unemployment compensation From the worker 's point of view the fact that unemployment insurance benefits are not subject to payroll or income taxes ( as they are in some other industrial countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom ) increases their value. For household heads earning $ per week unemployment benefits replace about percent of wages ( net of taxes ) and fringe benefits lost because of unemployment while for those earning $ per week the replacement rate is about one-third. The replacement rate can be very high ( close to percent ) for low-wage workers in high-income families : for example when the wife has low earnings and the husband has high income and they are in a high marginal tax bracket Benefits under the State unemployment insurance system are funded by taxes levied on employers in proportion to workers ' base wages equal in most States to the first $ In principle the tax rate varies according to employers ' experience ratings which are based on the extent to which their workers draw benefits from the system. However because the variation in tax rates is usually within narrow margins many firms with very high or very low unemployment experience relative to their industry often realize no change in their tax rates as a result of changes in their unemployment experience. Because the unemployment insurance funds in many States have been seriously depleted by the recent recession the Administration has proposed increases in the taxable earnings base and in the Federal component of the tax rate Potential coverage of workers has been extended under the regular programs from percent of all workers in to percent in because industrial coverage was made broader in and and because of a decline in the proportion of the labor force in the major remaining sectors not covered : agriculture self-employment and unpaid employment in a family business. As a result of special unemployment assistance coverage was extended to the approximately million wage and salary workers not covered by a regular program primarily State and local government farm and domestic workers. Only the million self-employed and unpaid workers in family businesses are not now covered by a regular or temporary program. The Administration has proposed legislation that would bring million additional wage and salary workers now covered by SUA under the regular State programs so that their employers will contribute to the unemployment insurance trust fund In spite of the increased coverage there has been a decline over the past years in the proportion of the unemployed receiving benefits under the regular State programs. This is probably due to the change in the composition of the labor force. Because of the eligibility requirements many unemployed youths and women with weak labor market attachment do not have sufficient work experience to qualify for benefits. As these groups have increased in relative importance both in the labor force and among the unemployed the proportion of the unemployed receiving benefits declined. Among the group with a more stable labor force attachment men aged and over there has been a secular increase in the proportion of the unemployed claiming benefits. For example this proportion declined from percent in to percent in for all unemployed persons but for men aged and over it increased from percent to percent Temporary programs to extend the duration of benefit entitlements in a recession have become more common. Prior to benefits were temporarily extended to weeks in and A law permanently authorized an extension of benefits to weeks in times of high State or national unemployment. In there was an unprecedented temporary extension of benefits in all States to a maximum duration of weeks through the weeks of federally funded benefits provided under Federal supplemental benefits ( FSB ) Under current legislation FSB and SUA benefits are scheduled to terminate in March or earlier if there is a sufficiently low State or nationwide unemployment rate. The purpose of this phasing out is that unemployment compensation should not discourage workers from actively seeking employment when job possibilities improve Some Effects of the Program In recent years there has been considerable research on how the availability potential duration and size of unemployment benefits affect the measured unemployment rate. Although their estimates must be interpreted with caution the studies are suggestive of the general impact of the program Several studies have used individual data to examine the effect on unemployment of the potential duration and level of benefits. The quantitative findings vary from study to study in part because they differ in methodology data and time period. However they all tend to indicate that the duration of actual unemployment is greater the higher the benefit level and the longer the potential duration of benefits. There is evidence moreover that the duration of benefit entitlement may be even more important than the level of benefits in explaining unemployment duration One study examined the effect of covering agricultural wage and salary workers ( who had previously been covered in only two States ) with the introduction of special unemployment assistance in January The study developed equations to predict agricultural unemployment rates and employment on the basis of cyclical and other factors. Seasonally O adjusted data were used to compare the observed and predicted values before and after the introduction of SUA. After SUA seasonally adjusted employment was lower during the off-season presumably because of the availability of unemployment compensation. The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate increased by about percent ( percentage points ) in the off-season but did not change in the on-season. Apparently because of the SUA benefits in the annual unemployment rate of agricultural wage and salary workers seems to have been about percent greater than that predicted on the basis of cyclical and other factors. However one year 's experience may not be sufficient to estimate the long-term magnitude of these effects The extent to which States engage in eligibility screening can affect the amount of observed unemployment. The proportion of claims for unemployment compensation under the State programs that are rejected on the basis of individual State administrative decisions regarding eligibility can be called a " denial rate. " Using State data for one recent study found that this denial rate had a significant impact on the State unemployment rate. It was estimated for example that at the margin a percent increase in the national denial rate from the observed per claimant contacts would lower the national unemployment rate by percentage point. It appears that a higher denial rate may not only decrease the period of unemployment among those denied benefits but may have an even larger impact by discouraging unemployment among others. Eligibility screening is subject to administrative control. Greater administrative expenditures and more time devoted to eligibility screening appear to result in a higher denial rate particularly for reasons related to unavailability for work and the rejection of suitable employment. These effects are likely to be weaker during a period of high unemployment when job vacancies are more scarce. And beyond some point additional expenditures would have much smaller effects Certain categories of workers are more strongly affected by benefits than others. Those who have home responsibilities or are approaching retirement are more likely to remain unemployed until they exhaust their benefit entitlements. A study of the unemployment insurance system in Nevada in for example found that a substantially larger proportion of exhaustees were either aged or over or women compared to those who stopped collecting benefits prior to exhausting their entitlement. Although greater difficulty in finding jobs may explain part of the differential it can not explain all of it. In this study for example months after benefit exhaustion percent were employed and another percent had withdrawn from the labor force primarily because of ill health retirement or family responsibilities. Similar findings emerge from other studies For most persons however the income support provided by the unemployment compensation system is a means of financing the search for a job. For these persons if a longer period of unemployment facilitates job search and leads to a job with higher wages and better fringe benefits more pleasant working conditions or a longer expected job tenure it may represent a worthwhile investment. Thus far however studies of the effect of the additional job search stimulated by unemployment compensation have been inconclusive The unemployment insurance system also affects employers ' behavior through the operation of the payroll tax. The tax levied on a particular employer does not depend strongly on the actual unemployment experience of his workers. Because of the weak experience rating the cost of a layoff is reduced. Partly because of the unemployment compensation benefits workers would be less likely to seek other jobs during these periods of unemployment particularly if unemployment is widespread. Thus the payroll tax subsidizes seasonal cyclical and casual unemployment relative to stable employment. This greater frequency of unemployment thereby leads to an increase in the unemployment rate. Data from a variety of sources indicate that much of the unemployment arising from job layoffs is temporary and does not involve a change in employer. For example since manufacturing establishments had an average of layoffs per employees per month. During this period their rehire rate was workers per employees per month. Thus on average percent of layoffs resulted in reemployment by the same establishment Results of various studies of the effects of unemployment compensation indicate that it is our most efficient tool for quickly providing financial help to those who lose a job. However and to a large extent unavoidably the existence of this automatic aid makes it easier for employers to lay off workers and for workers to prolong their period of unemployment. One implication is that the unemployment rate is affected by the amount and duration of unemployment compensation benefits. As a result of these and other issues that have been raised about the unemployment insurance system the President has proposed the establishment of a National Commission on Unemployment Compensation to study alternatives and make recommendations SOCIAL SECURITY The old-age survivors and disability insurance program generally referred to as social security is the largest income transfer program in terms of both funds and number of recipients. In million persons received cash benefits of $ billion which was percent of the Federal budget and percent of GNP ( Table ) Growth in the program has been extraordinary during the past years. The number of recipients increased by percent and after adjusting for the increase in prices over this period the average monthly benefit for retired workers increased by percent The social security system has been successful in raising the income levels of a large proportion of the elderly who otherwise would have been impoverished. However because of the sheer size of the program there is a TABLE Beneficiaries and cash benefits in the old-age survivors and disability insurance program ( OASDI ) selected years Beneficiary or benefit Number of beneficiaries ( millions ) ! : Total Annual cash benefits ( billions of dollars ) Retired workers dependents and survivors Retired workers only Disabled workers and dependents. Average monthly benefits ( dollars ) : All retired workers * Maximum to men retiring at age Maximum to women retiring at age Minimum to persons retiring at age As of December of each year Assumes retirement at beginning of year As of June Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare need to evaluate recent developments in the pattern of expenditures and of the taxes required to fund them Program Characteristics The first social security legislation of intended that the program operate on a self-financed and actuarially sound basis. Contributions from the payroll tax were to exceed benefits in the early years so that a substantial trust fund relative to annual benefit outlays could be accumulated. Individual benefits were to be closely related to each individual 's prior earnings except for preferential treatment at the base ( minimum ) amount. The amendments of changed the character of the program by stipulating that individuals retiring early in the life of the program would receive benefits greater than the actuarial value of taxes paid and that dependents of retired workers would also receive benefits without any additional tax payments required. The amendments moved still farther away from a fully funded trust to the " pay-as-you-go " system which prevails today under which those currently working essentially pay for the benefits of those who are retired As of January OASDI benefits are funded from a tax of percent levied on the first $ of wages the maximum taxable earnings with the payments shared equally by employer and employees. The self-employed pay a tax of percent. ( An additional tax of percent for wage and salary workers and percent for the self-employed is for medicare hospital insurance. ) Tax payments are paid into separate trust funds one for retirement and survivors and one for disability. About percent of all wage and salary earners and the self-employed are covered by the program and subject to mandatory contributions. The major exclusions are Federal civilian employees who are under a separate Federal retirement program and some State and local employees. In the past increases in benefits and taxes have been legislated by the Congress periodically. Starting in on the basis of the amendments benefit levels were " indexed " or linked to the consumer price index so that they rise -automatically depending on increases in prices. Similarly the maximum taxable earnings base was roughly indexed to changes in average covered wages and hence it also Social security is designed as a replacement for earnings lost because of increases automatically over time a worker 's retirement disability or death. Eligibility for benefits depends on work in covered employment for a minimum period as well as on age disability or survivor status. Although there are no restrictions on the amount of income that may be received from property other pensions or any sources other than work individual benefits may be reduced if the beneficiary has earnings from employment and is less than years of age. In beneficiaries can earn $ without any reduction in benefits but for each $ in earnings above $ benefits are reduced by $ The amount of a worker 's basic monthly benefit ( before any reductions ) depends on the worker 's record of covered earnings averaged over a specified number of years ( at present years for retirement benefits ) Dependents and dependent survivors receive payments tied to the benefit level of the primary beneficiary Workers choosing to retire between ages and receive a permanently reduced benefit. Disabled workers under the age of have been eligible for benefits since Table shows the relation between the size of the benefit awarded and preretirement earnings for hypothetical male workers at different earnings levels as calculated by one study. Examples are given for men retiring at age and age for single men and for married men whose wives did not work in covered employment. The social security formula for determining benefits is scaled progressively so that benefits as a proportion of earnings fall as the benefit base rises. The benefit base in turn is calculated from prior earnings. For example a male worker with a low-wage history culminating in $ in annual earnings in the year before retirement would receive TABLE Social security benefits for single men and for married men with a dependent wife retiring at age years and age years Men retiring at age years earnings before taxes and marital status Amount of tax free benefit ( dollars ) Benefit as percent of earnings before taxes Men retiring at age years Amount of tax free benefit ( dollars ) Benefit as percent of earnings before taxes $ : Single Married $ : Single Married $ : Single Married Note. Benefits are based on average amount of a worker 's wages over a 19-year period. Wage histories for each category of wage earners were simulated by assuming that their wages grew at the same rate as that of the average wages of nonsupervisory personnel. The wife is assumed to be same age as worker and to have no covered earnings Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Office of Income Security Policy ) percent of his preretirement earnings in benefits if he is single percent if he is married. But a male worker making $ before retirement would receive only percent of such earnings if single and percent if married Because benefits are tax free and taxes are relatively more important at higher earnings levels however the decline in after-tax replacement rates as earnings rise is somewhat less than indicated here Income of the Aged Social security is an important source of income for the aged. Largely because earnings decline with age and because women are less likely to work than men and earn less if they do social security increases in relative importance with age and is relatively more important for households headed by a widowed woman ( often single-person households ) In among households headed by a widow aged or older the average annual income was $ of which social security accounted for percent. By contrast among households headed by a married man aged to the total mean income was $ ; social security on the average accounted for percent of income and wages and self-employment earnings accounted for percent. In percent of all persons years old and over were women living alone while percent were married and living with a spouse The rapid increases in social security benefits of recent years have made a substantial contribution in improving the income status of the elderly In percent of those aged and over were below the poverty level compared to percent for all persons ; in percent of the elderly were in poverty compared to percent of all persons. In addition to cash income many of the elderly have imputed income from owner-occupied homes for which they are no longer making mortgage payments ( percent of elderly households own their own homes ) Virtually all of those aged and over receive medicare or medicaid benefits and many also finance some of their consumption out of their assets. These additional sources raise the relative level of consumption of the aged Work Incentives Social security has created incentives for the aged and disabled to reduce their work during the year. The availability of the pension itself is an inducement to work less and take more leisure. In addition the earnings test which applies up to age restricts the amount that can be earned without forfeiting any benefits Between and only about a third of men aged and over were eligible for social security benefits ( Table ) and benefits were low and declining in real value. After there was a sharp increase in the percentage eligible for social security to percent in and percent in Benefit amounts also increased sharply even after adjusting for inflation. After remaining stable from to the labor force participation of men at years of age and over declined sharply. Hours worked per week for men years of age and over also fell from in to in TABLE Labor force participation rates and social security benefits for men years of age and older selected years Age group Percent of men in labor force : years years years years years and over years years and over Percent of men eligible for social security benefits : years years and over Average monthly primary social insurance benefit for men filing for benefits in given year : Current dollars dollars ( ) U09 ( ) ( ) Data in the first four columns are from the " Census of Population. " Data in the last two columns are from the " Current Population Survey " ; they exclude institutional population and are for April Based on number of persons eligible at beginning of year s Not eligible for social security benefits * Data are for s Deflated by the consumer price index Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Department of Health Education and Welfare The same relation between benefits and retirement behavior is evident for the group aged who became eligible for retirement at reduced benefits in Although their labor force participation rate had been fairly stable until I960 it declined markedly after benefits became available. One recent study finds that for every percent increase in social security benefits relative to average wages the number of male beneficiaries aged increases by percent in the first quarter after the increase and by percent after quarters Persons eligible for social security have also been found to adjust their work behavior to avoid losing benefits under the earnings test. Thus following a liberalization in the earnings test during over percent of the working beneficiaries raised their earnings from $ to $ the new ceiling. The earnings test does not apply to those aged and over who may earn any amount without forfeiting benefits. For this reason many of those with high earnings wait until age to start collecting benefits Although social security appears to have been an important factor in the decline in employment among those of retirement age other factors were operating as well. Increases in earnings and income over time enabled workers to save more in order to enjoy more years of leisure at older ages and a larger proportion of the elderly now have asset holdings and private pensions The decline in self-employment on the farm and in nonfarm industries also contributed to declining work at older ages since the self-employed retire at a later age than employees. Studies indicate that in years of relatively high unemployment retirement is accelerated. Compulsory retirement practices may also have had an effect. However the spread of compulsory retirement may itself have been stimulated by the availability of social security and the development of private pension systems There were additional incentives for the elderly to work longer however which have probably served to prevent labor force participation at older ages from falling even faster. Most notable may be the increase in the availability of white-collar employment which tends to make less demand on physical strength. Increases in part-time employment opportunities have made work more feasible for those wishing a limited schedule although the increase in part-time jobs may itself have been partly stimulated by the supply of older workers Short-Run and Long-Run Financing Problems Issues have arisen with respect to both the short-run and long-run financial situation of the social security system. The Administration is proposing measures to deal with both of these problems Legislation has resulted in increases in benefit awards as a percentage of preretirement earnings from percent in to percent in for the median wage earner aged years and over. Other liberalizations in benefits have occurred such as the increase in the dependent widow 's pension from percent to percent of the husband 's benefit if neither claimed benefits before age Increases in early retirements have also contributed to rising outlays. Despite increases in the payroll tax rate ( from percent in to percent in ) and in the maximum of earnings to be taxed ( from $ in to $ in ) receipts have not risen as rapidly as benefits The tax shortfall has been exacerbated by the high levels of unemployment and the relatively slow growth of earnings in the past few years. Preliminary figures for indicate that expenditures exceeded payroll tax receipts by $ billion or percent of tax receipts. Total expenditures including administrative costs exceeded total receipts including interest on assets by $ billion or percent. The cyclical component of the problem will eventually diminish with the economic recovery although a $ 4.4billion deficit is forecast for and the trust fund will be permanently reduced. In response to the decline in the trust fund the Administration is proposing to increase the combined social security tax rate paid by employers and employees by percentage point as of This increase will enable the trust fund to be maintained at a level of at least one-third of outgo for at least the next years Projections of the social security system indicate that program costs relative to payroll receipts under present law are likely to escalate considerably The size of the projected shortfall depends on assumptions about the birth rate the rate of inflation and the growth rate of real wages. Under commonly used assumptions ( births per woman of a percent rate of inflation and a percent growth rate in real wages ) expenditures would rise to percent of taxable payroll by the year an amount which if benefits were to be matched by tax receipts would imply a social security tax rate about double today 's level. However with a lower fertility rate ( ) and more pessimistic assumptions about inflation ( percent ) and real wage growth ( percent ) social security expenditures would require taxes of percent of payrolls by the year Optimistic economic assumptions on the other hand combined with a projected increase in the fertility rate to lead to payroll taxes of percent of the total payroll by Even this would represent a percent increase in the present tax rate One reason the long-run social security projections described above are so high is that legislation provided for the double-indexing of social security benefits. Under the legislation once a person starts getting benefits the amount is kept constant in real terms through automatic adjustments tied to increases in the CPI. However the legislation inadvertently provided for a second effect of inflation on future benefits for those who are now working since the schedule that relates retirement benefits to past earnings was also tied to the CPI. In this way replacement rates the ratio of retirement benefits to average wages in the year before retirement can automatically rise as a result of inflation. It has been estimated that under current law if nominal wages increase at percent and the CPI at percent per year replacement rates for the median wage earner at age would increase from percent in to percent in For low-wage workers the increase would be from percent to percent over the same period and would exceed percent by the year This rise in replacement rates for those retiring in the future is estimated to add about percent to program costs by the year compared to a system in which replacement rates remain at the level The Administration will propose a specific plan to modify the system so that benefit levels will rise at the same rate as average wages. The goal is to make a person 's benefits rise solely in accordance with wages during his working years and in accordance with the GPI in years after his retirement MEDICAL CARE The provision of medical care services in the United States is largely private but government plays a major and increasing role in the financing of medical expenditures. Between fiscal and fiscal total health expenditures rose from percent to percent of GNP ( Table ) During the same period the Federal share of the total health bill rose from percent to percent an expenditure in fiscal of $ billion. Federal funding of the hospital component of health expenditures has increased even more dramatically paying percent of the Nation 's hospital bill in fiscal As a result of the expansion of Federal and State funds and of private insurance consumers directly paid only percent of all hospital expenditures. Consumers paid nearly all of the remainder indirectly through taxes and insurance premiums The two major Federal programs are medicare and medicaid which were enacted as part of the Social Security Amendments of Medicare is a TABLE Total health expenditures and personal health expenditures selected fiscal years by source of funds [ Fiscal years ; percent except as noted ] Type of expenditure and source of funds Total health expenditures : Amount ( billions of dollars ) Percent of GNP Percent funded by public Personal health expenditures : Amount ( billions of dollars ) Percent distribution by source of funds : Total Direct payments Third party payments Private i nsurance Other private Federal State and local _ _ __ _ Hospital expenditures : Amount ( billions of dollars ) Percent distribution by source of funds : Total funds Direct payments.. Third party payments Private Public ._ Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Social Security Administration ) Federal program with uniform benefits available to the aged, to certain disabled persons covered by social security and to those with end-stage renal ( kidney ) disease. Medicare includes hospital insurance financed through social security taxes with benefits subject to a $ deductible as well as various copayments after the 60th day of hospitalization. A physician reimbursement program is included which requires a monthly premium of $ with benefits subject to a $ deductible and percent coinsurance. Federal expenditures on medicare doubled from to In fiscal they are expected to reach $ billion. Fiscal Federal expenditures per enrollee are estimated at $ but expenditures per beneficiary receiving hospital insurance benefits are estimated at $ and for those receiving supplementary medical insurance benefits $ Medicaid is funded by the States with Federal contributions accounting for from to percent of costs. The law provides categorical coverage of participants in the AFDC program ; in percent of AFDC recipients obtained medicaid benefits. Also covered are most of the aged blind and disabled in the supplemental security income program. Many States have also extended coverage to the medically indigent. Medicaid benefits and the population covered vary considerably across the States. In two States California and New York received percent of all medicaid benefits although they had only about percent of the poverty population Federal expenditures on medicaid have also increased rapidly and are estimated to be $ billion in fiscal averaging $ per participant. In ' addition to medicare and medicaid the Federal Government provides health care for veterans and military personnel ( costing $ billion in fiscal ) as well as for Indians and other groups ( $ billion in fiscal ) and it subsidizes medical research and physician education ( $ billion in fiscal ) The influence of government on medical care extends beyond its spending programs however. For example by exempting from taxable income an employer 's contributions for health insurance the government indirectly encourages the purchase of more insurance. Federal and State governments impose regulatory controls on hospitals and States regulate the training and licensing of physicians and other health professionals Thus government has considerable direct and indirect influence on the quantity quality distribution and price of medical care in the United States This review of medical care and the role of Federal programs centers on : ( ) The relation between changes in health status and changes in medical expenditures ; ( ) the personal financial impact of medical expenses ; and ( ) the relation between health insurance and resource allocation HEALTH STATUS AND MEDICAL EXPENDITURES The medical care system is clearly important in maintaining the Nation 's health. But the relation between various measures of health status and expenditures on medical care suggests that medical care is only one of a large number of factors affecting health Dramatic declines in mortality occurred during the first years of this century mainly because of improved sanitation heating and other amenities along with significant breakthroughs in medical technology. The development of vaccines penicillin and other drugs led to the control of many infectious diseases. Despite a relatively low level of medical expenditures and little public financing access to medical care was apparently sufficient to ensure a general dissemination of these medical gains Since there have been substantial increases in expenditures on medical care. Infant mortality rates have declined from deaths in the first year of life per live births in to in partly because of the decline in high-risk births ( e.g. births that are a mother 's fifth or more ) However life expectancy at age one has barely changed for males since though for females there has been some increase Studies of the relation between income and mortality among the States indicate that higher income actually tends to be positively associated with higher mortality even though expenditures on medical care increase with income. Many of the factors increasing mortality such as pollution and sedentary white-collar work are also associated with high income. Research studies show that after controlling for these factors as well as education and income increases in health expenditures are associated with declines in mortality but the effect is very slight. Moreover at the same level of income and health expenditure increases in educational attainment are strongly associated with lower mortality Comparisons across developed countries also indicate that there is no simple relation between health and income or health expenditures. Among the OEGD countries life expectancy for males at age tends to fall somewhat as income measured by gross domestic product ( GDP ) increases even though health expenditures seem to be strongly related to GDP. A fairly strong negative relation is found however between infant mortality and income. These patterns are illustrated by the contrast between Greece and the United States. Although per capita GDP is about times higher in the United States and per capita health expenditures are times as high life expectancy at birth is years for Greek males and years for American males. For females the difference is smaller : years for Greeks and years for Americans. And infant mortality rates are higher in Greece : in compared to in the United States There are wide differences among the developed countries with respect to public funding and provision of care which some believe has an important effect on health particularly of the poor. The United States tends to rely more on private insurance or personal expenditures than do most developed countries. But there is no indication that access to physicians ' and hospital services in the United States is actually more restricted than in countries with nationalized health insurance or health care. For example one study of visits to physicians in compared the situation in the United States before medicare and medicaid with that in Sweden where a substantially greater proportion of physicians ' services are paid for by national health insurance. The incidence of reported symptoms of sickness was higher in Sweden but the percentage who saw a doctor when they had a symptom was the same in both countries ( percent ) The ratio of visits to the incidence of symptoms was however somewhat lower in the United States for low-income persons ( percent versus percent for Sweden ) and higher for high-income persons in ( percent versus percent in Sweden ) In a second survey showed an increase in the ratio for all income levels in the United States ( percent ) with the lowest income group close to the level of the highest income group ( percent and percent respectively ) No data are available for Sweden in These general findings that in the United States there are a similar number of visits to physicians per reported symptom as in other developed countries with greater subsidization of medical care are confirmed by other studies comparing a broader range of countries including those with nationalized health services The United States however has high mortality rates despite seemingly low sickness rates and high utilization of medical resources. One possible explanation is that the higher mortality in the United States is not the result of chronic illness susceptible to medical treatment but is due to illness less readily affected by medical technology. The unusually high rates of mortality in the United States from cardiovascular diseases give this hypothesis some support. These diseases it should be noted are more likely to be influenced by life-style and environmental factors When health and income are compared across families in the United States persons with low incomes are found to have poorer health as measured by such indexes as days spent in bed and infant mortality rates than those with high income who live in the same area. In part the relation occurs because sickness can cause low income. But as was the case with international and State comparisons detailed studies cast doubt that income or access to medical resources plays a significant role in explaining these differences in health. In fact in recent years the poor have spent more days in the hospital and visited doctors at least as often as those who were not poor. Moreover as noted above a similar incidence of visits to physicians pel reported symptom was found for high- and for low-income levels in Even taking account of differences in sickness overall access to treatment seems fairly equalized Education has been found to be strongly associated with health in the United States and seems to account for the positive relation between income and health among persons living in the same area. Even when health expenditures are held constant the relation between education and health is important. Education could affect health because those with more education are more aware of the effects on health of smoking diet and exercise. Evidence suggests that people with more education are more skilled in using medical resources and are better able to detect warning signals of illness. Of course to some extent the chain of causation may also run the other way : those with better health may also obtain more schooling These studies of the factors affecting health status suggest that large additional expenditures on medical care may be a very costly way of obtaining small improvements in measured health status for this country. Apart from medical care there are other ways in which the Nation 's health may be improved. New advances are likely to result from research on medical technology and drugs as in the past. Rising levels of education should tend to improve the health of the population. More important may be further research on and the spread of current knowledge about the effect of life-style and environment on health status HEALTH INSURANCE HEALTH EXPENDITURES AND FAMILY INCOME Given the current level of medical resources it is important to distinguish between the effects on health of small changes in medical expenditures and the effects of the absence of any medical care at all. Because medical care is beneficial and the incidence of serious illness is generally unpredictable people prefer to have medical insurance so that large unpredictable expenditures can be more easily budgeted on a routine basis A large proportion of the U.S. population is covered by private health insurance. On the basis of a survey of households it is estimated that about percent of the population have private health insurance for hospital care and percent have surgical benefits Virtually all persons years old and over are covered by medicare The percentage of this group with private insurance dropped from percent in to percent in after medicare was introduced. Since then however an increasing proportion have been purchasing private insurance which supplements medicare by paying for deductibles and coinsurance. The low-income elderly are eligible for medicaid which supplemented medicare for close to one-fifth of the elderly in According to household survey estimates in about million Americans under age had no private insurance against hospital costs and million were without surgical insurance. An estimated percent ( million ) of the uninsured under years of age were from families with an annual income below $ However an unknown proportion of the uninsured have other sources of coverage or access to free or low-cost care provided by public sources. No unduplicated count of those receiving benefits under all programs is available. In million persons received medicaid benefits at some time during the year of whom about million were under age including million AFDC recipients. In fiscal Veteran 's hospitals provided free hospitalization to million persons and million doctors ' visits on an outpatient basis. The miliary provided care for the million men and women in the Armed Forces ; million ex-military personnel and their dependents and the dependents of current military personnel were eligible for care under the civilian health and medical care program for the uniformed services ( CHAMPUS ) Care was also provided to Indians and others through the Public Health Service. State and local government spending for health excluding medicaid exceeded $ billion in Another way to evaluate the extent of coverage for high-cost medical expenses among the poor is to examine the data on expenditures incurred and sources of payment. In persons in lower-income families ( defined here as an annual income of $ or less for a family of four ) incurred expenditures of $ per year on medical care compared to expenditures of $ by those who were not poor ( Table ) Sources of funding differed however : medicare medicaid and other government programs paid for percent of the expenditures of lower-income families compared to percent for other families who as expected relied more on private health insurance. Out-of-pocket medical care payments averaged $ for those with lower income and $ for those with higher income Hospital expenditures are likely to be less discretionary than other medical expenses and the poor incurred somewhat higher hospital expenditures than those with higher incomes. However both groups were liable for only a small fraction of hospital bills. Mean out-of-pocket hospital expenses for those requiring a hospital stay were only $ for the poor and $ for others Although lower-income groups seemed to have obtained the same amount of health resources as others in mostly subsidized by public sources outlays on health consumed a larger proportion of their income. Outlays includ- TABLE Expenditures per person for different health services by family income status and source of payments Health expenditures ( dollars ) Payment as percent of total health expenditures Type of expenditure and family income status Total Total expenditures per person. _ Below near poverty Above near poverty Out of pocket Total Medicaid and other Medicare Voluntary insurance free care Out of pocket Other sources2 Physician expenditures Below near poverty Above near poverty Other health expenditures s _ _ Below near poverty Above near poverty In patient hospital expenditures Below near poverty Above near poverty Near poverty is a measure above the poverty threshold used by the Bureau of the Census. It was $ for a family of four in Includes free and non-free care provided by Veterans Administration hospitals workers ' compensation and military and civilian health and medical care programs for the uniformed services and their families > Includes expenditures on prescription and nonprescription drugs dental care appliances such as eyeglasses care by nonphysician medical practitioners ( nurses psychologists Christian Science practitioners ) ambulance service other outpatient services and supplies Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare ( Bureau of Health Services Research and Evaluation ) ing both out-of-pocket expenditures and payments for health insurance premiums were estimated to be percent of income on average for lowerincome families and percent for higher-income families It appears that a small proportion of the population experiences catastrophic medical expenditures relative to their income in any year. In percent of all families were estimated to incur medical and psychiatric expenditures of $ or more. Eighty percent of the expenditures over $ were paid for by private insurance medicare medicaid and sources other than the family. About percent of all families had outlays ( out-of-pocket expenses plus insurance premiums ) of $ or more of which percent represented routine payments for insurance premiums. For lower-income families percent had outlays of $ or more during the year ; and at higher income levels percent had such outlays. These medical outlays which include out-of-pocket expenses and insurance premiums exceeded percent of income for percent of all families and the proportion was percent for lower-income families and percent for higher-income families These estimates overstate the relation between outlays and income however because lower-income families with large health outlays are more likely to have a current income that is temporarily depressed below the usual level because of the sickness of an earner The data reviewed on expenditures and outlays refer to Since then medicaid has expanded : from serving million persons it served million persons in and third-party payments ( both public and private ) have accounted for a larger share of all expenditures Most Americans do have some coverage for health expenditures through public or private insurance or publicly provided care. However it is believed that a substantial proportion do not have coverage for very large medical expenses relative to their income and assets although it is also believed that such coverage is spreading rapidly. The Administration has proposed providing catastrophic health insurance coverage for medicare participants This proposal is discussed below RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND COSTS One of the major concerns about medical care is the sharp rise in costs. Since the medical component of the CPI has increased much faster than the overall CPI ( Table ) Prices of hospital services have increased at a much faster rate than physicians ' fees or other medical services. In part this is the result of an increase in the quality of hospital services not fully reflected in the CPI. As indicated in Table when total hospital expenditures per patient day are deflated by a crude price index for hospital inputs it appears that increases in real resources explain a substantial amount of the rate of increase in expenditures per patient day. During the 5-year period since medicare and medicaid were introduced to the rate of increase of real resources per patient day nearly doubled and accounted for about one-half of the nominal increase in hospital expenses per patient day TABLE Changes in prices of various medical and hospital services and expenses [ Percent change ; annual rate ] Hospital expenses and services per patient day * Consumer prices Period Annual average : to to to to to Real expenses Medical care services All items All services less medical care services Expenses Semi private room All Physicians ' fees Assump- Assumption A tion B Change from preced- " W : Beginning patient days have been adjusted for outpatient visits Includes some medical care services not shown separately Based on data reported by the American Hospital Association for community hospitals for year ending September Labor and nonlabor inputs adjusted for price changes Deflated by a weighted average of the consumer price index and an index of hospital wages Deflated by a weighted average of the consumer price index and adjusted hourly earnings index in the private nonfarm economy Change for all services Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) American Hospital Association and Council of Economic Advisers Resistance by taxpayers to the increasing burden of medicare and medicaid and pressures to restrain medical costs have led in the past to pressures for a more formal mechanism to control costs. During the period of the Economic Stabilization Program starting in August and ending April the health industry was placed under more stringent price controls than most industries. In addition to price ceilings on individual services controls were also placed on the increase in total annual hospital expenditures. These controls in effect curtailed the amount as well as the price of the service provided. From to increases in hospital resource use per patient day did slow. However it is not clear whether the slower growth rate represented a gain in efficiency through a more careful use of resources a curtailment of quality improvements that would have been desirable or less efficiency through a greater rate of admission of less serious cases. Since the end of controls real hospital resources have increased at a very rapid rate partly to " catch up " and perhaps partly in anticipation of a permanent controls program. Hospital expenses per patient day increased at the very high rate of percent from to Some of this expansion in medical resources is probably a desired quality improvement. There is considerable evidence however that much is a consequence of the growth of private insurance and public funding which has led to a system where " third parties " pay for an increasing share of medical services particularly hospital services. The most common form of health insurance has low or no deductibles and low cost-sharing ( coinsurance ) especially for hospital care. This type of coverage has been shown to have a substantial effect on the price and quantity of services. For example families with insurance have a greater number and longer length of stays in hospitals and more visits to physicians. The patients may themselves prefer this extra health care because the extra cost to them is small. In addition hospitals and doctors knowing that most of the costs will be paid by third parties who are not in a position to decide on what services should be provided are also likely to expand the quality quantity and price of their services. As a result patients receive services that they would not value enough to pay for if they were given additional income equal to the cost of the service. In this way too many resources and probably not the optimal kind are allocated to medical services. The system encourages the development and use of high-cost techniques and a reliance on institutional rather than home care Unlike most other forms of insurance private health insurance is largely purchased through the employer in a group policy. This practice has been substantially encouraged by the income tax and payroll tax systems which exempt from taxation the employer 's contribution for this form of insurance even though it is really an addition to the worker 's income. Up to a point it is to the mutual benefit of employer and employee to favor wage increases in the form of untaxed fringe benefits rather than in cash. As workers have moved into increasingly higher marginal tax brackets this incentive has increased. In employers paid all of the costs for health insurance O premiums for percent of employees and none of the costs for percent. By employers paid alj of the costs for percent and none of the costs for only percent The Government further reduces the cost of insurance by allowing a deduction under the personal income tax of half the cost of premiums paid by the taxpayer up to $ All medical expenditures including the other half of the premium cost that exceed percent of income may also be deducted. Estimated tax losses in fiscal are $ billion for exclusion of employers ' contributions and $ billion for itemized medical deductions including insurance premiums As a result of these tax subsidies the cost to the consumer of paying for medical care indirectly through insurance is sharply reduced. Indeed it has been estimated that in the Federal Government paid to percent of the premium costs of insurance through forgone tax receipts. Even taking into account the insurance companies ' administrative costs and the costs of induced additional medical care a result of the tax subsidy is that families with group coverage paid for at least in part by the employer spend less on medical care by buying insurance than they would have done by paying directly. In an unsubsidized market consumers would have the incentive to pay out of pocket for routine budgetable medical care and to confine their insurance to very large and unpredictable expenditures. Faced with insurance at a substantial discount they are induced to buy more comprehensive insurance covering expenditures from the first dollar The problems of insurance are exacerbated in the case of medicare and medicaid because the mechanism of higher premiums which may provide weak incentives to economize in our subsidized private insurance market hardly works at all in the public system. Although there are medicare deductibles there is no copayment for the first days of hospital care. Under medicaid there are generally no deductibles and no coinsurance for hospital and physicians ' services Perhaps the main feature that fosters cost increases is the method by which medicare medicaid and most Blue Gross policies reimburse the hospitals These insurers pay a share of the hospital 's costs based on the percentage of all costs accounted for by their respective beneficiaries. Because hospitals have the assurance that a large percentage of their revenues will be based on cost reimbursement there is little direct restraint to keep costs down. The Federal Government is now experimenting with prospective reimbursement schemes whereby hospitals are told in advance how much they will be reimbursed per unit of service provided ( e.g. patient admissions patient days ) MEDICAID AND MEDICARE PROPOSALS Medicare and medicaid have an important role to play because many of the poor and aged have difficulty financing health insurance premiums deductibles and cost-sharing. In part medicaid has expanded the use of medical services by the poor and has changed patterns of use from the public hospital or charity clinic to private doctors and nonpublic hospitals Medicaid benefits are unevenly distributed across States however with some of the wealthiest States receiving more than four times as much Federal money per low-income person as poorer States. In addition many other health care programs are funded under narrow categorical legislation which makes coordination difficult For these reasons the President has proposed to merge medicaid and other programs such as mental health services and neighborhood centers to form a single State block grant for health services under the proposed Financial Assistance for Health Care Act. The grant would be distributed among States according to such specific measures of need as the number of low-income persons. This would replace the present method of determining the distribution of medicaid funds and funds for other formula and project grants which use a wide variety of often arbitrary criteria such as narrow categories of disease or family status. The new formula grant would redistribute Federal funds more equitably since need would be the basic criterion. The new formula grant proposes Federal funding of $ billion for fiscal Under the proposed legislation States would be provided with maximum flexibility to allocate their funds among programs. In addition States would be required to undertake planning and cost control activities and would also be able to experiment with different forms of giving the aid whether through insurance vouchers Health Maintenance Organizations or direct State provision. Thus some innovations in health financing which would have implications for slowing the increase in medical costs may be stimulated The Administration has also proposed the Medicare Improvements Act of which would provide better protection for the elderly and disabled from catastrophic health expenses and would also help to control costs Under the cost-sharing reforms beneficiaries would pay the deductible and percent of hospital and nursing home charges until the proposed maximum of $ in out-of-pocket expenditures is reached after which the Government would pay all costs for covered services. For physicians ' services beneficiaries would pay a deductible of $ per year and percent of the charges up to a proposed $ of out-of-pocket expenditures. All expenditures above that would be paid by the Government. It is also proposed to limit annual increases in Federal reimbursements to medical care providers to percent for a day of hospital care and percent for physicians ' services These measures are expected to result in Federal cost savings of $ billion in compared to expected costs under the current medicare provisions CHAPTER The World Economy in T HE RECESSION APPEARS TO DIFFER from previous recessions not only in its breadth and depth but also in the length of time it is taking for recoveries to take hold. Although the fall in activity rates generally seems to have halted by the end of summer in many countries recoveries seem slow and appear fragile. The quintupling of the price of oil over the past several years has been a major factor deepening the world recession and inhibiting economic recovery. First it ensured the simultaneity of the recessions in many countries. Second structural changes necessary to adjust to the increased cost of energy have compounded the uncertainties created by the inflationary wave of Because of the historically very strong inflationary pressures that preceded the downturn and persisted well into the recession authorities in many countries were cautious in the timing and degree to which they moved toward expansionary policies late in and in early Since mid1975 however the thrust of policy has become broadly expansionary in almost every industrial country and policy measures put in place have cumulated to impart a very considerable stimulus. As a result individual economies now seem to be poised for a return to acceptable growth paths particularly since private sector assets have increased and liquidity positions have improved considerably over the past year. Recoveries could therefore broaden out very quickly. Just as the downturn was deepened because activity fell at the same time in many countries recovery paths may become considerably steeper than now appears likely because upturns in individual countries led by the recovery in the United States are beginning to reinforce each other THE CURRENT STATE OF THE CYCLE By early the slowdown in economic activity that had started in late in a number of industrial countries had broadened into the most widespread recession since World War II. By May industrial output in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) area had fallen to a trough percent below the cyclical peak reached in November This drop in economic activity in the industrial countries necessarily had severe repercussions throughout the rest of the world. Consequently in the volume of world trade registered its first significant decline in three decades. At the low point in the first quarter of the flow of goods across national borders was percent below its historical high reached in the second quarter of With the broadening and deepening of the recession the thrust of economic policy in most major industrial countries turned increasingly expansionary during the year The bottom of the recession appears to have been reached at least for most industrial countries sometime during the summer of The recovery first became apparent in the United States and Japan early in the year and is now in train in Germany and France. In the other major economies the downward trend seems to have been halted. But the underlying strength of a broad upturn in activity is contingent upon the restoration of confidence in the private sector DOMESTIC DEMAND In the major foreign industrial countries the stabilization of economic activity around mid-1975 was largely the result of previous increases in government expenditures and the ending of the inventory adjustment Earlier in inventory decumulation constituted a considerable drag on activity almost everywhere. By midyear reduced liquidation of inventories began to lend some support to industrial activity and by the autumn industrial production was moving up albeit slowly in an increasing number of countries ( Table ) TABLE Changes in industrial production in selected industrial countries [ Percent change ; seasonally adjusted ] Peak Country Peak to December United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom _ Nov. Mar. Nov. Aug. May Apr. Oct. From preceding month in to : Peak to June July August ! 1'.5 Sep- tember Q 2io October November i.i Source : National sources Final demand however has not turned up decisively. One relatively bright spot in the private demand situation is the positive response of residential construction activity to easier monetary policy and to direct fiscal measures. But the upturn in private consumption demand has remained hesitant except in the United States and so far has been unable to provide the consumption-led upswing hoped for in a number of countries. This reflects in part developments in the growth of disposable personal incomes In real terms disposable incomes have grown only slowly despite the lessening of price pressures and the adoption of various fiscal measures designed to support the growth of income. Incomes have been affected first and foremost by the large rise in unemployment, although income maintenance programs have tended to offset a significant part of earnings losses In addition increases in wage rates have slowed considerably and wage drift has diminished because of the deteriorating employment situation and rising short-time work Perhaps equally important for the behavior of consumer markets was the rise in household saving rates to postwar highs during the year ( Table ) To some extent the increase in the propensity to save in many industrial countries was directly related to the recession. It reflected uncertainties about the employment outlook and the large fall in the demand for housing and durable goods. These purchases usually require large down payments which are often financed by drawing down savings and substantial borrowing which implies additional dissavings. But in large part saving rates also increased because of the inflationary environment of the past several years Real financial assets were eroded significantly during ; and the large price rises for goods and services purchased frequently such as food and fuel reduced discretionary spending power and led to an increase in precautionary savings. The desire to rebuild real asset positions and renewed uncertainties about price prospects help explain why saving rates although declining somewhat have remained remarkably high. ( For a fuller discussion of saving behavior in the United States see Chapters and ) TABLE Personal or household saving rates in selected industrial countries [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted ] average United States _ Japan Germany United Kingdom 1Q7Q 107H 1Q7/I III II Note. For the United States and the United Kingdom the rate is personal saving as percent of personal disposable income. For other countries the rate is household saving as percent of disposable income Source : National sources During the second half of retail sales were generally increasing and consumer surveys indicated a moderate improvement in the way private households were judging economic prospects. But unemployment continued to increase or at any rate did not decline ( Table ) By late the number of unemployed in Western Europe reached postwar highs and on average was almost twice as large as in And unless certain income maintenance programs are extended payments may begin to decline With the decline in demand price pressures have been reduced. The moderation in the rate of price increases has in fact been dramatic in a number of countries especially in comparison with the performance in ( Table ) But in most countries the progress on the price side appears to be slow- ISO TABLE Unemployment rates adjusted to U.S. concepts in selected industrial countries [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted ] Country United States. _ Canada Japan France Germany Italy Great Britain average II III IV Unemployment as percent of the civilian labor force October October-November average Note. The quarterly adjusted data for the European countries make use of annual adjustment factors and should be viewed as approximate indicators under U.S. concepts. These data should be viewed as approximate only because of the difficulty in adjusting very disparate concepts Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE Changes in consumer prices in selected industrial countries [ Percent change ; annual rate ] 1O7/I average United States Canada.. Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom II III Oct Nov Note. Change from is based on annual data. Changes for and the quarters of are based on data for end of month in period. The monthly changes are simple annual rates ( monthly change times ) Quarterly changes are compounded annual rates Source : National sources ing and inflation rates remain unacceptably high. Higher food and energy prices and some increases in the prices of manufactured goods are putting pressures on price levels well before the productivity gains that normally accompany recoveries have had their full downward effect With the lessening of price pressures new wage contracts have also moderated in some countries. But because less progress has been made in containing inflation elsewhere a number of countries for example Canada the United Kingdom Belgium Finland and some other smaller countries have instituted some type of incomes policy The evolution of consumption demand and interest rate movements may be crucial to the eventual support the recovery can derive from a resumption of investment spending. Capacity utilization is at very low levels over a wide range of industries in many countries. Consequently private investment intention surveys have until recently shown continuous downward revisions of projected expenditures. Latest surveys indicate that the erosion of business confidence may have come to a halt but strong support to activity should not be expected from the side of private investment expenditures over the next several quarters EXTERNAL DEMAND At the same time that private consumption expenditures failed to impart the upward impetus to economic activity hoped for earlier in external demand fell. Countries experiencing a fall in internal demand in earlier periods generally derived support to the level of economic activity from foreign trade. But trade during the recession failed to conform to this pattern because the cyclical downturn was simultaneous across countries. Trade volumes fell significantly for the first time in postwar history mainly because of a drop in demand among industrial countries for each other 's products Imports of major industrial countries began to decline in the autumn of reflecting both weak final demand and inventory decumulation The latter may have been particularly important because of the generally high import content of inventories in many countries. In value terms the fall in imports amounted to almost percent between the second half of and the first half of and in volume terms imports fell by percent Exports of industrial countries also fell during the first months of but less than imports ( Table ) Exports to OPEC and to Communist countries have continued to grow and shipments to lesser developed countries which are not members of OPEC ( non-oil LDCs ) have been reduced relatively little. The fact that a large number of non-oil LDCs have been able to maintain their import levels in the face of falling demand in industrial countries and rising oil prices largely reflects their much above average export earnings in the 2-year period to mid-1974. In addition industrial countries seeking to bolster their export activity as domestic demand shrank increased their extension of trade credits. Because of the cyclical fall in imports and the somewhat better-sustained level of exports there have been significant shifts out of deficit in the trade balances of the industrial countries. These shifts are mirrored by larger deficits of non-oil LDCs and shrinking surpluses of OPEC With the recession bottoming out around midyear import demand in the large industrial countries stabilized during the summer months and trade among industrial countries appears to have resumed its growth in the second half of But increases in world trade are likely to be constrained to some extent by a deceleration in the growth of import demand of OPEC and by a possible slowdown in shipments to non-oil LDCs Although the slide in the exports from LDCs to the larger industrial countries seems to have been halted in recent months the fall in commodity prices from their cyclical peaks has yet to be reflected fully in earnings figures There is usually a considerable lag between a change in spot prices and a change in unit values of trade because a fair amount of trade moves under long-run contracts and contract rates take some time to adjust to new spot prices. Lags also occur between the time orders are placed and prices agreed upon and the time of actual shipments ; hence trade values at any given time TABLE Merchandise trade in selected industrial countries [ Billions of U.S. dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Country and trade item III United States : Exports Imports Balance IV II III Oct-Nov average Canada : Exports Imports Balance Japan : Exports Imports Balance France : Exports Imports Balance ? Italy : Exports mports Balance _ United Kingdom : Exports Imports Balance Six other industrial countries : Exports Imports Balance Germany : Exports Imports Balance * Data converted to dollars on the basis of average exchange rates as published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin October only Note. Merchandise trade data for the United States Canada Japan and the United Kingdom are on a balance of payments basis ; others are on a customs basis. Imports for the United States are f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) values ; for Germany and Italy c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) values ; for othe- countries f.o.b. ( free on board ) values. Exports for the United States are f.a.s. values and for all other countries f.o.b. values Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers reflect prices of some earlier period. A second factor likely to inhibit the growth of import demand of non-oil LDCs is that debt burdens are mounting as a consequence of growing trade deficits. Thus external financing difficulties may force curtailment of order activity in some of these countries. To a certain extent some smaller OECD countries which were able to maintain demand levels well into and early are beginning to experience similar problems. External financing problems may be increased by the recent rise in OPEC 's export price of oil as it works its way through the individual economies The oil-exporting countries are expected to continue to increase their import demand though not as rapidly as in and Growth rates will naturally tend to be lower because imports are expanding from a much higher base than in More significantly physical as well as emerging financial constraints in the high-import-absorbing countries such as Indonesia and Iran are limiting growth in import demand. Recent data show that a significant reduction in the rate of growth of export flows to the oilexporting countries as a group is in progress THE ROLE OF EXTERNAL DEMAND IN THE RECOVERY Although little impetus to world recovery can be expected from changes in the import demand of nonindustrial countries the current resumption of growth of domestic demand in the industrial countries could lend considerable support to world demand. Just as world trade during the recession fell by more than might be expected from its past relationship to changes in overall demand trade may recover faster than one would normally expect as demand in industrial countries begins to turn up A major factor in the resumption of growth in trading volumes is the swing in the inventory cycle. As noted above inventories in many countries have a relatively high import content hence trade flows are particularly sensitive to inventory changes. In addition the past recession has been one in which expenditures for services have held up relatively well while those for goods fell disproportionately. As final demand begins to turn around this pattern is likely to be reversed and demand for goods will grow faster than that for services. This will result in a stimulus to world trade over and above what could be expected from the observed changes in total demand Although recovery paths as currently projected do not indicate a steep upturn the effect on world trade of the growth in demand that actually is occurring should not be underestimated. The U.S. economy is moving from a fall in real GNP of about percent between the first half of and the first half of to a rise of perhaps percent or so from the first half of to the first half of Such a shift alone would have a considerable effect in expanding the volume of world trade. In addition recovery in the United States is being accompanied by similar although perhaps somewhat smaller shifts in the growth rates of other major industrial economies. The swing in activity rates over the comparable period for the six largest foreign economies is from a fall of percent to a projected rise of almost percent with the largest swing occurring in Germany. Changes in demand of this sort produce significant effects on world trade at any time. But because of the simultaneity of the upturns these effects are likely to be substantially magnified Hopes for recovery of domestic economic activity in most of the smaller countries and in a number of larger ones as well have centered upon export-led growth. Because of the depth and the length of the recession the authorities in some of these countries have been urging others particularly the United States to adopt more expansionary policies that would produce greater external stimulus and thereby help put their economies back on a satisfactory growth path. Our analysis indicates however that further expansionary action in the United States within reasonable bounds would do little to accelerate world recovery The evidence suggests that an additional percentage point of growth of the U.S. economy over and above what is currently expected for may produce an additional increase in the volume of world trade of no more than percent in that year. By partly because of multiplier effects the extra percentage point of growth in U.S. demand could be expected to induce an expansion in world trade of percent. The effect that such a change in the growth of world trade would have on economic activity in the major industrial countries is very small indeed and clearly can not be decisive to the path of world recovery. For example the effect on German gross domestic product ( GDP ) would be virtually negligible : less than percent in and a bit over percent by Effects on other European countries would be of similar magnitude. Although the impact on Canada and Japan would be somewhat greater it would by no means be of overwhelming significance. Canadian GDP in might be percent higher than it would otherwise have been and Japanese GDP might be increased by percent. * As noted above external demand began to revive in the second half of as the expansionary measures taken in many countries over the past several quarters began to work through the several economies. A resumption in the growth of export demand such as is in progress now in addition to its direct effect on activity can further quicken the pace of world recovery by its effect on business confidence and on the general economic climate. But a slightly faster growth in world trade than is now foreseen can not make the crucial difference in the turnaround in economic activity in the industrial countries. The main impetus must clearly come from internal demand. And the path of internal demand over the next several quarters depends primarily upon the response of the private sector to the domestic policy measures taken last year GOVERNMENT POLICIES Governments in most of the industrial countries responded to the deepening recession early in and the continued weakness of final demand through the summer by adopting successive measures designed to bring their economies back to more normal rates of growth. Earlier in the year with inflation rates still high expansionary measures except in Germany tended mainly to reverse earlier restrictive policies and involved for example the easing of credit and public expenditure ceilings. But since midyear the thrust of policy has become broadly expansionary almost everywhere except in Great Britain and Canada where however policies had not been * These calculations derive from special simulations produced by the LINK model by Professor Lawrence R. Klein of the University of Pennsylvania. The LINK results are in broad agreement with those derived from other econometric models and with simpler calculations based solely on the relative importance of exports to the United States for each of the economies in question notably restrictive earlier and where inflation rates continued high relative to levels Discount rates have been cut monetary aggregates have been growing significantly faster than in and expansionary fiscal measures were adopted in most major countries. Thus the fiscal and monetary stimuli built into the various economies have been considerable. The fiscal packages announced at the end of the summer excluding multiplier effects amount to roughly 3/2 percent of GNP in Italy and * percent l/ percent and J4 percent of GNP in France Japan and Germany respectively. Although some of these measures will not come into effect until later this year they are in addition to steps taken during the first half of and as such they cumulate to considerably more than the impacts cited above. The large budget deficits foreseen in most countries are to some extent cyclically determined ; but even on an estimated high-employment basis the shift in fiscal deficits of some countries and therefore in discretionary policy appears to be substantial. Monetary conditions have eased almost everywhere ; and interest rates notably short-term rates have come down significantly THE GENERAL OUTLOOK With the policy measures now in place the strength of confidence may be the crucial element in determining the pace and breadth of the current recovery. Over the past months liquidity positions in the private sector have improved significantly. Corporations ' debt maturities have been lengthened and consumer debt outstanding is at low levels in relation to disposable incomes. On the whole it appears that private sector demand is mainly inhibited by uncertainty. With growing confidence recovery paths may well become steep particularly because expansionary actions have been taken simultaneously in many countries as they had in In contrast to however purchasing power in oil-importing countries continues to be siphoned off by the higher foreign price for oil. Furthermore capacity utilization is currently at considerably lower overall levels ; hence bottlenecks are not likely to develop at an early stage of the recovery As the recovery proceeds however particularly as it starts from low primary-stage inventory levels in many countries pressure 6n some industrial sectors could become severe well before the upswing becomes broad-based and before overall capacity utilization reaches more normal levels. For example in the United States overall capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector at its cyclical peak in the third quarter of was percent as measured by the Federal Reserve index ; but at the same time capacity utilization for firms processing raw materials had approached post-Korean war highs. It may also be that general measures of spare physical capacity do not serve well in periods following relatively long and deep recessions. During such recessions effective capacity rather than being added to as is generally assumed in calculations of potential capacity may grow only slightly or may even be consumed. Actually usable capacity therefore tends to be less and in some cases considerably less than calculated Furthermore the current upswing comes at a time when the world economy has begun to adjust to the higher relative price of energy. This adjustment implies an increasing obsolescence of high-energy-using equipment where alternative production methods are being devised. Thus although this structural shift adds to demand for new equipment it may reduce currently usable capacity in some sectors. Finally the large increases in exports to OPEC which have given considerable support to activity during the recession are largely concentrated in goods incorporating precisely those industrial materials that tended to be in short supply early in the upswing Although the current outlook carries a number of downside risks the above discussion points to the existence of very real upside risks. A significantly faster recovery than now projected could lead to a repetition of the inflationary pattern of This outcome would not necessarily imply a return to double-digit inflation. Perhaps only one-half of the acceleration in inflation rates in the industrial countries from an annual rate of ^ percent in to over percent by the end of can be attributed to cyclical factors. Exogenous shocks such as the increase in the import price of oil and shortfalls in grain harvests may have accounted for the rest. But significant upward pressure on price levels even if inflation rates remain below the two-digit level may revive inflationary expectations. Such a development because of its possible effect on saving rates could carry the seeds of renewed curtailment in the growth of private demand For the short run the major policy task in the industrial countries seems to center on the lessening of uncertainties in the private sector. Some policy makers have suggested that this can best be achieved by a steady policy stance supportive of the recovery. Uncertainties about future policy action both in demand management and in social policy should not be added to the uncertainties already created by the oil crisis and by the inflationary experience of the past several years INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION The experience of has shown that simultaneous measures to reflate national economies without due regard to the amount of spending power that is being built up collectively can lead to worldwide inflation Similarly the simultaneous deflationary policies of led to cumulative recessions. Thus in formulating national demand management policies explicit account needs to be taken of changes in world demand in order to avoid the misreading of the changes in demand forces that occurred in and in If domestic policy objectives are to be achieved efficiently in an interdependent world economic changes and policy goals in other countries must be given explicit consideration precisely because they affect the path of any national economy even the largest Faced with the great economic difficulties of and the threat that these might be intensified by divisive action governments have striven to strengthen the mechanisms of international cooperation and understanding These efforts are exemplified by the Economic Summit at Rambouillet in November a meeting of heads of government of six major industrial countries and by the beginning in December of the Conference on International Economic Cooperation ( CIEC ) which involves a dialogue between industrial countries oil producers and non-oil LDCs. Some progress has also been made in matters involving trade and international monetary arrangements. The commitment to pursue internationally compatible policies and to avoid beggar-thy-neighbor policies may become increasingly important in months to come since unemployment levels are likely to remain high in the early stages of the recovery and some sectors of the economy will tend to lag considerably behind a general upturn in activity. The political pressures on governments to take a narrowly nationalistic view of these problems may therefore intensify TRADE POLICIES Pressures for protectionist actions which resulted from the worldwide recession and were latent throughout much of intensified in a number of countries toward the end of the year. Recognizing that beggar-thy-neighbor policies can only serve to make everybody ultimately poorer the governments of the OECD countries except Portugal renewed in May the pledge they had made a year earlier to refrain from taking measures specifically aimed at improving their individual trade positions. As a result international trading arrangements were not seriously breached during the course of and there have been few significant departures from the pledge. On the import side a number of smaller OECD countries Portugal Finland Iceland New Zealand and Yugoslavia have instituted import deposit or licensing schemes. ( An import deposit scheme in effect in Italy was lifted in March ) Among the larger countries only Australia which had earlier cut some tariffs imposed tariff increases or quotas on a relatively wide range of goods. Political pressure to institute protectionist measures was particularly evident in Great Britain where the government in December imposed restrictive import measures on a limited number of products. On the export side a number of governments among them the French Italian and British have instituted or expanded fiscal and monetary measures specifically designed to encourage exports Against this background the heads of government of six major industrial countries at the Economic Summit reaffirmed their commitment to the principles of the OECD trade pledge and agreed that the time schedule of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations ( MTN ) now under way in Geneva should be accelerated. The MTN aim at achieving substantial tariff cuts or elimination of tariffs in some areas a significant expansion in agricultural trade and a reduction in nontariff barriers by the end of This con- stitutes an ambitious program yet a necessary one in the current economic and political setting Progress in has mainly been toward laying the basis for actual negotiations in and The preparatory work for the MTN proved to be more time consuming compared to that in preceding trade negotiations because of the larger number of participants and because for the first time a wide range of nontariff barriers are being included. Unlike preceding negotiations the MTN have been marked by a concentrated effort within the United States to reach a broad domestic consensus on what they are to achieve Progress in Geneva has been made on a draft code for the regulation of product standards and the treatment of tropical products. It is expected that broad agreement will be reached in on the major elements of a tariff-negotiating plan and on the procedure for achieving a meaningful liberalization of quantitative restrictions. It is further hoped that substantial progress can be made this year on procedures for dealing with questions of subsidies government procurement and safeguards against injurious import penetration so that substantive negotiations can begin. The United States also continues to work toward developing improved procedures and agreed principles on assured access to supply The admittedly difficult area in which little movement can be discerned is agriculture. The problems in the agricultural area are well known and of long standing. First they concern the great comparative advantage that the United States and some other primary producers have over producers in the European Community ( EC ) Second there are different approaches toward maintenance of farm incomes with the United States moving away from price stabilization and production controls and the EC firmly committed to price supports. Because of the deep-seated problems in this area it was particularly important that the heads of government at the Economic Summit specifically emphasized their commitment to achieve a significant expansion of trade also in agriculture INTERNATIONAL MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS Discussions initiated in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in about the structure of a reformed international monetary system were quickly overtaken by events in early Growing pressures on price levels and volatile short-term capital flows led to the adoption of de facto generalized floating in March Toward the end of the quadrupling of the export price of OPEC oil brought about a fundamental change in the international payments structure. Oil-importing countries as a group began to be faced with large current account deficits vis-a-vis the oil exporters at least for a number of years until import demand in oil-exporting countries can rise to match export revenues and until importing countries develop alternative sources of energy and succeed in economizing on energy use. Consequently financial markets and official international monetary arrangements had to adapt to rapidly changing payment patterns including an enormous increase in capital flows connected with the financing of the so-called " oil deficits. " Moreover there were wide disparities in inflation rates among countries. In these circumstances the flexibility of the exchange rate regime that had emerged after the breakdown of the parity system became increasingly important in facilitating trade and payment flows in and Of course the monetary fiscal and other policies that individual authorities adopt to stabilize their economies and to adapt to the higher oil import bill whether by increasing net exports borrowing from official or private sources or drawing on reserve assets constitutes " managing " their exchange rate in the wider sense of the term. It is of continuing importance that this " management " of exchange rates not lead to competitive devaluations or other selfdefeating and disruptive policies but be accomplished in an internationally cooperative manner The financing of the large external deficits of oil importers over the past years has been accomplished considerably more smoothly than had been anticipated earlier. Financial markets turned out to be very adaptable and the more flexible exchange rate system helped to avoid the market disruptions so often experienced during past periods of strain. Furthermore deficits were somewhat smaller than was earlier foreseen because of a faster rise of import demand in oil-exporting countries and a reduction in the demand for oil imports resulting from resistance to high oil prices conservation efforts and the recession. Finally expansion of international liquidity through increased use of IMF credit including the creation of the Oil Facility in the IMF and increases in official lending helped ease more serious financing strains. Traditional concepts of measurement of total international liquidity such as those published by the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) however have dubious applicability in today 's international monetary system. Some of the currency reserve assets for example ^ those accumulated by oil-exporting countries tend to be " inactive " assets because they represent the intended accumulation of foreign investment and differ in important respects from earlier foreign currency accumulations by monetary authorities. And largescale official borrowing in foreign financial markets has demonstrated the ability of countries to create liquidity through debt operations. The fact that not only the Eurocurrency markets but also national money markets such as the U.S. market are open to foreign borrowers and lenders is very important in this respect and has helped smooth the financing of external deficits The financial surpluses of OPEC in the first instance were largely invested in very short-term assets. But during considerable diversification of OPEC investments took place. The share of investible funds flowing into bank deposits and short-term assets was much reduced from about one-half to perhaps one-quarter and purchases of corporate bonds equities and long-term government securities rose. For the reasons discussed above the total amount of OPEC new investible funds declined sharply in The shrinkage in OPEC surpluses in was reflected in a large reduction in the current account deficits of the industrial countries ( Tables and ) The decreased financing needs of industrial countries in however were partly offset by an increase in import surpluses of LDCs that stemmed largely from the recession. ( The financing problems of LDCs are discussed below. ) Because of the smaller total external financing needs and the realization that the international financial system had been able to intermediate successfully between the large increases in the supply and demand for loanable funds developments in international money markets in more closely reflected differential economic conditions than they had during the turbulent year of Because most other economies have lagged the United States in the cycle interest rate relationships have shifted during the year ( Charts and ) Early in short-term rates in the United States declined sharply relative to rates in other money-market centers. But from mid-June to September most interest rate differentials swung the other way. Some of the resulting interest rate incentive was reversed again later in the year but by then rate-induced capital flows to the United States were also being strengthened by the relatively better economic news here than abroad and by the continuing high U.S. trade surplus TABLE Current account balances for OECD OPEC and other countries [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Group of countries OECD OPEC Non-oil developing countries Other countries Discrepancy ^ ji/ 1/ * -17J * 13i/ 1X -j \ / -7M Estimates Projection sSino-Soviet area South Africa Israel Cyprus Malta and Yugoslavia Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Department of the Treasury and national sources TABLE Current account balances for OECD countries ^ [ Billions of U.S. dollars ; seasonally adjusted ] First half Second half 6M ^ Estimate Second halfi Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and national sources O First half OECD 'Total United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Other OECD Country IM i i 2y2 Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER ANNUM * UNITED STATES CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT Q >l i i i l I i i i l i I l l l l l I l l I l l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I > GERMAN INTERBANK h RATE Q >i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i UNITED KINGDOM INTERBANK STERLING Q >l l l l l I l l I I l I l l I l l I I l I l l I l l l I I I I I I l l I I I I I l I I I I I I > * 3-MONTH RATES SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Interest Rate Differentials PERCENTAGE POINT DIFFERENCE * UNITED STATES CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT RATE LESS UNITED KINGDOM INTERBANK RATE PERCENTAGE POINT DIFFERENCE * UNITED STATES CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT RATE LESS GERMAN INTERBANK RATE * DIFFERENCE IN 3-MONTH RATES SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Private capital transactions in the U.S. balance of payments registered sizable outflows in the first half of the year. U.S. banks increased their foreign assets by about $ % billion reflecting in part relatively low interest rates in the United States and in part heavy loan demand of some foreign countries largely LDCs. The volume of new foreign bonds issued in the United States reached record rates reflecting to some extent extraordinary financing requirements of international agencies. But these outflows were partly offset by rising foreign purchases of U.S. corporate stocks including sizable purchases by oil-producing countries. In the third quarter as U.S. interest rates rose relative to rates abroad there was some reduction in banks ' acquisition of foreign assets and the net flow of private capital was inward. The final quarter brought a resumption of net outflows through banks as well as a sizable net outflow through transactions in securities as placements of foreign bonds in the U.S. market including a lars : e issue by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) more than matched a continued high volume of foreign purchases of U.S. corporate stocks. For the year as a whole net private capital outflows were probably somewhat above the net outflow of over $ billion reported for Reflecting these changes in capital flows and the large surplus on trade account noted above the exchange value of the dollar in terms of a tradeweighted average of major foreign currencies first depreciated by about 4yi percent between the end of December and the end of February and then appreciated by about percent from March through September During the fourth quarter of the dollar rate changed very little drifting down by about one-half of percent The swing in the exchange value of some individual currencies against the dollar was of course greater than is reflected in the weighted average value. In particular movements of the European currencies against the dollar were very wide. For example against the European currencies linked in the " snake " arrangement the dollar depreciated by about percent from the end of December to its low early in March rose by ^ percent to its September high and depreciated again by 2/2 percent to year-end ( ChartS ) Even though governments on the whole allowed market forces to move exchange rates rather ^ videly there appears to have been a considerable amount of intervention by foreign banks particularly during the second half of the year. Gross intervention by the Federal Reserve however has been very limited. In order to avoid disorderly conditions and to lessen the danger of unwanted and self-defeating actions which might lead to competitive currency depreciations or other international policy conflicts national governments recognized the need to intensify international consultation on these matters. As part of the broader international monetary negotiations the United States and France reached an understanding at the time of the Economic Summit regarding a shared position on amendments to the Arti- Chart Foreign Exchange Rates CENTS PER UNIT OF FOREIGN CURRENCY POUND STERLING ( Left Scale ) A i i i I I I i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i I I i I I I A I CANADIAN DOLLAR ( Left Scale ) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM cles of Agreement of the IMF dealing with the exchange rate regime. This facilitated agreement by the Interim Committee of the IMF in January on the entire package of amendments to the IMF 's Articles of Agreement which had been pending since agreement on certain parts was reached at the time of the Interim Committee meeting in August The main elements of this package in addition to amendment of the Article dealing with exchange rates are a percent increase in the Fund 's resources to SDR billion as decided in the Sixth Quota Review ; the phasing out of gold with regard to Fund transactions and other gold arrangements ; and the establishment of a Trust Fund for the benefit of the poorer members of the IMF Agreement on the outstanding IMF issues does much to help assure the adequacy of international financing arrangements in the face of the continuing large payment surpluses of the oil-exporting countries. As economic recoveries broaden current account positions of the oil-importing countries as a group will move into greater deficit. This shift may put financing strains on some countries and might lead to policies that could arrest the recoveries or be mutually damaging in other ways. It is therefore important to ensure that safeguards are in place to prevent unavoidable financial difficulties from being compounded by internationally inappropriate policies Therefore the cooperative international spirit underlying the agreements reached at the meetings in January is particularly significant EXCHANGE RATE ARRANGEMENTS The agreement on amended exchange rate provisions of the IMF Articles first worked out between the United States and France and subsequently accepted by the Interim Committee of the IMF recognizes that the underlying economic and financial situation determines the degree of exchange rate stability that is possible. Participating members agree to endeavor to direct their economic and financial policies toward the achievement of orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability to recognize that orderly underlying economic and financial conditions are prerequisites to stability to avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive advantage and to follow exchange policies compatible with these undertakings When formally approved by percent of the member countries representing percent of the votes these general provisions will be incorporated in amended Articles of Agreement of the IMF. The agreement allows countries to choose among exchange arrangements including : ( ) The maintenance by a member of a value for its currency in terms of the Special Drawing Right or another denominator other than gold ; or ( ) cooperative arrangements by which members maintain the value of their currencies in relation to the value of the currency or currencies of other members ; or ( ) other exchange arrangements of a member 's choice The revised Articles would authorize the Fund upon approval by an percent majority vote to establish a system of exchange arrangements based on stable but adjustable par values when international economic conditions are appropriate. In effect such a system could not be established without the approval of the United States which under the proposed new quotas will have approximately percent of the voting strength. As far as the United States is concerned for the foreseeable future it is thought unlikely that conditions will be appropriate for the establishment of a par value system or the setting of target rates and zones or bands within which movements in the rate of the dollar would be contained. Policies aim at achieving stable economic conditions. However progress toward narrowing disparities among inflation rates in different countries is slow nor can one be sure that progress once made will be lasting. Exogenous shocks to which the various economies continue to be subject also argue for a considerable degree of flexibility in the monetary system. Central bank intervention will be limited to that necessary to counter disorderly conditions or erratic fluctuations Each country will be the judge of what constitutes an erratic fluctuation in its exchange rate To facilitate the achievement of internationally cooperative behavior in exchange markets the French and the U.S. authorities have suggested an intensification of the consultative arrangements among governments and central banks of major countries. Central bank officials will exchange daily information on the foreign exchange market and their intervention activities Finance ministry and central bank officials will at frequent intervals review exchange rate movements and intervention activities and discuss both the underlying economic and financial conditions and the impact of policies on these conditions. Under these arrangements there may be somewhat more frequent intervention than in the past. But the main point is that decisions on intervention in exchange markets will be based on better information and that a growing understanding may also develop which recognizes that managing the exchange rate rather than the economy may only serve to introduce disequilibria and lead to misallocation of resources GOLD ARRANGEMENTS The agreement reached on gold consists of four major elements : Gold no longer will be a medium of settlement in IMF transactions One-sixth of the gold holdings of the IMF will be restituted to members that is distributed to members in proportion to their quotas One-sixth of the gold holdings of the IMF will be sold at auction over a period of years to finance a Trust Fund for the benefit of the poorer members of the IMF An agreement that will be reviewed after a 2-year period has been concluded by the largest industrial countries. It bars any action to peg the price of gold and provides that the total stock of gold held by the Fund and the monetary authorities of the participating countries will not be increased. Other countries may also adhere to this agreement The agreements on gold reflect general acceptance of the agreed upon objective to reduce the role of gold in the international monetary system In addition with the scheduled sale of some of the IMF 's gold holdings for the purpose of financing the Trust Fund gold may be expected to begin gradually to move out of the monetary system into private hands Some observers have argued that these new agreements may lead to a revaluation of official gold holdings at market-related prices or encourage more frequent use of gold as a medium for settlement among central banks It is further argued that this combined with the distribution of IMF gold to members will have the effect of making more gold available to major countries thus giving them greater liquidity and perhaps adding to world inflationary pressures and reducing the likelihood that additional allocations of SDKs would be approved However central banks have had the ability for some time to sell their gold holdings in the market as well as to value such holdings at marketrelated prices. Only one foreign central bank has actually written up its gold reserves and there is no indication that others intend to do so. Moreover there also is no reason to expect the agreements to result in significant transactions in gold among monetary authorities. Indeed by abolishing the official price for gold in the IMF by strengthening the prospect of future sales of officially held gold into the market and by establishing transitional provisions against pegging of the price these agreements should in fact discourage widespread revaluations of official gold holdings and increase the risks associated with transactions among monetary authorities With the phasing of gold out of international official transactions the danger that some authorities might seek to stabilize the price of gold is much diminished. In addition authorities attempting to peg the price of gold despite agreement among major countries not to do so would find that such an effort could be exorbitantly expensive in terms of foreign currency assets needed for such operations. The cost would be higher the smaller the number of participants Finally the increases in world credit during the past several years have made it unlikely that new SDKs will be issued in the near future. Therefore the restitution provision has been welcomed by some of the lesser developed countries which will receive percent ( their quota share ) of the amounts to be distributed. In addition the gold arrangements make possible the establishment of the Trust Fund which is of crucial importance to the poorest developing countries particularly now that the Oil Facility in the IMF is being terminated. Moreover a large number of LDCs will not make any nominal contribution to the Trust Fund but will have that part of the profits on the gold sales by the IMF that represents their quota share in the Trust Fund distributed to them directly. Thus of the million ounces of gold to be sold by the IMF the profits on perhaps million will go directly to LDCs and those on million will be used for the Trust Fund INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL RESOURCES In some sense a very important aspect of the completion of the arduous negotiations on exchange rate and gold arrangements is that the agreement on quota increases can now go forward. Such an increase in the general resources of the IMF is particularly important at this time because of the possible increase in external financing strains which some countries may face in the years ahead For the period necessary to ratify the scheduled quota increases it was agreed that general access to the IMF 's resources be temporarily liberalized by permitting a percent increase in drawings in all credit tranches This decision increases the general availability of IMF credit but to the extent that it applies to the first credit tranches it makes available a larger amount of resources that can be drawn upon freely without any or at any rate with only a few conditions attached. To that extent it will be necessary to guard against a possible inflationay impact. The temporary liberalization of access to IMF credit exceeds the scheduled quota increase and thereby should help smooth the continuing financial repercussions of the recession in the immediate future. By the time the permanent increase in IMF resources is in place this exceptional bridging support should no longer be necessary For the industrial countries the IMF resources will be supplemented by the agreement reached last spring to establish a mutual Financial Support Fund among members of the OECD. This fund is designed to backstop traditional sources of financing and is to come into use only when financing is not available at reasonable rates through other channels. Drawings upon the Support Fund will be conditional upon the pursuit of appropriate domestic and international economic policies and upon progress toward increased conservation and production of energy. Thus the Fund effectively constitutes an effort by industrialized oil consumers to insure against too great a bilateral financial dependence upon oil producers and to guard against protectionist or divisive measures designed to improve external payments positions at the expense of others. To the extent that it prevents member countries from taking restrictive payments measures and more generally by contributing to an improved world economic outlook the Fund would also be of help to nonmember countries For the poorer among the LDCs the establishment of the Trust Fund in the IMF is of great importance as noted above. Of potential help to a broader spectrum of LDCs is the decision to liberalize significantly the IMF 's compensatory financing facility. Under this facility the IMF provides balance of payments support in amounts additional to normal IMF credit available to member countries who are experiencing a shortfall in export earnings for reasons beyond their control. The IMF 's buffer stock facility which assists countries in balance of payments need that have made contributions to international buffer stocks is also being modestly liberalized THE CURRENT FINANCIAL POSITION OF THE NON-OIL LDCs The difficulties experienced by LDCs in adjusting to the higher price of oil have been compounded by the depth of the recession that the oil price increases themselves helped to produce. So far the financing of the large payments deficits which the non-oil LDCs have been incurring since has been managed with considerably less strain than was feared. Consequently actual expenditures requiring foreign currencies have been curtailed considerably less than was expected. The combined deficit on goods and services of the non-oil LDCs in is estimated at approximately $ billion. Total financing requirements however would be in the $ 40to $ 45-billion range since scheduled debt amortization must be added These requirements were partly met by official aid flows and financing available through the IMF 's Oil Facility. Through mid-1975 most LDCs were able to finance the remainder with little recourse to their first-line resources. Reserves which had grown by very large amounts during the commodity inflation and conditional IMF resources were not drawn on to any considerable extent. In addition to official aid flows the main financing came from bank lending and trade credits an indication that a large number of these countries have maintained their credit worthiness in the view of private lenders. Many LDCs seem to have preferred bank borrowing because a rundown of their reserves or IMF resources might have eroded their credit standing In the overall position of the non-oil LDCs could improve somewhat ( Table ) The recession caused the external balances of the industrial countries to move from large deficits toward surplus in and the counterpart of these changes was to be found in deteriorating payments positions of the developing countries. In this pattern should be partially reversed as the recovery proceeds. The earnings of non-oil LDCs may therefore begin to rise once more and could well rise faster than imports. The non-oil LDCs as a group have lagged behind the industrial countries in the cycle ; and many began to take deflationary or import-reducing measures only sometime during Thus imports in may show little if any growth. Accordingly financing requirements for the year may be in the $ to $ 33-billion range on a goods and services basis and in the $ to $ 40-billion range when debt amortization is taken into account Private market sources still appear to be willing to increase their lending to a number of these countries. Although their debt burden has grown considerably in nominal terms since inflation has reduced their real debt position. Consequently debt burdens in real terms may not be too far from their level of or thereabouts The fact that financial disaster or drastic cutbacks in development plans and economic growth have so far been avoided in the larger number of non-oil LDCs does not mean that their situation can be viewed with equanimity. Some countries ' financial positions are indeed precarious Considerable amounts of official aid will be necessary particularly since their problems are likely to be compounded over time. But such aid should be conditional upon the adoption of appropriate policies that will allow existing growth potential to come fully into play. For the remaining countries the outlook is more encouraging partly because of their natural endowment partly because of efficient domestic management and other reasons. For these countries the increase in official financial resources currently being put in place in addition to their access to private financing may well suffice. The need is clear however to assure that these financing facilities are promptly accessible The Extended Fund Facility of the IMF is already in place. This facility provides considerably more liberal financing possibilities in connection with programs aiming at major structural changes than the regular IMF resources do both in terms of amounts and in terms of maturities of loans available. In addition the Trust Fund will become operational early this year as will the liberalization of the IMF 's compensatory financing and buffer stock facilities discussed above. These facilities and the enlarged access to regular resources of the IMF represent important safeguards against financing problems that may arise in EARNINGS STABILIZATION AND COMMODITY ARRANGEMENTS In part because of the financial problems created by the higher oil prices and the waning of the commodity boom of developing countries have forcefully attempted to focus the world 's attention on their longer-run problems. LDC demands stem mainly from a desire to maintain or increase the purchasing power of their export earnings and to receive increased aid flows from richer countries. In certain matters the interests of LDCs and industrial countries clearly coincide. The large fluctuations in prices for primary products disrupt LDCs ' development plans and compound inflationary problems in the industrial countries. In addition greater earnings stability in the commodity area would help the investment climate and thereby contribute to adequacy of supply. In recognition of these facts the liberalization of the compensatory financing and the buffer stock facilities in the IMF noted above have been agreed upon As part of its approach to commodity problems the United States has expressed willingness to discuss commodity agreements case by case. U.S objectives are to arrive at agreements which reduce excessive price swings without raising commodity prices above their long-term m'arket trends and without significantly weakening the functioning of market forces. In line with these dbjectives the U.S. view is that production controls and export restrictions should be avoided because they create supply rigidities and longer-run market distortions and because they result in misallocation of resources and excessive costs to consumers The current approach to earnings stabilization problems relies on financing arrangements through the IMF which help smooth shortfalls in export earnings and on joint producer-consumer efforts to contain cyclical price fluctuations through buffer stock arrangements. Past attempts at using buffer stocks generally have foundered upon the inadequate size of such stocks the high costs of holding inventory and breakdowns in agreements among members on operating the stocks. Some of these drawbacks were due in part to the fact that the direct cost was carried by producers. The current approach which brings producers and consumers together perhaps carries a better promise for success than past buffer stock programs in terms of both setting more realistic stock disposal rules and attempting to provide sufficient safeguards to protect consumers from a situation where average prices over the cycle are significantly higher than competitive market prices would have been The general and specific problems relating to commodity issues are being discussed in various international forums. One of the major issues that continues to be pressed by the LDCs is some provision to link their export prices to changes in prices for manufactured goods. These " indexation " proposals need to be opposed on various grounds. First efficient use of economic resources depends upon the smooth functioning of the price mechanism. If relative prices were frozen misallocation of resources would inevitably result Second because such arrangements tend to result in selling prices that are higher than market forces would bring about they impart an inflationary bias to the international economic system. Therefore earnings stabilization schemes can better be implemented through the more market-oriented ways discussed above and any transfer of resources to the poorer countries can better be accomplished through official aid channels Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December THE PRESIDENT : Sir : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities 'during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ALAN GREENSPAN, Chairman PAUL W. MAcAvov BURTON G. MALKIEL Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During1975 The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide economic analysis and advice to the President and thus to assist him in the development and evaluation of economic policies Alan Greenspan served as Chairman of the Council during On June Paul W. MacAvoy became a Member of the Council succeeding Gary L. Seevers who left the Council on April Mr Seevers who became a Member in July is at present a Commissioner of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Mr. MacAvoy is on leave of absence from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he is Henry R. Luce Professor of Public Policy On July Burton G. Malkiel became a Member of the Council filling a vacancy created by the departure of William J. Fellner who left Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Position Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserl ing John D.Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns.. Neil H.Jacoby Walter W.Stewart.. Raymond J.Saulnier. Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller. James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun_ James S. Duesenberry Merton J.Peck. Warren L. Smith.. Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein.. Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member. Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman. Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Augusts August November May August May June September March September December April December ~ ~ May December ~ ~ November May January January January Augusts November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October O Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February the Council on February to return to the American Enterprise Institute where he is Resident Scholar. Mr. Malkiel is on leave of absence from Princeton University where he is Gordon S. Rentschler Memorial Professor of Economics RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The principal directive of the Employment Act is that the Federal Government " use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations for the purpose of creating and maintaining conditions to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The basic responsibility of the Council of Economic Advisers is the analysis of economic problems and the interpretation of trends and changes in the economy to assist the President in the development and evaluation of national economic policies. The Council prepares regular reports on current economic conditions and forecasts of future economic developments and its recommendations are considered in the formulation of economic policy The Council also performs a direct advisory role both within the Executive Office of the President and through participation in interagency groups in which representatives of various departments agencies and offices in the executive branch evaluate current programs and consider and develop new ones. The scope of its efforts covers a wide range of economic problems which come before the Office of the President During the Council and its staff contributed to the study of many different economic issues. The analysis of current developments in business activity and the evaluation of alternative macroeconomic and energy policies were an important part of the Council 's work last year. The Council also participated in the analysis of future capital requirements ; foreign economic conditions and international financial developments ; issues and proposals regarding agriculture and food policy agricultural exports and commodity trade policies ; measures to improve the functioning of the labor markets and to alleviate the impact of the recession ; measures and programs to support housing construction and to stimulate investment in the public utility industry ; alternative proposals to deal with a wide range of energy issues and problems ; transportation problems and policies ; policy proposals in regulatory reform ; proposals for more effective health insurance income maintenance and social insurance systems ; and measures to improve the Government 's economic statistics Early each year the President submits the Economic Report of the President to the Congress as required by the Employment Act. The Council assumes major responsibility for the preparation of this Report which together with the Annual Report of thu Council of Economic Advisers reviews the progress of the economy over the past year and outlines the Administration 's policies and programs The Chairman is a member of the Economic Policy Board and of its Executive Committee. This Board was formed in October to direct the formulation coordination and implementation of economic policy. The Executive Committee which serves as the focal point for economic policy making meets daily to address current issues of economic policy. It is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury and consists of the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers the Director of the Office of Management and Budget the Secretary of State the Secretary of Commerce " the Secretary of Labor the Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy and the Assistant to the President for Economic Affairs who is the Executive Director of both the Economic Policy Board and its Executive Committee. The Executive Committee often augmented by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System meets regularly with the President to review economic conditions makes recommendations and discusses possible changes in economic policy The Chairman of the Council is a member of the Executive Committee of the President 's Energy Resources Council which was instituted in October to formulate and coordinate energy policy. The Chairman also heads the U.S. delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and serves as vice chairman of the Committee. Council Members and staff economists attend meetings of various working parties of the Committee during the year The review and analysis of the overall performance of the economy is conducted and coordinated through a series of " Troika " working groups comprising representatives of the Council the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget. At regular intervals economists from these agencies evaluate recent economic performance and formulate economic forecasts which are then reviewed by a second group chaired by a Council Member and including a representative of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget. The analysis and projections are finally reviewed and cleared through the Chairman of the Council for presentation and consideration by the Executive Committee of the Economic Policy Board The Council has initiated a series of quarterly meetings at which leading economists are invited to present their views on the economy and economic policy to the Executive Committee of the Economic Policy Board. Three of these meetings were held in The economists who attended included Gardner Ackley ( University of Michigan ) Henry L. Duncombe ( General Motors ) Otto Eckstein ( Harvard University ) Robert E. Hall ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Walter W. Heller ( University of Minnesota ) Hendrik S. Houthakker ( Harvard University ) Albert G. Matamoros ( Armstrong Cork Company ) Paul W. McCracken ( University of Michigan ) James Meigs ( Claremont College ) Allan H. Meltzer ( Carnegie-Mellon University ) William D. Nordhaus ( Yale University ) Arthur M. Okun ( The Brookings Institution ) Leif Olsen ( First National City Bank New York ) William Poole ( Brown University ) Albert E. Rees ( Princeton University ) Paul Samuelson ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Herbert Stein ( University of Virginia ) James Tobin ( Yale University ) and Marina v.N. Whitman ( University of Pittsburgh ) " A Study of Fixed Capital Requirements of the U.S. Business Economy " was prepared for the Council of Economic Advisers under the direction of Beatrice N. Vaccara Associate Director for National Analysis and Projections of the Department of Commerce. The results of this study are used in this Report and the entire study is available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce The Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) like the Council was created by the Employment Act of to make a continuing study of matters relating to the economy and to submit its own report and recommendations to the Congress. During the Chairman and Council Members appeared before the JEC five times. The Chairman and the Council also presented testimony before the Budget Committees of the House and Senate on a number of occasions during the year -and appeared before a number of other committees of the Congress to discuss budgetary energy and other related issues The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers contained in the Economic Report of the President is the main vehicle through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It presents a comprehensive review and analysis of economic conditions forecasts and projections for the coming year as well as an explanation of the Administration 's economic policy. In recent years about copies of the Economic Report have been distributed. The Council also presents its views on current economic problems and developments through occasional press briefings testimony before various congressional committees and speeches and papers presented by the Chairman and the Members of the Council. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly publication Economic Indicators. It is prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the direction of Frances M. James and issued by the Joint Economic Committee with a distribution of about copies ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed both through discussions with the President and through regular reports on economic developments. The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal and informal meetings of Government officials. He exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The Council Members directly supervise the work of the staff are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council and represent the Council at numerous meetings where they assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement. Whenever the Chairman is absent from Washington one of the Council Members becomes Acting Chairman In practice the Chairman and the Council Members work as a team. For operational reasons however subject matter is divided informally between the Council Members. Mr. Malkiel is responsible for analysis of business conditions short-term forecasting and matters related to monetary and fiscal policy ; international trade and finance ; manpower employment and developments in the labor market ; financial markets ; housing ; taxation ; and social security. Mr. Malkiel is the Chairman of the second-level Troika group and also of the Economic Policy Board 's subcommittee on improving economic statistics. Mr. MacAvoy 's responsibility encompasses energy ; natural resources and commodity trade issues ; food and agriculture ; health education and welfare ; environmental problems ; transportation ; regulated industries ; and antitrust questions. He is Chairman of the Economic Policy Board 's Food Deputies Group and co-Chairman of the Domestic Council Group on Regulatory Reform PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff and their special fields of economic analysis were : Senior Staff Barry R. Chiswick John D. Darroch John M. Davis Jr George M. von Furstenberg Bruce L. Gardner R. Jeffery Green Helen B. Junz June A. O'Neill Frederick M. Peterson Milton Russell John L. Scadding Economists Labor and Human Resources Prices and Industry Studies Special Assistant to the Chairman Fiscal Policy Public Finance Housing and Capital Formation Agriculture and Food Econometrics and Forecasting International Finance and Trade Labor and Human Resources Economic Analysis Environment and Technology Energy Analysis and Policy Monetary Policy Financial Institutions Capital Markets and Interest Rates Statisticians Frances M. James Catherine H. Furlong Senior Staff Statistician Statistician Staff Doral S. Cooper David C. Munro Rosemary Quintano Economists International Trade and Finance Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting Economic Analysis Prices and Forecasting Junior Staff Economists David W. Brazell David B. Crary James W. Moser Joan M. Porter Valerie Sarris J. W. Henry Watson Paul G. Westcott Monetary Policy and Environment Monetary Policy and Financial Markets Labor and Human Resources Econometrics and Forecasting Public Finance and Energy Regulated Industries and Transportation Economic Analysis Agriculture and Transportation Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician is in charge of the Statistical Office and manages the Council 's economic and statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of tables and charts for the Economic Report and for the Council 's work. She also directs the fact checking of memoranda testimony and speeches. Catherine H. Furlong Dorothy Bagovich and Natalie Rentfro assist Miss James During the summer James R. Golden ( U.S. Military Academy ) was a member of the professional staff. Robert S. Dohner ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) assisted the Council in the preparation of the Report The Council conducts a program under which student interns are appointed for temporary periods. The summer intern for was Robert E. Berry ( University of Virginia ) A large number of economists provided professional assistance or served as consultants to the Council. These included Alan S. Blinder ( Princeton University ) William H. Branson ( Princeton University ) Murray F. Foss ( National Bureau of Economic Research ) Roger W. Gray ( Stanford University ) Hendrik S. Houthakker ( Harvard University ) Lawrence R. Klein ( University of Pennsylvania ) Myron S. Scholes ( University of Chicago ) Herbert Stein ( University of Virginia ) Susan M. Wachter ( University of Pennsylvania ) and Marina v.N. Whitman ( University of Pittsburgh ) In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff. Special assistance in connection with the Report was also furnished by Dorothy L. Reid a former member of the Council staff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office provides administrative support for the entire Council staff which includes preparation and analysis of the Council 's budget ; procurement of equipment and supplies ; responding to letters and inquiries from the general public ; and distribution of Council speeches reports and congressional testimony. The Administrative Office consisted of Nancy F. Skidmore Elizabeth A. Kaminski and Bettye T. Siegel. The duplicating mail and messenger department was operated by James W Gatling Frank C. Norman and Jerry W. Catling Serving on the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Anne V. Jackson Joyce A. Pilkerton Patricia A. Lee Alice H. Williams and Man ^ aret A. Bocek. Secretaries for the professional staff included Mary C. Fibich Dorothy L. Green Bessie M. Lafakis Earnestine Reid Linda A. Reilly Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff members are drawn primarily from universities and research institutions. Murray F. Foss who served with the Council for years retired from Government service in to take up new duties as a Senior Research Associate with the National Bureau of Economic Research Washington. Other senior staff economists who resigned during the year were Joseph G. Kvasnicka ( Federal Reserve Bank Chicago ) James C. Miller III ( Council on Wage and Price Stability ) Allan G. Pulsipher ( Southern Illinois University ) G. Edward Schuh ( Purdue University ) and J. Richard Zecher ( Tulane University ) Junior economists who resigned in were Joseph P. Kalt ( University of California Los Angeles ) Leroy O. Laney ( Department of the Treasury ) Robert J. Schanzmeyer ( Rice University ) and Robert S. Stillman ( University of California Los Angeles ) Other resignations included James H. Ayres Administrative Officer Ruth Ann Butler secretary and Mary P. Kane research assistant Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-l B-l B-l B-14 B-15 B-l6 B-l B-18 B-19 B-20 Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Gross private domestic investment Inventories and final sales of business in current and dollars Relation of gross national product and national income National income by type of income Relation of national income and personal income Disposition of personal income Sources of personal income Personal consumption expenditures Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B Population by age groups Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Selected unemployment rates Unemployment by duration Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-29. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-30. Productivity and related data private economy B-31. Changes in productivity and related data private economy PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : Page B-32. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B-33. Industrial production indexes market groupings B-34. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-35. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing B-36. New construction activity B-37. New housing starts and applications for financing B-38. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-39. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-40. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-41. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders PRICES : B-42. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes B-43. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups B-44. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services B-45. Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted B-46. Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups B-47. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups B-48. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings B-49. Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted B-50. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-51. Money stock measures B-52. Commercial bank loans and investments B-53. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-54. Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors B-55. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-56. Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits B-57. Bond yields and interest rates B-58. Short-and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding B-59. Instalment credit extended and repaid Er-60. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender B-62. Net public and private debt GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-65. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years B-66. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts B-67. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-68. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts B State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-70. Public debt securities by kind of obligation B-71. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-72. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : Page B-73. Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment by industry B-74. Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment manufacturing industries R-75. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-76. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-77. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group B-78. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-79. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-80. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-81. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit B-82. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-83. Income of farm people and farmers B-84. Farm production indexes B-85. Farm population employment and productivity B-86. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-87. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-88. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-89. U.S. balance of payments B-90. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-91. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-92. International reserves B-93. U.S. reserve assets B-94. International investment position of the United States at year-end and B-95. Price changes in international trade B-96. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars See Economic Report for data for intervening years not shown here except as noted below The national income and product accounts data shown in these tables are the revised series to be published in the " Survey of Current Business " January Data for usually shown in these tables are not yet available for the revised series Symbols used : * Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B Gross national product or expenditure { Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures i Gross private domestic investment * I960 Gross national product Year or quarter Government purchases of goods and services Federal State and local Percent change from preceding period gross national product ^ Total 4R.6 Imports ExNet exports ports Total National Nonde- defense fense < * : II III IV : | | III IV : II Ill IVp See Table B-16 for detailed components See Table B-9 for detailed components Net of Government sales * This category Corresponds closely to the national defense classification in " The Budget of the United States Government s Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department cf Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Gross national product Year or quarter Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment _ p : 1II III IV : II Ill IV : II III. IV P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B Gross national product or expenditure in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) Net exports of goods and services Gross private domestic investment continued Government purchases of goods and services l Fixed investment continued Residential Year or quarter Change in business inventories Percent change from preceding period gross national product Net exports Exports Imports Total r'ederal State and local 5i5 Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment p : II III... IV... : II III... IV : II III... IV P.. Net of Government sales Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment * Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment P : | | III IV : II III IV : ! II Ill IV P... See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment ^ continued Fixed investment continued Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services Residential ProExFarm ducers ' ports struc- durable tures equipment Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Imports Total Federal State and local Gross domestic product Gross Gross donational mestic product product Total Nonfarm structures v : II III IV : II III IV 117.C : L. II Ill IV P... 13L6 Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods output Year Gross or quar- national ter product Final nventory sales change Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Final nvenFinal nvenFinal nvenTotal sales tory Total sales tory Total sales tory change change hange Auto Serv- Struc- outices tures put ~ ~ * : i f " III. IV. : if I III. IV. : [ \ ~ III. IVp Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Gross national product by major type oj product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods output Year Gross or quar- national ter product Final sales ! Inventory change Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Final InvenFinal nvenFinal InvenTotal sales tory Total sales tory Total sales tory change change change Serv- Struc- Auto ices tures output ~ i2. ~ ? * : I.. II III. IV-- : if. " III. IV_- -3.'l : II.. III. IVp Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B ~ Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Gross Year or quarter national product Business Total Total Government Nonfarm * StatisFarm tical discrepancy Households and institutions Total Fed- State and eral local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross domestic products ! e : ; ! v | | III IV II III IV : II Ill IV ; Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees a Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here See table B-l for percent changes in gross national product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Gross national product Business Total Year or quarter Nonfarm Households and instiFarm Resid- tutions ual Total Percent change from Government Rest precedof the ing world period State gross Total Fed- and domestic eral local product * P : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IV p Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Data are preliminary The difference between gross product in dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of gross product by industry. Data are preliminary Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ from those obtained from data shown here. See table B-2 for percent changes in gross national product in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net domestic product Gross Capdo- ital Domestic income mes- conInditic umpprod- tion rect Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital busiconsumption adjustments uct llowof ances ness Year Comwith or taxes nonpenquarter finan- capiProfits before tax plus tal Total ranscial sation Inven- Capi- Net fer Total of tory tal cor- conntersumppayemProfits after tax valu- con- est poploy- Total Profits rate tion ments ation sumpees tax less adbusi- adtion Total labilsubUndis- just- adness justDivi- tribu- ment justment sidies ity Total dends ted ment profits I960.... k.20.0 IL. " III IV... P.. : : : ll ~ ~ ~ ~ III IV... : IL. " Ill IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross private domestic invest- Total ment Nonresidential Structures Producers ' durable equipment Nonfarm Nonfarm Total -s ; i " 25.Y Total Nonfarm ~ ~ 16.T I960 ProFarm ducers ' Total struc- durable tures equipment Nonfarm structures Total Total Residential '.7 ! ! e .'6 le P : II ML.. IV : II III... IV : II ill IV * ___ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Inventories and final sales of business in current and dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories Year and Quarter Final sales Inventory-final sales ratio Nonfarm Total Farm Total nonfarm Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Total SHtiar utner Nonfarm Total Nonfarm Current dollars Fourth quarter : P. : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. IV * _ dollars Fourth quarter : _ P. : II III... IV... : II... III... IVp__ * End of quarter Annual rates Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B-l Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Capital consump- Equals : tion allowNet ances with national capital product consumpion adjustment Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Indirect business tax and nontax liability Less : Business Statistical transfer discrepancy payments Equals : National income I960 : | II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Farm National income Year or quarter Total SuppleWages ments and to sala- wages and ries salaries Nonfarm Total Income Capital consumption adjustment Total In- Total come Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adadjustjustment ment I960 P : II Ill IV... : II... III... IV... : II... III... IV v See footnotes at end of table ^ LS '.B -'.8 TABLE B-12 National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Capital Rental conincome sumpof tion Total persons adjustment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Total Capital Net con- intersump- est Inven- tion tory adjustProfits after tax valua- ment tion Tax Total Undis- adjustliability Total Divi- tributed ment dends profits Profits before tax Total P : 1-..II.. III.. IV.. : II... III. IV... : ! _ _ _ _ II... III. IV P National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-ll Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] PI i s : Le 5s : Corporate profits with inven- Net National income valuation interest and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements Government transfer payments to persons Personal interest income Equals : Dividends Business transfer Personal payincome ments : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV P * : II.. III. IV. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income ._ r Year or quarter Personal income Total PerPerInterest sonal sonal paid by transfer conconpaysump- sumers ments tion to to forexpend- busieigners itures ness ( net ) Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Total Consumption expenditures Personal saving : II.. III.. IV.. : L.. II.. III.. IV.. L.. II.. III.. IV * ._ : Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements Personal income Year or quarter Total Commodityproducing industries Total Manufacturing GovernDistrib- Service ment and utive indus- indus- governtries ment tries enterprises Other labor income ' Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm P : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with Year or capital Divi- Personal quarter con- dends interest income sumption adjustment Transfer payments Total Old age Government survivors unemVetdisability erans ployand health ment in- benefits insurance surance benefits benefits Government employee retirement benefits Less : Personal Noncontrifarm Aid to butions perfamilies for sonal with de- Other social inpendent insurcome children ance ( AFDC ) I960... 1975'.. i ! IL.TI III... IV... : II III... IV P. : I II... III... IV... : * The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-12 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Nonfarm income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by farm corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-16. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goods * Durable goods * Household operation a J | Personal consumption expenditures CL Services * I J II IV II III IV II III IV p... Year or quarter -a a ii c lc " o O ? J If -o> u_ a * Total includes items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 'o a c TO S a c DO C 'o <3 I 1C c o & 'o c UJ a c H i TABLE B-17. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Disposable personal income Total ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Population ( thousands ) dollars : II Ill : p ' II Ml IV IV II III IV * i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-18. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total Gross Perbusisonal ness saving saving1 Gross investment Government surplus or Capital grants deficit ( ) national income and product received accounts by the United States ( net ) Fed- State Total and eral local Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Statistical discrepancy -2'.0 l'.7 P. _ : II III... IV... : II... III... IV... : II.... III.... IV P -2'. '.1 <-2.0 ^ l'.9 Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) s Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid to foreigners In February the U.S. Government granted to India $ million ( quarterly rate ) in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Adjustment Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners and is included in the first quarter of as $ ( annual rate ) in capital grants received by the United States Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Saving by individuals * [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Currency Savand ings Total deacmand counts deposits L6 : I... II.. III.. IV.. : II.. III.. l. 's Non- MortInsurance Con- cor- gage and Non- sumer po- debt Con- Other pen- farm du- rate on sumer sion homes rables busi- non- credit debt * reness farm serves assets homes ( ) Corporate equities < Securities Less : Increase in net debt Corporate and foreign bonds * Net investment in Government securities ' ~ L9 ! s " is ; ! i i Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business * Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations Includes investment company shares * Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves * Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-20. Number and money income ( in dollars } of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Total White Year FAMILIES $ _ 8,b73 $ Below Below pov $ erty level UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS Negro and other races Percent with Percent with incomes incomes Total Total num- Median num- Median BeBeber ber Below Below ( mil- income low pov- ( mil- income low povlions ) $ erty lions ) $ erty level level $ Below Below pov $ erty level Percent with incomes Total num- Median Beber Below ( mil- income low povlions ) $ erty level BeBe- low low pov $ erty level " " l " ill.l U1.2 ill.O U3.2 U4.6 U5.5 i Revised using population controls based on the Census. Such controls not available by race Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflects different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family head and farm-nonfarm residence. The poverty threshold is updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index For further details see Current Population Reports Series P-60 No. Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-21. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) Julyl Total Under and over * _ Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Noninstitutional population1 Year or month Civilian labor force Total labor force ( includ- Armed ing Forces i Armed Forces ) Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor force particiUnem- pation ployrate ment ( total rate labor ( percent force as of percent civilian of noninstitulabor force ) tional population ) Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Thousands of persons years of age and over Oil I9603 See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( includ- Armed Forces ing Armed Forces ) Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor force particiUnem- pation ployrate ( total ment rate labor ( percent force as of percent civilian of nonlabor instituforce ) tional population ) Thousands of persons years cf age and over 6.D \ 7.2J [ \ : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr.. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Not seasonally adjusted Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of Census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of Census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of Census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on Census in March added to labor force and to employment. Overall categories of the labor force other than those noted were not appreciably affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-22 through B-25 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-23/ Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment Unemployment Females Males Year or month Total Total years years and over Total years Males years and over Total Females Total years Total years years and years and over over : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June- July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June- July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec. i See footnote Table B-22 Note. See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE K-24. Selected unemployment rates ( Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] By color By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes ^ years Men years and over Women years and over By selected groups ExpeNegro rienced Housewage and and hold other salary heads races workers White Married men a Fulltime workers * Bluecollar workers * May " June July... Aug.__ Sept. Oct Nov... Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Labor force time lost s 5.'l I : ? _. r .__,. ..-Jfied except as noted > Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March > Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Aggregate hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part-time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force hours Note.-See footnote and Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-25. Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted * ] Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Year or month Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept " Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec i Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B ~ Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) ^ Insured unemployment Exhaus Season " Unad- Season tions Unadjusted ally ad justed ally ad justed justed Apr May _ June July.. Aug.. Sept Oct Nov Dec.. : Jan Feb.. Mar _ Apr May. June July.. Aug. Sept p Octp NOVP Decp Insured unemployment as per cent of covered employment Benefits paid Average weekly check ( dollars ) * Unad- Season justed allyac justed Tntal ( millions of dollars ) ^ Percent Weekly average thousands Thousands p p : Jan Feb Mar.._ Initial claims Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal Supplemental Benefits ) and SUA ( Special Unemployment Assistance ) programs ' Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment < Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers ccvered by State programs account for abcut percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-27. Wage and salarv workers in nonagricultural establishments ( All employees ; thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ) Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Government Federal State and local P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. AprMay.. June. TransFiporta- Whnlo nance tion wnoie- insursale and and ance Servana pubices retail and lic trade real utiliestate ties Government Pnn i/ontract construction Federal State and local Manufacturing Nnn PI On- Mining Total Durable goods July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June-- July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.__ Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. SeptOct.. Nov Dec * durable goods Note. Data in Tables B-27 through B-29 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-22 through B-25 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours ConTotal private Manu- tract nonag- factur- coning strucricultion tural i Year or month Total private Manu- ConRetail non- factur- tract Retail contrade agriing struc- trade * cultion tural i Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Index = Current dollars dollars * Percent change from preceding period ' Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ I960 v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept.... Oct Nov Dec * i Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-27 * Includes eati ng and drinking places * Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index * Monthly data are annual rates computed from indexes to two decimal places Note. See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ! TABLE B-29. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average spendable weekly earnings total private nonagricultural * Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural l Current dollars dollars > Manu- Contract facturing construction Retail trade Percent change from preceding period Amount Current dollars Current dollars dollars ' Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ $ $ $ T.5 v : Jan Feb I960 Mar Apr May June _ _ _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-27 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index * Includes eating and drinking places Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes for a worker with three dependents * Monthly data are annual rates In annualizing the rates of change the effect of the change in tax rates at the beginning of and and in May is taken into account separately Note.-See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE B-30. Producthity and related data private economy [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output * Year or quarter Hours of all persons Output per hour of all persons Compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private nonnonnonnonnonnonprivate farm private farm private farm private farm private farm private farm C 1C2.8 : II III IV : II Ill IV : II III IV P Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31. Changes in productivity and related data private economy ( Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Hours of all persons Output i Year or quarter Total rivate rivate non- Total rivate farm rivate nonfarm utput per hour of all persons Compensation per hours Total Private nonrivate farm Total Private Total Private Total Private nonnonrivate farm private farm private nonfarm Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator < ^ * " ! * 3'. '.3 * : | II III IV : II Ill IV l. ( : II Ill IV * _ <j l'.7 __ F -2'. I -ii. ; 1'.3 -6J ~ 2'.9 sic ! Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed < Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-30 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE E-32. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Durable Total Utilities Nondurable * _ " * _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Dec * Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods Total Total Materials Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total Business Intermediate products Total Durable goods Nondurable goods P : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June- July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov.. Dec.. ? : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June 1C2.9 1C6.0 1C7.0 July- Sept " NovT Dec v Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes industrial fuel and power not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-34. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures OrdTransnance porta- Instru- private Mation and chinery equip- ments government ment Lumber clay and glass FurniTexPaper ture tiles and apparel and printmiscel- and ing laneous leather Chemicals petro- Foods leum and and tobtcco rubber Primary metals Fabricated metal products Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec J29.0 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June \ 1W.1 P July Aug Sept Oct NOVP Dec ? Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-35. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] FRB seriesl Year or quarter AdTotal manu- Primary vanced procprocfacturing essing essing Durable goods Nondurable goods PriAdmary- vancedprocprocessed essed goods goods -j Total manufacturing Durable goods : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. IV... : II.- III.. IV... : II... III.. IV... : IP.. II P Illp- Total manufacturing ~ Wharton series3 Commerce series a Nondurable goods For description of the series see Federal Reserve Bulletin October and November Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For descri ption of the series see Survey of Current Business ' July Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers " The Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization : A Ten Year Perspective " Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section American Statistical Association Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Wharton School of Finance TABLE B * New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings ^ Total Total > Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction * New housing units Total Commercial ' Industrial Total Federal Other * State and local * '.2 ! e New series l ! See footnotes at end of table ! e TABLE B-36. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Residential buildings i Total Year or month new construction Total Total * Naui new hmic nous : __ ing units Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction l Total Commercial In- dustrial Total State oral erai Other < and local * ocE ! : : : Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb Mar... Apr... May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct.... Nov p.. : Jan Feb Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug... se i Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately * Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc * Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) except as noted TABLE B-37. New housing starts and applications for financing ^ [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Private Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Proposed home construction Type of structure Total One unit Two or more units Government home programs ( nonfarm ) FHA3 VA New private housing units Appliauthor cations ized< for FHA commitments Requests for VA appraisals J929 New series 5fr3. P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-37. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued ( Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Proposed home construction * Private Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and non- Type of structure3 Non- Government home programs ( nonfarm ) New private housing units authorized < farm commit- Total farm ) One unit Two or more units Applications for FHA FHA a ments VA Requests for VA appraisals Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July 9S [ Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov ? Dec * C <7 ) ( i ( e : Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for For to 4-unit structures * Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; for ; for ; and prior to Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Not available separately beginning January Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Housing and Urban Development and Veterans Administration ( except as noted ) TABLE B Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 76l [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Mining Railroad Air Other Public Comutili- munities cation Commercial and other : II.... Ill IV... : II III. : | _ _ _ _ : II.-. III.. IV... IV3.. Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-39. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade InvenInvenInvenInvenSales i tories ' Ratio > Sales i tories Ratio Sales i tories J Ratio ' Sales i tories * Ratio > ___ : Jan Feb.. Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec... I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov P... Dec v i Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Manufacturing data prior to not completely comparable with later data Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value witnout adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-40. Manufacturers9 shipments and inventories ^ [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments l Inventories ' Durable goods industries Year or month Total Dura- Nonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries Total Total Materials Work Finin and ished sup- process goods plies Nondurable goods industries Total Materials Work Finand in ished sup- process goods plies * * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.... June July Aug... Sept...Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May_._ June ? % July.... Aug.... Nov p... ffl : : : : * Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Data prior to not completely comparable with later data Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-41. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders l Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug.. Sept 0t NOVP 4b3 9b9 70b Capital goods industries nondefense Unfilled orders Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Unfilled ordersshipments ratio Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Data prior to not completely comparable with later data Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-42. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classesy For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] All items Year or month Housing Food Total Rent Apparel Transportaand upkeep tion Reading Other Medical Personal and goods care care recreaand tion services : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ___ July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-43. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = Services Commodities Year or month All items Special indexes Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable Nondurable All services Rent Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE B-44. Consumer price indexes > selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Total i New cars Used cars Household durables Apparel commodities Total Services less rent Nondurables less Total food and apparel Household Transserv- portation ices servless ices rent Medical care services Others '1969 iSi : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ; ; ; ; ; ; Includes certain items not shown separately Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-45. Consumer price indexes seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers = seasonally adjusted ] Commodity groups Special indexes Year and month All All items All All items items less comless less med- modfood shelter ical ities care Selected expenditure classes Commodities less food Food Total Durable Nondurable Fuel Shel- and ter utilities Apparel Trans- Medand porical up- tation care keep : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ._ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-46. Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups [ Percent change ] Dec to Dec. a Commodities less food Food All items Year or month Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Services l Dec to Dec Year to year is Change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug ._ Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar ._ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted ! l '.1 '.3 ! e Percent changes for services are based on unadjusted indexes since these prices have little seasonal movement Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for the all items index are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-47. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds All commodities Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related Chemicals products and allied products ^ and power i : Jan Feb Mar.._..._ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb.. Mar.. Apr May June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE E-47. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp Metals Rubber Lumber paper and and and and plastic wood metal allied products products products products Year or month _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Transportation Furni- Nonme- equipMachin- ture and ment : Misceltallic ery and houseMotor laneous equipmineral vehicles products hold ment durables products and equipment 133.<1 Prices for most items in this grouping are lagged and refer to or months earlier than the index month Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings [ = Intermediate materials supplies and components * Crude materials for further processing Year or month All cornmodi ties Materials and components for manufacturing Materials and components For For Com for connonstrucdurab durab ponen tion manu manu factur factur ing ing Materials Tota Food stuff and feedstuffs Nonfood mate rials excep fuel Fuel Tota Tota For food manu factur ing : Jan Feb... Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings Continued = Finished goods Special groupings Consumer finished goods Year or month Producer finished goods Crude materials IntermeCondiate sumer matefinrials ished supgoods plies excludand ing com- foods ponents Manufactured goods Total Foods Other nondurable goods _ Total Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Durable goods Total Durable i Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies > Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco * Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted [ = seasonally adjusted ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year and month Special groupings Intermediate mateCrude rials mate- suprials ! plies and components a Producer finished goods Total Consumer finished goods Farm products Processed foods and feeds July Aug Sept Oct : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Total Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Nov Dec : Jan Feb Manufactured goods Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Durable goods TABLE R-50. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups [ Percent change ) Year or month All commodities Industrial commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Consumer finished goods Total Foods All except foods Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to DecJ Year to year Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.i Year to year 4.C l q l ? q Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adadadjusted justed justed justed justed justed : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec Unadjusted Seasonally Unadadjusted justed Seasonally Unadadjusted justed Seasonally adjusted -2'. L2 '.2 .'5 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for all commodities and industrial commodities are based on seasonal adjustdexes to two decimal places ment factors and seasonally adjusted inde : Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-51. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily Figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Overall measures Components and related items M2 M3 ( Mi plus ( M plus time Mi deposits ( Currency deposits at nonplus at combank mercial demand thrift deposits ) banks instituother than large CD 's ) tions ) Year and month Deposits at commercial banks Currency i Time and savings Demand Total Large CD 's * Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ) : Dec : Dec : Dec : ^ : : : : ' : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * >... Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ? : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec_ : Jan Feb Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve Banks and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government. Effective June excludes balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) Negotiable time certificates of deposit issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks savings capital at savings and loan associations and credit union shares Deposits at all commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-52. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans End of year or month Total loans and investments Total a Investments Commercial and industrial U.S. Government securities Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates : June : June I960. * M8.7 P s T129.7 s s >503.0 Mar Apr May June July p Aug p _ _ _ Septp Oct * NOVP Dec p Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Data are for last Wednesday of month or year ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic bank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans ' Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes totaling about $ billion are classified as other securities rather than as loans Beginning June commercial and industrial loans were reduced by about $ billion due to loan reclassifications at 8one large bank Beginning June the merger of a large mutual savings bank and a nonmember commercial bank increased total loans and investments by $ billion loans by $ billion and other securities by $ billion Beginning November the liquidation of one large bank reduced total loans and investments by $ billion total loans by $ billion commercial and industrial loans by $ billion and other securities by $ billion. In addition commercial and industrial loans were increased by $ billion due to loan reclassifications at one large bank Beginning August reflects new definition of affiliates included and different group of reporting banks. Amount of total loans sold was reduced by $ billion Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-53. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Item Corporate equities Debt instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments __ Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations ._-.Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential Commercial _ Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c. _ Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector ' Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors j _ o _ _ Foreign Public debt securities Agency issues and mortgages U S Government Total funds raised _ o Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency. Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities. Less security debt _ Other sources : Foreign funds At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans _ Private insurance and pension reserves.. Other See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-53. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item Total funds raised Foreign Corporate equities Debt instruments Corporate equities Debt instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home _ Multi-family Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n e e Open-market paper Other Debt capital instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors II Public debt securities Agency issues and mortgages III U S. Government II _ _ By borrowing sector * Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate _ _ III " s'.o * Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U S Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other i_ Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ~ L4 TABLE B-54. Private liquid asset holdings nonfnancial investors [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Year and month Total liquid assets Total Demand Curderency * posits * NonCombank merthrift cial institubanks tions U.S. Government securities Negotiable certifiShortcates term Sav- market- of deposit * ings able bonds securities * Openmarket paper : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec ' Dec Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec rso.o Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec v i holdings and holdings by domesticfinancialinstitui Money stock components ( see Table B-51 ) after deducting foreign li tions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfmancial sectors : ors As published in money stock statistics Series E and H savings bonds held by individuals * Short-term marketable U.S. Government securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings s Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings Open-market paper held outside banks and other financial institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-55. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Deep : Jan Feb Mar _ Apr May June July Aug _ Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug _ Sept Oct Nov Dec ? Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings Total Seasonal Member bank reserves All other mainly float b,717 Total 8i7 * Required U.822 Excess <240 i Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed s Beginning November includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Beginning allowable deficiencies included are ( beginning with first statement week pf quarter ) : first quarter $ million ; second quarter $ million ; third quarter $ million ; fourth quarter $ million. Beginning allowable deficiencies included are : first quarter $ million and second quarter $ million. Transition period ended after second quarter Includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which penalties were waived in accordance with Regulation D change effective November Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-56. Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits [ Averages of daily figures ; * billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Deposits subject to reserve requirements * Member bank reserves Year and month Demand Total Nonborrowed Required Available Total Time and savings Private U.S Government Total member bank deposits plus nondeposit items : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Seot Oct Nov Dec v Except as noted in footnote * Member bank reserves series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M Reserves available to support private nonbank deposits are defined as ( ) required reserves for ( a ) private demand deposits ( b ) total time and savings deposits and ( c ) nondeposit sources subject to reserve requirements and ( ) excess reserves. This series excludes required reserves for net interbank and U.S. Government demand deposits Deposits subject to reserve requirements include total time and sayings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks B Total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements plus Eurodollar borrowings loans sold to bank-related institutions ( data relate to Wednesday figures ) and certain other nondeposit items. This series for deposits is referred to as " the adjusted bank credit proxy. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-57. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month TreasTaxable year bonds s ury issues bills i Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Average Highrate on Prime grade shortcomterm municmeripal bank cial loans bonds ( Stand- to busi- paper nessard & Poor 's ) selected months cities Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York * Federal funds rates FHA new home mortgage yields M.OO M.OO % See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-57. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasyear Taxable ury issues bonds bills i Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Average High- rate on Disgrade short- Prime count communic- term rate meripal Federal Federal bank cial bonds loans pa ^ r Reserve funds rate * ( Stand- to busiBank ard & ness- months of New Poor 's ) selected York * cities Aaa Baa : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ " Tie " ^ * * lYr-lY * FHA new home mortgage yields ^ ^ ^ ^ 7H-7K -7fc ^ -6M 6K-6M ^ ^ K i&a i Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December * Selected note and bond issues First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; November 1941-March years * Average effective rate for the year ; opening and closing rate for the month s Based on seven-day averages of daily effective rates for weeks ending Wednesday. Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred e Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissible interest rate ( percent beginning September ) Through July computed on 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages paid in years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or { ess Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-58. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding ( Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit Total End of year or month Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Total Noninstalment credit Home m p rovemen t loans1 Personal loans Total Charge accounts Other a Addendum : Policy loans by life insurance companies ' * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * i Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in other consumer goods paper Single-payment loans and service credit Data are annual statement asset values. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) TABLE B-59. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Automobile paper Total Other consumer goods paper Home improvement loans Extended Personal loans Year or month Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid % I960 Repaid Extended Repaid : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sent Oct Nov Dec * i Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-60. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multi- Commerfamily cial propproperties erties i Conventional to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses P : II III... IV : II III... IV... IV v.. : II III... i Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations > Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender [ Billions of dollars ] Private financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banks i Other lenders Life Federal insurance and comrelated panies agencies Individuals and others '.3 I960 * : II Ill IV : II III.. IV : II ill IV * __ Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association and new Government National Mortgage Association as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Admini stration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan C orporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizaions TABLE B-62. Net public and private debt [ Billions of dollars ] Private Public Individual and noncorporate End of year Total FedFederal eral Gov- financial ernm e n t agencies Nonfarm State and local governments Total Corporate Total Total Mortgage Commercial and financial ' Farm * Consumer _ ~ ~ ~ 6.y ._ 1974_ i Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating government and corporate debt Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " This comprises the debt of federally sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with < Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers'debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyhoiders Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) based on data from various Federal agencies and other sources GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays f seal years [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) * i._ -_ Transition quarter * -_ _ -._ I960 __ Estimate Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government will shift beginning with fiscal year Through the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year will run from October through September The 3-month period from July through September will be a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays beginning For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Act jal BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts * Federal funds Trust funds. _ Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) 86b i ! * Federal funds Trust funds ] * * ] * | * OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Another BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs General science space and technology Natural resources environment and energy Agriculture Commerce and transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services _ Health Income security .Veterans benefits and services Law enforcement and justice General government Revenue sharing and general purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances.. _ _ Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement. Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf * * ? ' * * * * * Q 77fi * '650 See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes Oil AJf nqo * * * * * Id 71fi ? QQ * in 73fi i fisn TABLE B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Con [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ) Actual Estimate Transition quarter BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts.. Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions. Total outlays. _ Federal funds Trustfunds Interfund transactions National defense International affairs General science space and technology Natural resources environment and energy Agriculture Commerce and transportation _ Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health. ._ Income security Veterans benefits and services Law enforcement and justice General government. _ _ Revenue sharing and general purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System _ _ Others BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes. Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other BUDGET OUTLAYS Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement-Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf GOO Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government will shift beginning with fiscal year Through the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year will run from October through September The 3-month period from July through September will be a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-65. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures actual Transition quarter RECEIPTS Total budget receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing.. __ Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases. Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures _ Note. See Note Table B-64 See Special Analysis A " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-66. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Federal Government State and local government Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit <- ) national income and product accounts : II III IV : ! ! __. Ill IV : II III IV * Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-67. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Yearorquarte Fiscal year : Calendar year : 1975p..._ Personal Corpotax and rate Total non- profits tax tax acre- cruals ceipts Transfer payments Indirect business tax and nontax accruals PurConchases tribuof tions for Total i goods To and social perserv- sons insurices ance Grantsin-aid to State and To forlocal eign- governers ments Net interest paid Surplus Subsior dies defiless cit cur- ( ) rent nasurtionplus al inof come govand ern- prodment uct enter- acprises counts : IL III IV : II Ill IV * Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of and in each of the quarters of Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-68. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Expenditures Subsidies Pur- Transdirect tontriPerless busichases fer Corutions Fedonal of payorate ness Net current eral tax for urplus tax ) rofits rants- Total i goods ments nterest of govsocial and tax and and to paid ontax ccruals ontax nsur- n-aid ernservperceipts ment ccruals ance ices sons enterprises Surplus or deficit national ncome and product accounts ! e -i.'o g -ill P | : II III IV : L II III IVp___ | | III IV -I'.l J 2'.1 Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of and in each of the quarters of and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-69. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year * Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes General expenditures by function * ReveIndi- Corponue All vidual ration from other : net ncome ederal revetaxes income Govern- nues taxes ment Total Education Highways Public welfare All other < * i Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded s Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-62 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-70. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest- bearing public debt End of year or month Total public debt securities Marketable public issues by maturity class Within year ItolO years years and over Nonmarketable public issues U.S savings bonds and notes Foreign and international Other Government account series ^ Matured public debt and debt bearing no interest M92.7 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec li Prior to July this series was shown as " Special issues. " Beginning July excludes the non-interest-bearing notes issued to International Monetary Fund to conform with Budget presentation Source : Department of the Treasury O TABLE B-71. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values ; ^ billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month I960 Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv AUK Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ _ Held by Government accounts Held by Federal Reserve Banks Total Mutual savings State MiscelCombanks Other mercial and in- corpo- nd local Indi- aneous banks surance rations govern- viduals invesments * tors companies M92.7 U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-52 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies < Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain government deposit account and government-sponsored agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country Beginning December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund International Development Association Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government. See also footnote Beginning July excludes non-interest-bearing notes issued to International Monetary Fund to conform with Budget presentation Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-72. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt End of year or month Amount outstanding Maturity class Within year Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Average length Years Months w ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ^ Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec. Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuaticn adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial Year or quarter Total Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Total Manufacturing i TransportaWhole- tion sale comand municaretail tion trade and services Rest of the world Other ! P 's : L II.. IV.. : III.. IV.. : II.. III.. See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-73. Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment ^ by industry Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Domestic industries Nonfinancial Financial Year or quarter Total Total Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing ^ Wholesale and retail trade Transportation communication and services2 Other Rest of the world '.S v : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. See Table B-74 for industry detail Services consists of electric gas and sanitary services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Year or quarter Total Food Chemmanuicals and facturand ing Total kindred allied prodproducts ucts Durable goods Petroleum and Other coal products Total Fabri- MachinPrimary cated ery metal except metal indus- products electrical tries _ _ _ _ p ElectriMotor cal equip- vehicles and Other ment equipand ment supplies : IL. III.. IV._ : II III.. IV.. L3 '.3 : I I III.. See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-74. Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment manufacturing industries Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Nondurable goods Year or Total quarter manuFood facturand ing Total kindred products Durable goods Chem- Petroicals leum Primary Fabri- Machin- Electriery cal and and metal cated except equipallied coal Other Total indus- metal electri- ment and prod- prodtries products cal supplies ucts ucts Motor vehicles and Other equipment ..,_ : II. III IV. : I.. II. lll_ IV. : ! IL. III. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-75. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Profits StockStock- Sales Stockholders ' Sales Before After holders ' Before After holders ' ( net ) Before After equity ( net ) equity equity income income income income income income taxes i taxes taxes i taxes taxes i taxes Profits Year or quarter Sales ( net ) : IV New series : : IV | II III IV | il Ill In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted gfour Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter % figures ) See " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations First Quarter " Federal Trade Commission ing " " Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-76. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Year or quarter All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries I960 : IV New series : a IV : II Ill IV ' II Ill Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations First Quarter " Federal Trade Commission Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See also Note Table B-75 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-77. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales ' all manufacturing corporations ^ by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Industry Durable goods industries Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals III III IV i II IV Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical.. Electrical and electronic equipment. Transportation equipment Motor vehicles and equipmentAircraft guided missiles and parts Nondurable goods industries Food and kindred products. Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products Instruments and related products.. Other durable manufacturing products III Ratios based on equity at end of quarter Source : Federal Trade Commission II III All manufacturing corporations TABLE B-78. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfnancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Sources Uses External PurPeriod Total Total Total Longterm ^ l ! in Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) financial assets of cal Shortterm physi- Total Other crease assets * Credit market funds Internal In- chase ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II Ill i Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation adjustment ) and capital consumption allowances > Stocks bonds and mortgages * Bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans * Plant and equipment residential structures and inventory investment Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-79. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter Cash on Total hand U.S Govern- and ment in securi- banks ' ties Current liabilities Ad- Receivables from U.S Govern- ment3 and ac- counts receivable Inventories and prepay- Notes ments counts Other current as- Total U.S Govern- sets < Net Fed- vances Notes and ac- Payable eral in- come Other work- cur- capi- rent tax lia- liabilities ing tal bilities ment All corporations s L8 : II III IV : II III Nonfinancial corporations * i Includes time certificates of deposit ' Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to the U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations'books or amounts arisingfrom subcontracting which a re not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * I ncludes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets * Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Excludes banks sayings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Note Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Department of the Treasury ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-80. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Industry of corporate issuer Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Manufacturing ! Electric gas and water J Transportation ' Communication Other I960 _ : II Ill IV : II Ill i Prior to also includes extractive radiobroadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included from forward Sources : Securities and Exchange Corrmission " The Corr.rrercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-81. Common stock pricest earningst and yields ' and stock market credit Margin credit at brokers and banks ( end of period ) Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price indexes Regulated Year or month Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) RailPublic utilities roads ( ( stocks ) stocks ) Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratios Total = Brokers Banks Unregulated ; nonmargin stock credit at banks Millions of dollars : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Apr _. Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Monthly data are averages of daily figures and annual data are averages of monthly figures > Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures a Ratio of price index for last day of quarter to quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data < Margin credit includes all credit extended to purchase or carry stocks or related equity instruments and secured at least in part by stock. Credit extended by brokers is end-of-month data for member firms of the New York Stock Exchange. June data for banks are universe totals ; all other data for banks represent estimates for all commercial banks which accounted for percent of security credit outstanding at banks on June In addition to assigning a current loan value to margin stock generally Regulations T and U permit special loan values for convertible bonds and stock acquired through exercise of subscription rights Nonmargin stocks are those not listed on a national securities exchange and not included in the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 's list of over-the-counter margin stocks. At banks loans to purchase or carry nonmargin stocks are unregulated ; at brokers such stocks have no loan value Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System New York Stock Exchange and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-82. Business formation and business failures Business failures * Year or month Index of net business formation ( ) New business incorporations ( number ) ^ Number of failures Business failure rate Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug.. Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " " Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc * Failure rate per listed enterprises * Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data * Preliminary ; based on seasonally adjusted data through November s Excluding W. T. Grant current liabilities were $ billion Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-83. Income of farm people and farmers [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Year or quarter Net to farm operators Realized gross ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- IncludFrom From From receipts penses ing net ing net nonfarm inven- invenall Total from farm sources sources l sources markettory tory ings change change * Billions of dollars Current dollars dollars Dollars ! v : II Ill IV : II III IV Net income per farm including net inventory change : II Ill IV v Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments * Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney and other farm income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-84. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops2 Year Farm output ^ Feed Total grains Hay and forage Food Vegegrain table Livestock and products Fruits and nuts Cotton ToOil bacco crops Total Meat animals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs _- _ _ _ _ 1973__ P. Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture O TABLE B-85. Farm population employment and productivity ^ Farm population ( April l ) i Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Per hour of farm work Total Per Family Hired unit of workers workers total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre < Index = p i Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas * Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-24 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-86. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = except as noted ! Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm products Crops Prices paid by farmers Livestock All items interest and and products taxes rates wage Family living items Parity ratio Production items Actual Adjusted _ Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec i Percentage ratio of index of prices received by farmers to index of prices paid interest taxes and wage rates on = base a The adjusted parity ratio reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-87. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) l Total hours of farm work ( billions ) 14.5' ' Year v _ Total Farm labor Farm real estate MeFeed chani- Agriseed cal and Taxes Miscelpower cultural liveand chemi- stock interest laneous and cals mapurchinery chases Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm portion of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-88. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Financial assets Other physical assets Beginning of year Real LiveTotal estate stock HouseMaReal DeInvest- Total estate Other chinhold U.S ment equip- posits ery debt debt and Crops ment and savings in cocurbonds operamotor and tives vehifurnish rency ings cles Proprietors ' equities s5 : ! 1958_ * Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-89. U.S. balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as notedj Merchandise * * Military transactions Net investment income Net travel Year and Other trans- servon porta- ices goods tion ex- net and pendiservtures ices i or quar- ter Cv tx- po s Imports Net balance 1951_._ _ _ _ _ 1973__ _ : II _ III.. IV.. : II III. IV. Direct expend- Sales itures balance U.S Government ( ) ( ) ( ) and other unilateral transfersi Balance on current account | c " H Remittances pensions Privates : II Ill p. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net Balance is-7,182 is-3,357 is is Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in timing and coverage Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from net investment income and included in other services net In concept equal to net exports of goods and services in the national income and product accounts although the two series may differ because of revisions special handling of certain items etc Excludes liabilities to foreign official reserve agencies Private foreigners exclude the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) but include other international and regional organizations Includes liabilities to foreign official agencies reported by U.S. Government and U.S. banks and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States Official reserve assets include gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF. Minus sign indicates increase ( Footnotes continued on following page. ) TABLE B-89. U.S. balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted excej.. as noted ] Long-term capital flows net Balance on current Year or account quarter and U.S longGovPriterm ernvate capital ment " AlloNoncaliquid tions shortof term speprivate cial capital drawflows ing net rights ( SDR ) Errors and omissions net Net liquid- bafance * * Liq- Official uid reserve pritransvate actions capital balflows ance net * * * Changes in liabilities Changes in U.S to official foreign reserve official assets agen- nets cies net ? U.S official reserve assets net ( unadjusted end of period ) * " H-1,200 HI * is : : " II III... IV : II Ill p. II Ill IV " H273 n-2,252 H904 " n-2,713 " IV v Includes increases ( in millions ) as follows : for $ resulting from revaluation of the German mark in October ; for $ in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December ; for $ resulting from change in par value of the dollar on May ; and for $ resulting from change in par value of the dollar on October Beginning July valuation of SDR and reserve position in the IMF based on a weighted average of exchange rates for the currencies of member countries. On a pre-July basis reserve assets for December are $ million and for December $ million Not available separately n Coverage of liquid banking claims for and of liquid nonbanking claims for is limited to foreign currency deposits only ; other liquid items are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims Data beginning not strictly comparable with earlier data i ^ Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India " Includes return import into the United States at a depreciated value of $ million of aircraft originally reported in III sales as a long-term lease to Australia * * These balances have been used to measure exchange market pressures on the dollar. Under current floating exchange rate conditions these pressures are inadequately reflected in the balances Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of the Treasury TABLE B-90. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ) Merchandise exports Year or month Merchandise trade balance Merchandise imports Domestic exports General imports Total domestic Food Crude ManFood Crude Manand foreign Totals bever- mate- ufac- Totals bever- mate- ufac- Total ages rials tured ages rials tured c.i.f exand to- and goods and to- and goods * value7 ports bacco fuels * bacco fuels * Exports less imports customs value Exports Exports less less im- imports ports c.i.f f.a.s Customs value F.a.s. value Oil F.a.s. value : Jan. Feb... Mar.. Apr May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov... : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr-May.. June.- July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec... : : : : : : Beginning I960 data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Total excludes Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind < Includes fats and oils * Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Seasonally adjusted annual rate for months Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) TABLE B-91. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Area Jan,Nov Exports ( domestic and foreign and special category shipments ) Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and Republic of South Africa * * * Other Western Hemisphere. _ Near East East ahd South Asia Developing Africa Petroleum exporting countries Other countries * * * Socialist areas in Europe and Asia Unidentified countries l Developed countries Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and Republic of South Africa General imports IB * Petroleum exporting countries Other countries Developing countries _ Socialist areas in Europe and Asia Unidentified countries Developing countries Other Western Hemisphere Near East East and South Asia Developing Africa _ Developed countries * Beginning January transshipments of certain grains and oilseeds through Canada are shown as exports to unidentified countries Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Includes developing countries in Oceania Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country Note : Exports are f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) ; imports are Customs values generally the market value in the foreign country ; and imports are transaction values f.a.s. Petroleum exporting developing countries are as follows : OPEC ( Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ) Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela ; and other petroleum exporting developing countriesAngola Bahamas Bahrain Brunei Egypt Leeward and Windward Islands Netherlands Antilles Oman Trinidad and Tobago and Tunisia Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) TABLE B-92. International reserves [ Millions of U.S. dollars ; end of period ) Area and country November All countries Industrialized countries1 United States Canada Japan Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Norway and Sweden ) Switzerland United Kingdom Other Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Iran Nigeria. Saudi Arabia Venezuela Other Oil exporting countries Less developed areas Other Western Hemisphere Other Middle East Other Asia Other Africa ^ Includes Luxembourg Algeria Bahrain Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar Trinidad and Tobago and United Arab Emirates Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDR ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Conversions from national currencies to U.S dollars from December through January are calculated at the cross rates reflecting the parities and central rates agreed in December From February through June the intention is to reflect the cross rates of parities or central rates for countries having effective parities or central rates and market rates for others. Beginning July foreign exchange is valued at end-of-month market rates or in the absence of market rate quotations at prevailing official rates. Gold is valued throughout at SDR per ounce equivalent to US $ per ounce from December through January to US $ per ounce from February through June but to the respective US $ /SDR transactions value as measured by the " basket " valuation of the SDR beginning July Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-93. U.S. reserve assets ( Millions of dollars ) Gold stock i End of year or month Total reserve assets Total Treasury Special drawing rights ( SDR ) Convertible foreign currencies * Reserve position in International Monetary Fund * i r MO Ml HO '11,567 n,958 June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May i U65 'Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with the right of repurchase and gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas Prior to December excludes gold held by the Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF ) In December the Treasury acquired all the gold held by the ESF Includes initial allocation on January of $ million second allocation on January of $ million and third allocation on January of $ million of special drawing rights ( SDR ) in the Special Drawing Account in the IMF plus or minus transactions in SDR Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System The United States has the right to purchase foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could purchase additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February Includes increases ( in millions ) as follows : for $ resulting from revaluation of German mark in October ( $ in mark holdings ) ; for $ in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December ; for $ in total assets resulting from the change in par value of the U .S. dollar on May ( $ million total gold stock $ million Treasury gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position ) ; for $ in total assets resulting from the change in par value of the dollar on October ( $ million total gold stock $ million Treasury gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position ) Beginning July the IMF adopted a technique for valuing the SDR based on a weighted average of exchange rates for the currencies of member countries. SDR holdings and reserve position in the IMF are also valued on this basis beginning July At valuation used prior to July ( SDR = $ ) end of month values are ( in millions ) : Total reserve assets : Dec. : Dec. SDR Reserve position in IMF Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Department of the Treasury and Board of Gcvernors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-94. International investment position of the United States at year-end and [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States2 U.S. assets abroad Nonliquid assets U S Government Long-term credits Foreign currencies short-term assets _ _ and other Private long-term Liquid assets M.8 Private short-term nonliquid claims _ Direct investments abroad Foreign securities Other claims3 Private claims U.S. monetary reserve assets s ( ) Gold Special drawing rights ( SDR ) Convertible currencies Gold tranche position in IMF U S liabilities to foreigners o Nonliquid liabilities to other than foreign official agencies g U.S. Government Private long-term Direct investments in the United States U.S securities Other liabilities Private short-term nonliquid Liquid liabilities to private foreigners and liquid other readily marketable and nonliquid liabilities to foreign official agencies To private foreigners. _ To foreign official agencies Liquid Other readily marketable Nonliquid reported by Government U.S Preliminary Includes U.S. gold stock Reported by U.S. banks and nonbanking concerns Liquid claims are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims s Reserve assets include increases from changes in the par value of the dollar as officially implemented ; on May the increase totaled $ million consisting of $ million gold stock $ million SDR and $ million gold tranche position in IMF ; and on October the increase was $ million consisting of $ million gold stock $ million SDR and $ million gold tranche position in IMF. Beginning July the IMF values SDR on the basis of weighted averages of exchange rates for currencies of member countries Reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-95. Price changes in international trade [ = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade l United States : Exports Terms of trade l Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade i Latin America : Exports Terms of trade * Southern and Eastern Asia : Exports Terms of trade i III World export price indexes Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Coffee tea and cocoa. Cereals Other agricultural commodities Fats oils and oilseeds Textile fibers Wool Rubber Minerals Metal ores Fuels Manufactured goods : Total Nonferrous base metals * _._ III Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Data are for second quarter Includes forest products < Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Note. Data exclude trade of socialist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research and Bureau of Resources and Trade Assistance ) TABLE B-96. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries ' [ = ] Period United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom i : II III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV2 For United States 12-month average ; for all other countries January-November average except Italy and the Netherlands January-September average October-December average for United States ; and October-November average for all other countries Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O