ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Price $ Stock Number CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK CHAPTER ECONOMIC REVIEW OF CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY IN CHAPTER POLICIES TO INCREASE SUPPLY APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report seepage ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The past year was a year of sound economic achievement. A year ago I said that my key economic goal was " to create an economic environment in which sustainable noninflationary growth can be achieved. " While much remains to be done we have built a very solid foundation for further economic gains in and beyond. The recovery has continued to produce substantial gains in output and employment Unemployment remains much too high but the marked reduction that we see in inflation as well as in inflationary expectations represents significant progress toward regaining the stable noninflationary prosperity that has been our goal The gross national product adjusted for inflation rose by slightly more than percent last year. The rise in production was extremely rapid at the beginning of The advance moderated during the spring but at the close of the year the recovery showed signs of reacceleration. In December more than million Americans were employed an increase of about million from last December and more than million above the recession low. Economic gains were widespread. Real incomes continued their rise consumer expenditures also moved upward business investment began to recover and housing construction improved significantly. Unemployment dropped sharply in the early months of last year although it rose again as the extraordinarily rapid expansion in the labor force outpaced the creation of new jobs Substantial headway was also made on the inflation front. Since late the consumer price index has risen only percent a full percentage point less than was anticipated and a noteworthy improvement over the percent inflation rate of Wage settlements continued to moderate. Record crops and more ample supplies of farm products halted the sharp increases in food prices. As fears of inflation ebbed interest rates declined contrary to most expectations at the beginning of the year ; and the stock market reflecting this heightened confidence was close to the highs of the year when trading ended in The lower rate of infla- tion and the improved state of financial markets attest to the significant progress we have made during the past year toward reestablishing a stable noninflationary full-employment economy If this goal is to be fully realized the present policy of moderation in fiscal and monetary affairs and of relying on a restored vitality in the private sector must continue. We need tax reductions to support a lasting economic recovery and to provide relief from the increases in real tax burdens induced by inflation. In the long run inflation and real economic growth will constantly push taxpayers into higher and higher tax brackets unless tax laws are changed. Some believe that these additional tax receipts should be spent on new Government programs. I do not Instead I believe that the Congress should counteract the growing burden imposed by the tax system and the reduction of private incentives that it implies by periodically providing offsetting tax cuts while continuing to restrain the rate of growth of Government spending The creation of permanent meaningful and productive jobs for our growing labor force requires a higher level of private investment. Tax reductions must be so designed that measures to stimulate consumption are balanced by those which will increase investment. Investment has for some time been falling short of the levels required if we are to provide enough productive jobs for our people at rising real wage rates and if we hope to renew and improve our capital stock so that we can meet our requirements for energy and make headway toward environmental job safety and other goals. Investment has grown more slowly than would normally be true at this stage of a recovery. A stronger spur to investment in productive plant and equipment is necessary for the further improvement in production and employment in and beyond TAX REDUCTIONS In October I presented to the Congress a program of tax cuts and spending restraints that would have reduced the burden of government for all taxpayers. It would have given the American people more freedom to spend their incomes as they choose rather than as Washington chooses for them and it would have increased incentives to expand investment. However the Congress decided otherwise to increase spending far more than I wanted and to cut taxes far less than I wanted Earlier this month I again sent to the Congress my recommendations to cut taxes. I have once more urged a permanent increase in the personal exemption from $ to $ to replace the system of temporary tax credits that has so greatly complicated the individual income tax return I am also recommending a higher income allowance and a series of per- manent tax rate reductions. My proposals provide income tax relief for individuals that will total $ billion in To encourage the investment that will mean good steady jobs for our expanding labor force I am recommending once again a permanent reduction in the corporate income tax from to percent. I urge as well the enactment of legislation to make permanent the extension of the percent investment tax credit and the increased corporate surtax exemption provided by the Tax Reform Act of In the longer run we must eliminate the double taxation of dividend payments. I am therefore renewing my proposal to integrate corporate and personal income taxes gradually over a period of years beginning in I am also renewing my recommendation of accelerated depreciation for investment in new plants and equipment undertaken in areas where unemployment is percent or higher. I am firmly convinced that this is a far better way to raise employment where the economy has not caught up with the recovery than adding layer upon layer of new spending programs Although such tax cuts for individuals and businesses are desirable at this time to support stronger consumer and capital goods markets we must be mindful of the need to bring down our large Federal budget deficit as quickly as possible. As the economy improves and the demand for private credit becomes greater Federal borrowing requirements to finance the deficit must be lowered to avoid preempting funds needed for private investment and to ensure steady progress in the battle against inflation. Accordingly in my Budget Message I am again recommending responsible restraint in the growth of Federal budget outlays. These policies will also bring us closer to our goals of stable noninflationary prosperity INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS Much progress was evident in the rest of the world last year and international economic cooperation continued to improve. Restoration of a stable growth path however has proved difficult. Throughout the world countries are still grappling with the complicated and painful aftermath of inflation recession and the sharp increases in the relative price of energy. Serious social and political problems have made these adjustments more difficult When I met with the leaders of the major industrial nations in the summer of the restoration of full employment in our several economies was the most important item on our agenda. Stable full employment and continued improvement in the well-being of our own peoples and the world population at large we agreed will take a number of years. Although the course of faster expansion seems attractive it is clearly risky. Impatience which leads to a reacceleration of inflation could jeopardize the significant progress we have achieved so far The costly lessons of the past decade are inescapable. High and variable inflation rates are incompatible with sustainable growth. Overly expansionary policies contributed to the very high inflation rate and in turn to the deepest worldwide recession since the 1930s. Policy changes and adjustments will doubtless be needed in and thereafter. But policies must hold to a reasonably steady and predictable course. In particular the measures we select to further our economic expansion must not raise the risk of future inflation The growing recognition among nations of their interdependence has helped to create the cooperation that is now apparent among members of the industrial community. The mutuality of the policy goals of the developed and developing countries needs to be better understood on each side. For this reason the discussions between developed and developing countries during have attempted to foster a climate in which our joint interests and our diverse concerns can be freely expressed. Although the progress so far achieved has disappointed some it has helped us avoid the sometimes easier but mutually destructive course of trade restrictions ENERGY POLICY Energy matters retain their troublesome hold among the problems threatening the Nation 's long-run prosperity. The sharp increases in oil prices in imposed major costs upon our economy. We have done much to accommodate the new higher prices for energy but some aspects of energy policy have hampered the adjustment. The Congress has continued to hold prices for domestically produced oil and natural gas well below world market levels. These lower energy prices have encouraged the inefficient use of energy and discouraged efforts to expand domestic supplies and improve the energy efficiency of the overall capital stock The recovery has heightened the demand for energy and thus resulted in greater imports of oil. In consequence the United States now depends even more heavily upon imported petroleum and is even more vulnerable than a year ago to future price manipulation and interruptions in supply Now that the problems of recession and inflation are receding we can more vigorously address this difficulty. The energy program that I have presented before is designed to answer the longer need First steps are under way toward creating a strategic oil reserve which will help shield us from disruptions in supply. The OPEC pricing decisions of December were a forceful reminder of the Nation 's growing need for protection against foreign moves that affect the price and can alter the availability of imported oil. Strategic storage will provide a first line of defense against the threat of disrupted supplies. This vital program must be implemented and we must also take positive steps to lessen our economic dependence upon foreign oil Measures that will make us less dependent on foreign energy supplies have been proposed by this Administration ; but unfortunately many of the most important proposals have not yet been accepted by the Congress Some of the measures involve present costs which will yield much greater future benefits. Others which would lead to more efficient use of our energy resources would benefit the Nation immediately as well as in the future It is critically important for energy security environmental quality and long-term economic productivity that prices of domestic petroleum and natural gas be allowed to match more closely the full cost of these fuels. In the immediate future oil prices should be allowed to rise as they were intended to do under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act Steps should also be taken which would help close the gap more rapidly between domestic and world market prices for petroleum allow a freemarket price for North Slope Alaskan oil and deregulate the wellhead price of new natural gas Although a number of inconsistencies remain the relation between the Nation 's goals for energy and for the environment has become clearer and the effects of existing policies more fully known. The time is ripe for reexamining environmental policy and determining whether the ends we all seek can be achieved at a lower cost to the economy and to the security of our energy supplies Taken together all of the actions recommended here would help the economy to adjust to the new energy situation and do much to ensure more reliable supplies of energy for the future. They would also signal to the world that this Nation is serious about developing secure supplies of energy. Most important these efforts would encourage conservation and give industry the confidence that will spur the production of both conventional fuels and substitutes REGULATORY REFORM As economic problems have arisen and been dealt with by new policy initiatives the Government 's role in the economy has grown ever larger The number of commissions agencies administrations bureaus and offices set up to conduct programs increases constantly. Each appears important when it is first established. The trouble is that they are seldom if ever terminated when they have accomplished their original mission. By one recent count there were Federal Government organizations alone having significant powers to regulate a wide and growing range of economic activities The direct Federal outlay to control practices in the private sector is substantial. Even more important are the losses that these activities impose on the production and distribution of goods and services throughout the economy. No accurate measure of the total costs and benefits of actions by the regulatory agencies is possible at this time or perhaps ever Although all Americans are aware of the substantial benefits which regulations produce in their everyday lives we frequently lose sight of the efforts of such programs in restricting the growth of productivity The use of newly developed technology the development of new companies and products and the opening up of new occupations have all been impeded by the need for licenses certification review and legal judgments introduced by one agency or another. When innovative activities are discouraged progress is curbed throughout the economy even in those areas where some regulation is justified. Regulations must therefore be reexamined to ensure the removal of costly and counterproductive regulations and to identify those whose need has passed. Where benefits seem large we should make sure that the benefits are realized at the least possible cost To reduce the regulatory burden I asked the Congress in the last year to eliminate unnecessary and anticompetitive regulation in the airline and trucking industries. This action was to follow the path of regulatory reform that the railroad industry achieved in the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of I also urged the Congress to eliminate the Federal Power Commission 's controls on new gas prices which have held back exploration and sales to the interstate pipelines serving northern and western cities. Earlier this month I once again submitted to the Congress a plan to eliminate controls on gasoline refining and marketing Among agencies under my jurisdiction I have set out new regulatory procedures which will make controls more effective and less costly to all concerned but such steps are only a beginning. The Congress and the executive branch must undertake a comprehensive review to ascertain the effects of present controls and then offer to the American people a corrective program that will cut across administrative boundaries. Only a sweeping reform will remove the regulatory burden where it is no longer justified and place the initiative for production and distribution back in the more efficient hands of private enterprise ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT IN SOCIETY I firmly believe that if we dedicate our efforts to the major problems I have outlined here we can successfully resolve them. As a people we have an extraordinary capacity to marshal our resources against even the gravest difficulties Unfortunately many of our problems are self-made. One which has concerned me particularly over the years is a tendency born of goodwill and a desire to improve the state of American life which makes us think we can create costless benefits for our people. We are unwilling to confront some of our hardest choices. We persist in the belief that we can always tolerate a little larger Federal deficit or the creation of a little more money especially for the sake of programs which seem to promise clear and readily definable benefits. This is a kind of self-deception that we must learn to resist Certainly we must adopt measures that promise to keep the economic expansion going and reduce the high unemployment. But overly expansive policies with their inevitable risk of renewed inflation are realities which are easily overlooked in the understandable desire for the immediately tangible benefits foreseen from specific programs. What we seek is a sustainable expansion and the restoration of full employment without inflation and we must settle for no less The discipline implicit in a prudent fiscal policy is not easy but it offers very considerable and lasting rewards. I am hopeful that the recent creation of the budget committees to serve the Congress will help to provide this necessary discipline. Prudent budget policies are essential if we are to restore stable full-employment conditions and provide the productive jobs which our people need and want. Some part of our present deficit is the result of the recession and will accordingly disappear as full employment is restored. Beyond this however we must restrain the growth of Federal expenditures. If we do not we shall have to resign ourselves to higher taxes or to high employment deficits with their inflationary consequences Nowhere are these tradeoffs so evident as in our social security program and our efforts to provide medical insurance for our people. I have emphasized the need to maintain a fiscally sound social security system and repeatedly rejected proposals to fund increased benefits out of what are called general revenues. The purpose of linking social security benefits to specially designated taxes is to balance the benefits to one segment of society with the costs to another segment. Our democratic processes of government work better when the costs of programs are open and visible to those who pay them. Funding our social security benefits through specifically designated payroll taxes strengthens the discipline that should govern these decisions. Benefits are not costless and we should not allow this fact to be submerged in any general revenue funding of the social security system Similar pressures are building up with respect to medical care. We have become concerned and rightly so over sharp increases in the cost of medical care which emphasize the need to improve the efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of health care services. These have arisen in part because the large expansion in health insurance coverage under both private and public programs has reduced the sensitivity of consumers to costs and weakened the incentives to achieve efficiencies. Individuals businesses and unions confronted with the higher costs of private health insurance have begun to exert curbs on the systems for delivering health and medical service and their influence should be salutary. I hope we will not choose to fund these costs through a comprehensive national health insurance system since this will only weaken the incentives for improvement and efficiency that are now emerging These are but two examples of the pressures which threaten to erode our fiscal processes. We must recognize that making governmental expenditure policy the principal arm of demand management has undesirable consequences. Expenditure programs once in place are extremely difficult to cut back. The result is a permanent rise in Federal outlays and the risk of ever-increasing growth in the government relative to the private sector. As the experience of other countries forcibly illustrates this is a dangerous path. It weakens incentives reduces efficiency leads to lagging standards of living and carries inevitable risks of inflation. It is much better to provide fiscal adjustments through tax reductions than through Federal spending programs The solid improvement of this year means continued progress toward a better life for all Americans. Problems will always remain but the future is bright with opportunities to continue strengthening our economy Improvement is part of the American way of life but we must recognize that few problems when viewed realistically lend themselves to quick and easy solution. Our policies must take into account the full costs and lasting implications of the changes we make today for whatever worthwhile reason. If they attack symptoms rather than causes policies will be ineffective and may even preclude the very goals which we seek. Enduring improvement in the economic welfare of the American people requires that the courses we embark on to meet today 's problems will also bring us closer to our more distant goals and aspirations January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS O LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ALAN GREENSPAN Chairman BURTON G MALKIEL CONTENTS Page CHAPTER ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK General Policy Principles Economic Policy for Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy Energy Policy The Outlook Private Consumption Nonresidential Fixed Investment Housing Starts and Residential Investment Inventory Investment Net Exports Government Purchases Labor Force and Unemployment Inflation Productivity Growth and Resource Utilization The Productivity Slowdown The Full-Employment Unemployment Rate Growth in Potential Output Policy Implications CHAPTER ECONOMIC REVIEW OF Demand and Output Personal Consumption Business Fixed Investment Inventory Investment Housing and Residential Investment Government Purchases Net Exports Prices Wages and Profits Prices Wages Productivity and Unit Labor Costs Corporate Profitability Government Budgets and Fiscal Policy Federal Expenditures and the Shortfall Tax Legislation and Federal Receipts The Fiscal Balances The New Congressional Budget Process CHAPTER ECONOMIC REVIEW OF Continued Monetary Policy and Financial Markets Growth of the Monetary Aggregates Federal Reserve Tolerance Ranges for Monetary Growth Interest Rates Other Financial Developments Employment Unemployment and Income Transfer Programs Employment Unemployment Labor Force Participation Income Transfer Programs Energy Developments Consumption Production Imports Prices Agricultural Developments Commodity Markets and Food Prices Farm Income Farm and Food Policy CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY IN Page The Demand Situation Demand and Output in Major Industrial Countries General Demand Trends Public Sector Deficits The External Sector Economic Outlook and Government Policies Stabilization Policy and Exchange Rate Policy Current Account Positions and Financing OECD Current Account Positions OPEC Surpluses Non-Oil LDC 's Exchange Rate Changes International Financial Markets Official Financing Adequacy of Official Financial Resources Ill North-South Economic Relations CHAPTER POLICIES T O INCREASE SUPPLY Structural and Induced Unemployment Frictional and Cyclical Unemployment Induced Unemployment and Unemployment Compensation Structural Unemployment Employment Tax Credit Summary CHAPTER POLICIES T O INCREASE SUPPLY Continued Government Regulation Regulated Price Above Market Price * Regulated Price Below Market Price Regulations That Directly Affect Cost Implementing Regulatory Reform Summary Agricultural Policy The Movement to Market-Oriented Farm Programs The Threat to Market-Oriented Policies The Future of Market-Oriented Policies Tax Policies for Capital Formation Investment Tax Credit Tax Integration Policies To Stimulate Saving Page APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables The Market Value and the Replacement Cost of Net Assets of Nonfmancial Corporations Projected Growth Rates of Monetary Aggregates Calendar of Major Private Nonfarm Collective Bargaining Activity Civilian Unemployment Rates by Age Sex and Reason for Unemployment Civilian Unemployment Rates for Selected Groups and Potential and Actual Gross National Product Changes in Gross National Product in Constant ( ) Dollars Growth of Real Consumption Expenditures and Real Disposable Personal Income Changes in Plant and Equipment Expenditures Changes in Selected Price Measures Changes in Labor Costs and Productivity in the Private Nonfarm Business Sector Changes in Major Collective Bargaining Settlements Output Profits Net Interest and Profit Measures of Nonfinancial Corporate Business List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Continued Page Comparison of Projected and Actual Federal Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Fiscal Years Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendai Years Federal Expenditure Shortfall National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Year Reconciliation of Estimates of Federal Expenditure Shortfall Unified Budget and National Income and Product Accounts Fiscal Year and Transition Quarter Actual and Full-Employment Federal and State and Local Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Basis Calendar Years Projected and Actual Growth Rates of Monetary Aggregates Funds Raised in Credit Markets by Nonfinancial Sectors Labor Market Indicators Income Transfer Programs Changes in Energy Consumption and Relevant Economic Indicators by Final Consumption Sector Changes in Consumer Prices of Energy Items Real Income Per Farm and Per Capita Disposable Personal Farm Income as Percent of Nonfarm Income Personal or Household Saving Rates in Selected Industrial Countries Changes in Industrial Production in Selected Industrial Countries Private and Public Employment in Selected Industrial Countries Export Shares in Trade in Manufactures of Industrial Countries Current Account Balances for OECD OPEC and Other Countries Current Account Balances for OECD Countries Estimated Disposition of OPEC Investible Surplus Borrowing in International Capital Markets Civilian Unemployment Rates Under Alternative Definitions by Age and Sex Change in After-Tax Internal Rate of Return Under Present Percent Investment Tax Credit All Businesses List of Tables and Charts Continued Charts Page Relation of Real Business Fixed Investment to Real GNP Ratio of Market Value of Nonfinancial Corporations to Replacement Cost of Net Assets Productivity in the Private Business Economy Gross National Product Actual and Potential Growth in Money Stock Interest Rates Exchange Rates for Selected Industrial Countries Interest Rates in Selected Industrial Countries CHAPTER Economic Policy and Outlook T HE U.S. ECONOMIC RECOVERY is now almost years old. In real gross national product ( GNP ) rose by percent and employment increased by almost million persons. Although the pattern of real GNP growth during was more erratic than had been anticipated showing rapid growth in the first quarter followed by more moderate gains in subsequent quarters the rise in real GNP for the year as a whole was about what had been projected a year ago. The growth of production and employment for was accompanied by a further significant moderation of the inflation rate. The average annual rate of change in the GNP deflator was percent over the quarters of compared with a percent average in The unemployment rate declined by almost percentage point from to but it is still much too high and must be reduced further. The percent increase in employment in indicates that progress is being made in alleviating the economic and social hardships remaining from the recession. Owing to the combination of secular and cyclical increases in labor force participation rates and in the growth of the working-age population the labor force grew by percent in This rapid growth of the labor force means that jobs must be created at a fast pace in order to reduce the rate of unemployment A continuation of rapid employment and real income gains will require a strong growth in private investment demand in the years ahead. Little extra impetus to the economic expansion will be forthcoming from inventory investment and personal consumption because inventories already have risen and saving rates have dropped closer to normal levels. Although business fixed investment has begun to recover from the low levels of the recession its growth has been slower than in past recoveries. Without a sharper upturn in investment the expansionary momentum already slower in the second half of last year can not easily be maintained. Even if final sales growth could be bolstered without a strong recovery of business fixed investment the implied lesser growth of productive capital would not be sufficient to provide new jobs at a faster rate in the future without a slower growth of productivity and real wages In our Report we indicated that business fixed investment would have to account for approximately percent of GNP during the last half of the 1970s if the Nation is to achieve full employment by meet specified productivity and environmental objectives and attain greater independence in regard to energy. While it was not suggested that economic equilibrium can not be attained under many other sets of conditions the social and economic strains of adjusting to a slower and less widely shared improvement in living standards seem likely to become severe if we continue to fall very far short of this ratio. Business fixed investment in was less than percent of GNP and even with the improvement anticipated this year the share is likely to remain below percent in The momentum of the recovery must be maintained in the near term through measures which foster growing business confidence and which support stable economic growth and decelerating inflation. If not a slow growth of capital formation may create capacity limitations which could stall the expansion before acceptably low levels of unemployment are reached To provide support for an economic expansion strong enough to effect a substantial reduction in unemployment without at the same time jeopardizing the progress achieved so far in containing inflation the President has recommended a permanent reduction in personal and business taxes beginning this year. The purpose of these measures is to further the growth of disposable income which has been eroded in part by inflation-induced increases in taxes and to provide more incentives to investment spending. The continuing diminution of inflation during the past year indicates that such tax reductions to promote the growth of demand are consistent with the goal of sustainable noninflationary growth if they are accompanied by steps to restrain the growth of Federal expenditures in future years. To help consolidate our progress in curbing inflation the President has proposed a budget which provides for a slowing of the growth in Federal outlays in and beyond. Unless surpluses can eventually be achieved in the Federal budget at high levels of employment it may be difficult to increase the share of investment in GNP and maintain the growth of the Nation 's productive capacity With the help of these policies the economic recovery is expected to continue in Real GNP is expected to be to / percent higher than in and its rate of growth should average between 5j/i and percent during the quarters of Such growth will produce further gains in employment. But unless labor force growth decelerates significantly from the current high rates the decline in the unemployment rate is likely to be modest. In any event unemployment will still be unacceptably high during the year. If we are to eliminate the economic loss and hardship associated with idle resources economic growth in and beyond must continue to proceed at a more rapid pace than the longer-run rate of growth of potential output. We do not anticipate that these policies will lead to an increase in the underlying rate of inflation. Indeed if wage settlements continue to moderate further progress in reducing inflation could be possible in this year and in future years GENERAL POLICY PRINCIPLES To assure a sustained expansion four general principles should guide the formulation of economic policies over the next several years. Economic stimulus where needed should be provided by tax reduction rather than by increases in government spending. Tax reduction should be permanent rather than in the form of a temporary rebate. Policy initiatives should be balanced between measures directed toward consumption and those aimed at increasing business fixed investment. Economic policy should aim for a steady economic expansion in which the components of aggregate demand are in balance Stimulus should be provided by tax reduction rather than by increases in government spending. Rising government purchases of goods and services first increase income and employment in the areas that produce the increased output demanded by government. The visibility and strength of these first-round effects account for much of the political support for increased spending. A number of serious difficulties arise however when government expenditures are used as a tool of stabilization policy Our experience has been that under existing institutional arrangements the startup time for many spending programs can be quite long ; this is particularly true of the large construction projects which are considered by many to be useful instruments of countercyclical fiscal policy. The danger is that the economic impact of new spending programs will not be felt when it is most needed and will then outlast the need for stimulus. In addition when restraint rather than continued stimulus becomes desirable it may be politically difficult to cut these programs. As a result a fiscal policy which stimulates expansion primarily through increases in government purchases may risk overstimulating the expansion at a later stage. Another difficulty is that frictional inefficiencies arise from manipulating the level of government expenditures for stabilization purposes. Each time a government program is changed costs are incurred as the private sector is forced to adjust and reallocate the necessary resources. And in some cases the rules and regulations associated with the enactment of these programs may necessitate widening government interference in the private sector Similar dangers exist with income maintenance and support programs These programs are essential to relieve the economic hardships associated with unemployment. But we must be careful that changes in programs designed to deal with cyclical contingencies do not end by permanently increasing Federal payments the number of beneficiaries and the size of the individual benefits. Such a result would reduce the growth of resources available to the private sector ; and the higher marginal tax rates eventually required to finance these expenditures may lower incentives to work and invest thereby hindering the growth of our aggregate supply capabilities and heightening inflationary pressures. An analysis of some special job creation programs is provided in Chapter of this Report Tax reduction should be permanent rather than in the form of a temporary rebate. The primary objectives of tax reduction in the current situation should be to provide relief from the inflation-induced increases in real tax burdens and to support a lasting economic expansion. Because consumers normally adjust expenditures to their " permanent " or long-run income a lasting reduction in personal taxes which raises both current and future after-tax income should yield a sustained rise in consumer spending as happened following the permanent tax reduction in Sustained growth in consumer spending is required to promote a durable economic expansion On the other hand any stimulative effect that a temporary tax rebate may have on consumer spending will diminish quickly. For example a substantial increase in expenditures for durables did occur after the payment of the rebate. Part of the effect of such a one-time windfall however may have been to shift some expenditures to the present that had been planned for a later time with the result that spending would be correspondingly lower in subsequent periods. This phenomenon may be the reason for the very low rates of increase in purchases of consumer durables in the last quarters of Such fluctuations in the movements of demand contribute to uncertainty about fiscal policy and damage the prospects for steady growth. Thus temporary tax rebates are not consistent with the objective of sustaining an economic expansion. While they may be useful in helping to bring about a reversal of generally declining demands during a recession they are not consistent with the maintenance of an expansion of demand that is already under way Moreover transitory increases in consumer spending associated with temporary tax cuts are not likely to stimulate investment as much as more permanent increases in demand would do. Business firms may realize that an expansion in sales will not last if the increase is apparently due to a temporary reduction in taxes and will have less incentive to expand capacity than if they expect a more sustained rise in sales. A permanent reduction in income taxes has a more lasting impact on household consumption demand and consequently on business firms ' willingness to invest in productive capital It is sometimes argued that tax cuts should be temporary in order to maintain a permanent revenue base for future spending programs. A strong and more certain growth in and beyond however is ultimately the key to whether resources will become available to support these expenditures Moreover taxes automatically increase faster than income over time because of the combined effects exerted by inflation real growth and our graduated tax rate structure. Unless permanent reductions are made from time to time taxes will account for an ever larger share of taxable income Thus there is little danger that a permanent tax reduction will destroy the revenue base for the Federal Government. Indeed another fear may be more realistic : if taxes are not reduced periodically we run the risk of allowing the tax burden to rise over time and thus inhibit the growth of demand in the private sec cor Economic initiatives should be balanced between measures to stimulate consumption and those designed to increase business investment. We noted above that investment must grow somewhat faster than GNP for some years to achieve long-run goals of employment and income growth. It is therefore essential that economic policy create an environment which will encourage business investment. Clearly investment spending will be stimulated by substantial increases in final sales which tend to reduce excess capacity and increase expected profitability. A cut in personal income taxes which sustains real consumption growth will thus encourage investment However in the current economic environment we believe this consumption-induced investment growth can usefully be augmented by direct stimulus to private investment. Consumption-oriented growth in demand will not necessarily bring aggregate investment to the levels needed to offset the inadequate investment of the past few years. On the contrary direct stimulus may be necessary to counteract forces which have deterred investment Chart shows that business fixed investment currently accounts for a relatively low proportion of GNP approximating the percentage of the early 1960s. Even with substantial increases in business fixed investment next year this ratio will remain under percent and far below the ratios we believe are desirable. Furthermore the slow growth of labor productivity analyzed later in this chapter does not suggest that productive capital has become relatively more abundant over the last decade. The policy response to comparable problems in the early 1960s was to stimulate investment directly with such measures as a reduction in corporate tax rates Chart Relation of Real Business Fixed Investment to Real GNP PERCENT OF REAL GNP h I T i l l I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I A number of factors may have prevented the restoration of business confidence and hence restrained investment growth. Wage and price controls are still a recent memory and fears of a reacceleration of inflation have not been completely dispelled. Recollections of the severe recession may also restrain business confidence. Because fears of a renewed inflationrecession cycle may encourage businesses to increase liquidity rather than invest in plant and equipment confidence must be rebuilt before sales growth will be translated into higher capital outlays Laws and regulations to provide necessary protection for the environment also create costs and uncertainties. Not only does the spread of regulations raise production costs but long-run cost and profit calculations are made less certain because of the possibility of future changes in regulations. For instance if ' a change in environmental laws may affect the operations of a new plant then the risk associated with building this plant is correspondingly increased. The impact is more severe on longer-lived investments which require longer commitments with less flexibility once they are made It is of course very difficult to prove that a decline in business confidence or an increase in risk premiums is responsible for the failure of investment to rise as much as might have been expected during the current recovery This difficulty results partly from our inability to directly measure the uncertainty or accurately assess the expectational factors and the environment within which long-term investment decisions are made. Most evidence for the view that business confidence remains poor is qualitative and involves a degree of casual empiricism. One quantitative indicator of the expectations affecting business investment is the market value of a corporation 's stocks and of net interest-bearing debt relative to the replacement cost of its assets. If for example assets are valued in the market significantly above their replacement cost corporations will be encouraged to invest in new equipment and thereby create capital gains for the owners of their securities. On the other hand if assets are valued below their replacement cost/ corporations which sell new securities to buy new capital goods may be creating capital losses for their security holders. In the latter case we can infer that the cost of capital has risen relative to the average profitability of past investment projects and that new investment will be discouraged Of course at the margin the expected rate of return on a significant number of potential new investments will remain above the cost of capital even though existing assets on average are valued below their replacement cost Thus even if the market value of a firm fell below the replacement cost of its assets this would not mean the end of investment incentives. It would be especially inappropriate to draw such conclusions from estimated aggregates composed of heterogeneous corporations Nevertheless it is probably safe to infer that the almost continuous decline in the ratio of the market value of nonfmancial corporations to the replacement cost of their assets during the last few years ( Table and Chart ) is an indication that investment incentives are much lower currently than in the TABLE The market value and the replacement cost of net assets of nonfinancial corporations Replacement cost of net assets Market value Year Total Interestbearing debt * Equity Total Net noninterestbearing financial assets Net stock of depreciable fixed assets and inventories Ratio of market value to replacement cost of net assets Ratio of real business fixed investment to real GNP Billions of dollars I960. _ i Market value of net interest-bearing debt of nonfinancial corporations ( NFCs ) adjusted from face value by assuming a maturity of years and discounting a stream of coupon payments equal to the net interest paid by NFCs. The discount rate is assumed to equal Moody 's Baa corporate bond yield * Dividends of NFCs divided by the dividend/price ratio of Standard & Poor 's composite index of common stocks Average of year-end values * Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers ( based on data from various sources ) second half of the 1960s. Even allowing for the possibility that the high values of the ratio in the 1960s reflected some temporary overconfidence in the evaluation of future returns the significant downward trend is an indicator that a lack of confidence may be a factor holding back long-term investment commitments now. One inference from this evidence is that a direct stimulus to investment such as a corporate tax reduction would provide could hasten the restoration of business confidence and be useful to supplement the normal accelerator mechanism. Another is that measures which would help reduce the risks of substantial changes in the regulatory climate over the normal life of fixed assets would also raise investment Such measures would help to offset the uncertainties which are still restraining investment and would make up for the slow growth of productive capital in the past few years Policy should aim at a steady expansion with balance among the components of aggregate demand. An important policy decision in the years ahead concerns the appropriate amount of fiscal and monetary stimulus to sustain the recovery. In the effort to achieve continued progress toward full employment we must not create inherently unstable and ultimately http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ of Federal Reserve BankO St.- Louis Chart Ratio of Market Value of Nonfinancial Corporations to Replacement Cost of Net Assets SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ( BASED ON DATA FROM VARIOUS SOURCES ) counterproductive conditions along the way. With a high inflation rate and many uncertainties still remaining to hamper the economy stimulus which aims for a balanced composition of demand and a steady pace will provide the safest and surest path of advance. A steady recovery allows aggregate production to expand gradually toward full capacity thereby avoiding such imbalances as overaccumulation of inventories shortages of strategic commodities or insufficient accumulation of fixed capital. Moreover if unexpected shortages or demand deficiencies begin to arise policy can react before either inflationary or deflationary pressures become too severe. In this way the possibility of renewed instabilities is minimized. In turn the improved outlook should help restore confidence encourage investment and assure that increases in demand raise employment rather than inflation rates Evidence showing the impact of inflation and expectations of inflation on business decisions is very limited. Nevertheless an overly rapid expansion could generate a rise in inflationary expectations which might restrain capital accumulation and threaten to cut off the expansion before full employment is reached. In the short run increases in inflation may appear to stimulate investment because of delays in the upward adjustment of market interest rates and the estimates of the risk associated with inflation However high rates of inflation may be associated with high variability in individual prices. If this is so the expected variance of future returns on investment would increase with inflation thereby adding a risk premium to the rate of return required to undertake new investment projects. Thus the cost-price uncertainties which could be associated with high inflation because of larger more frequent and less predictable changes in relative prices may eventually discourage business spending. In the long run the effect of inflation may be negative as market interest rates adjust to offset the inflation stimulus and only the negative effect of greater uncertainty remains Another factor which will call for moderation at a later stage if the expansion is to be sustainable is the current uncertainty about the level of potential output in the U.S. economy and the likelihood that the potential has been growing at a lower rate in the 1970s than during most of the 1960s There is also some uncertainty about the unemployment rate that should be used to represent a constant degree of tightness in the labor market at full employment either now or in the future. These uncertainties suggest the wisdom of proceeding with a greater degree of caution in our return to full employment than was previously thought necessary. ( These and other factors that bear on long-run economic growth are discussed more fully later in this chapter International considerations provide a further reason for maintaining a steady recovery. If a too rapid expansion at home is accompanied by rapid expansions followed by bottlenecks in other major industrial countries inflationary forces can be intensified by worldwide excess demand for strategic commodities. On the other hand in a situation where the world 's economic development is lagging it is important that U.S. growth should not be so slow as to contribute to sluggishness in world trade. This would reinforce rather than alleviate demand deficiencies and increase the risk of another recession ECONOMIC POLICY FOR FISCAL POLICY With these general principles in mind the President has proposed a permanent tax cut for individuals and corporations which will reduce tax liabilities by about $ billion in calendar The largest part of the tax cut $ billion would go to individuals in the form of higher personal exemptions an increase in the low-income allowance and lower tax rates. The rest would go to corporations in the form of a percentage point reduction in the corporate income tax rate. Federal expenditures on a national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis are expected to be $ billion in This will yield an actual deficit of $ billion for the year and a decline in the full-employment surplus of $ billion in As private sector spending continues to expand it is expected that the Federal deficit will gradually diminish to make room for the necessary private savings flows to finance new capital formation The proposed $ 10-billion permanent reduction in personal income taxes would be implemented by an increase in the individual exemption from $ to $ an increase in the low-income allowance to $ for single persons and $ for joint returns and a reduction in rates in the lower- and middle-income brackets. Furthermore the temporary tax credits first enacted in would be repealed. These changes would offset the increase in the real tax burden of middle-income families resulting from the high inflation rates of recent years. The reduction in personal taxes would lead to a permanent increase in after-tax income and a more confident outlook in the household sector both of which should significantly boost consumer spending in the year ahead. By creating stronger markets and raising the rate of capacity utilization the personal tax cut would also indirectly stimulate additional investment The proposed reduction in the corporate income tax rate from percent to percent would reduce corporate tax liabilities by about $ billion in It would thus improve the net return on all capital assets and enlarge the flow of internal funds to finance new projects. The supply of savings has been adequate since the recovery began in ; but as the expansion proceeds and pressure on capacity builds the increased cash flow would be an important source of finance for new investment. The tax cut would also have a beneficial effect on expectations in the business community possibly yielding further gains in investment spending. The President is also renewing several previous recommendations to improve business profitability : a program of accelerated depreciation for newly installed plant and equipment in areas of high unemployment ; the partial integration of corporate and personal income taxes over a period of years beginning in to offset the double tax on corporate earnings ; and permanent extensions of the percent investment tax credit the percent tax on the first $ of corporate income and the $ corporate surtax exemption As noted in the Economic Report of the President at a time when there was a similar concern that stagnating investment could damage the prospects for long-term growth : it is essential to our employment and growth objectives that we stimulate more rapid expansion and modernization of America 's productive facilities. Investment in private plant and equipment is a principal source of long-term gains in productivity. A high rate of investment is needed to equip our growing labor force with better and more modern equipment. The investment needed to gain our growth objectives will be achieved only if we eliminate economic slack only if we strengthen demand and broaden incentives to take risks The tax program outlined in this Report is designed to achieve these same objectives in and beyond. If business confidence does not improve and if investment does not begin to grow rapidly additional stimulative measures for investment should be considered in the future MONETARY POLICY The Federal Reserve Board has projected growth ranges for the three major money supply measures through the third quarter of Barring unforeseen changes in financial conditions monetary growth within these ranges should be sufficient to finance continued economic expansion without risking a resurgence of inflation. However the unusual uncertainties which have recently clouded the relationship between monetary growth especially Mi growth and nominal GNP will require special caution and adaptability in setting and revising if necessary the growth ranges in the near future The specific ranges which have been set for the year ending in the third quarter of are / to 6/ percent for Mi ] /2 to percent for M and to l/i percent for M The projected ranges for Mi reflect a projected structural shift in the growth of demand for this aggregate. The Federal Reserve has estimated that a number of regulatory and technological changes encouraging the use of alternatives to demand deposits for transactions will reduce the demand for Mi in Quantitatively the most significant of these changes appear to be regulations permitting the use of savings deposits by businesses and State and local governments the growing use of negotiable orders of withdrawal ( NOW ) savings accounts which can provide the equivalent of checking services and the use of telephonic transfers of funds from savings to checking accounts To the extent that these developments will continue to reduce the growth of demand for Mi in the announced ranges for M x growth are consistent with a monetary policy that will encourage a stable economic recovery If the effects of these changes are forecast correctly then a sustained growth of Mi beyond the new upper boundary would be more than is needed to finance the recovery and hence it might overstimulate the economy and carry a risk of renewed inflation. However if these structural changes cease to have this expected negative effect on M x demand then a reconsideration of the ranges would be necessary to ensure that the growth in Mi is consistent with a continuation of the recovery. In interpreting the impact of these structural changes it is important to recognize that a further slowdown in the economic recovery could be a direct cause of slower Mx growth. If so it would be inappropriate to adjust the growth range downward. A sustained rather than a reduced Mi growth would be an important stabilizing influence offsetting the weakness in aggregate demand. Because the current forecast of the structural change in Mi demand is necessarily imprecise financial developments must be closely monitored to determine the underlying causes of observed monetary growth trends This is not to say that the current uncertainties in the demand for Mi suggest an abandonment of monetary growth ranges in favor of market interest rates or other money market indicators. The ranges directly act to dampen inflationary expectations by indicating a commitment to a monetary policy consistent with long-run price stability. Moreover interest rates alone can not serve as a guide to monetary policy especially during periods of high and variable inflation rates. A monetary policy which attempts to hold market interest rates steady for too long would be destabilizing. In the face of an unanticipated and excessive economic boom such a policy would result in a rapid monetary expansion which would reinforce the boom and prevent the moderating effect of a rise in interest rates. On the other hand if an unnoticed fall in inflationary expectations developed a policy which stabilizes market interest rates would effectively raise real rates and be contractionary. Properly interpreted however interest rates as well as other economic variables such as business investment should be useful in projecting and revising the monetary growth ranges. Because a strong growth in the capital stock is crucial both for the near-term economic expansion and for the long-run sustainability of income growth policy must be flexible enough to minimize the risk of not providing sufficient credit for long-term productive investment The upper boundary for M2 and M growth has been increased by onehalf of percentage point since the previous Federal Reserve growth projection ( Table ) and this may provide some additional flexibility. One of TABLE Projected growth rates of monetary aggregates Mi M2 ^ ^ Period ^ M3 Range of percent change from a year earlier * : : II Ill ^ Range of percent changes in Mi M2 and M3 forecast by Federal Reserve for the period Note. Mi is currency plus demand deposits ; M2 is Mi plus time deposits at commercial banks other than large negotiable certificates of deposit ; and M3 is M plus deposits at nonbank thrift innstitutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System the serious problems facing the monetary authorities is the choice of an appropriate measure of the money supply. Theoretical or empirical evidence does not indicate the clear superiority of any one of the measures and at times they give conflicting indications. Throughout much of Mi growth was near the lower boundary of its range and M growth near the upper boundary. Until there is a reversal of these diverse patterns the increase in the upper boundary for M2 may permit a slightly faster growth of both aggregates if this is necessary to finance the recovery Our forecast for nominal GNP growth for the year ending in the third quarter of is about percent. Along with these projected monetary growth ranges it implies that the velocity of Mi the ratio of GNP to Mi will increase by 4l/2 to ^ /2 percent. For the quarters of Mx velocity growth was percent. Thus even if Ma grows near the upper boundary of its range velocity growth in will be about the same as in Some reduction in velocity growth normally occurs in the advanced stages of economic recoveries especially during periods of slower economic growth like the latter part of The / percent velocity growth of Mi is unusually large and presupposes a continued structural shift in M x demand The projections also imply that the velocity of M will increase by to 3/2 percent over the year ending in the third quarter of This compares with a decline in M velocity over the quarters of Given our GNP forecasts velocity gains closer to the larger of the above estimates 6j/s> and 3/2 percent for Mi and M velocity respectively would be unusual under any circumstances and could generate a substantial increase in interest rates unless the shift in money demand is even larger than last year For the longer run fiscal policy will have to absorb proportionately more of the burden of restraint than monetary policy if we are to meet our capital growth needs. In the Federal deficit absorbed percent of the net funds raised in U.S. credit markets and although the proportion was reduced to percent in the first quarters of it is not expected to be reduced further in This has not yet constrained private finance because overall credit needs have been low. As the borrowing requirements for private investment grow in the years ahead however fiscal stimulus will have to be lessened in order to release funds to meet these needs. Smaller Federal deficits and eventually surpluses will permit a less restrictive monetary policy with easier conditions in the credit market. In the years ahead aggregate demand management must rely less on consumptionoriented fiscal policy for stimulus in order that monetary policy which generally has a disproportionate effect on investment is not forced to take all the burden of restraining inflationary forces ENERGY POLICY Assurance of sufficient supplies of energy resources will be required to sustain a steady economic expansion. To promote this end the President has recommended an energy program which stresses expanded domestic energy production and increased utilization of our most abundant resources particularly coal. The key feature of this program is the phased elimination of controls on prices of natural gas and oil. While such a change would entail higher prices for these products in the near term it would help to ensure that the U.S. economy is less vulnerable to sudden changes in the availability and cost of imported resources in coming years. Moreover the most efficient production and allocation of the economy 's resources which would be encouraged by decontrol would increase our aggregate supply capabilities and reduce inflationary pressures in the longer run Higher prices for oil and natural gas in the short run would reduce the relative share of imported oil and gas in total energy consumption. The higher prices would also tend to shift fuel use away from oil and natural gas in favor of coal and this would further moderate the economic impact of price increases by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) The phased elimination of price controls on natural gas would help remove the risk that a period of severe cold weather could disrupt the economic recovery by forcing a random unscheduled closing of factories owing to curtailment of supplies. Such forced closing did not cause significant disruptions in and when there was excess capacity ; but as utilization rates increase during the next years the risk of shortages in manufacturing capacity could become more serious with resulting inflationary pressures The President has also proposed measures to encourage the use of nuclear power. If they succeed they will further reduce our dependence on imported oil and natural gas. Increased funds for general energy development have also been proposed. While these may contribute little in the near future in the longer run the benefits to our energy supply capabilities could be substantial These actions would ease and hasten the adjustment of the economy to the new energy situation and they would help to ensure more stable and reliable energy supplies for the future. The OPEC pricing decisions of December were a forceful reminder of the Nation 's growing need for protection against foreign moves that affect the price and availability of imported oil. The proposed measures mean somewhat larger increases in domestic energy prices in the near term and they would combine with the upward adjustments of U.S. petroleum prices under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act and the long overdue upward adjustments in natural gas prices under the Federal Power Commission ( FPG ) decisions of Taken together however these energy price increases would not be great enough to exert a significant restraining influence upon the expansion THE OUTLOOK The main elements of continued economic growth in the United States are well established despite the slowdown which occurred in the second half of With the assistance of the monetary and fiscal policies discussed above and with continued strength in the private sector real GNP is expected to rise by to ^ percent from to and its annual growth rate is expected to average between 5J/2 and percent over the quarters of This will permit a further expansion of employment and bring the rate of unemployment down to nearly percent by year 's end. At the same time because the recovery over the past years has avoided the excesses in public and private demand which characterized the previous upturn the rate of inflation is not expected to rise above the to percent range With a much smaller expected rise in inventory investment compared to earlier stages of this recovery the expansion in will require a strong growth in final demand. The expected recovery of business fixed investment will be an essential component of this demand. The proposed reduction in personal income taxes which will stimulate a higher rate of real consumption growth as well as the reduced corporate tax rate will help to encourage such an investment recovery. A continued strengthening of residential investment is also expected to boost the rate of growth in final sales in PRIVATE CONSUMPTION The growth of real disposable income slowed in the latter half of but is expected to reaccelerate in as a result of strong employment growth the reduction in personal taxes and moderate increases in consumer prices. Because of the slower growth in real disposable income in the latter half of the saving rate had fallen to percent in the last quarter. This rate should rise in early with the start of the personal tax reductions but for the year as a whole the saving rate is not expected to be appreciably different from the average of % percent. Real consumption growth for should therefore approximate the to percent rate expected for real disposable income The growth in consumer spending in is expected to be most pronounced in the durable goods categories. The combination of a return to strong and steady real income gains and lower layoff rates should continue to restore the confidence which is essential for accelerated growth in real expenditures on durable goods. The year-over-year growth in real purchases of motor vehicles and parts is expected to be about percent This figure is down substantially from the percent growth in ^ but still represents an important contribution to a continued economic expansion. Another major factor bolstering spending will be the strong growth in housing completions in which should stimulate furniture and appliance sales NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED INVESTMENT The growth of nonresidential fixed investment in especially in the latter part of the year was low for this stage of recovery and by the end of the year the real level was still well below the peak. With the expected increase in sales growth and with the reduction in the corporate tax rate which will begin to affect investment later this year real business fixed investment is expected to increase by approximately percent in The projected rate of investment will provide sufficient capacity for the year ahead but the share of investment in GNP will almost certainly remain below the average of the late 1960s Recent surveys of investment anticipation have indicated that current dollar expenditures in business fixed investment should increase by to percent in Surveys often underestimate actual new investment in periods of expansion however and the recent surveys may not have taken full account of the effects of the proposed cut in taxes in An increase of about percent therefore seems quite possible Investment growth in is likely to be strongest in durable manufacturing particularly in the automobile sector. Plant and equipment modifications for producing lighter small and intermediate-sized cars as well as for general modernization appear to be the underlying factors here. Other sectors where new investment should grow rapidly are nonelectrical machinery and ferrous and nonferrous metals. Investment growth in nondurable manufacturing except for petroleum refining and in the commercial sector is expected to be comparatively weak. The sluggishness in the construction of commercial and office buildings should persist through owing to overbuilding earlier in the decade HOUSING STARTS AND RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT The housing recovery which accelerated in the third and fourth quarters of last year should continue in and be an important factor in the growth of final demand. Total housing starts are expected to average between and million units this year with approximately million single-unit starts. Since this represents a significant increase over last year and because last year 's increase was concentrated in the second half of the year real investment in residential construction is expected to rise by percent in The major sources of strength for housing in will be continued growth of real disposable income continued strong flows of funds for mortgage credit slightly lower mortgage rates and some stimulus from programs of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) An important influence on residential construction is the availability and cost of long-term funds for mortgages. Short-term interest rates have declined during the recovery and savings flows to thrift institutions are likely to remain strong making funds for mortgages readily available. Moreover the decline in secondary-market mortgage rates in the latter half of has begun to bring primary-market mortgage rates down slightly Until the latter half of the recovery in multifamily housing had been relatively weak. Overbuilding in and and continued low profitability on rental housing had evidently been restraining the construction of multiple-dwelling units. Vacancy rates for rental housing have finally dropped however and are now below the percent average of These factors coupled with the HUD Section lower income housing assistance program and the $ billion in Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) loan commitments during should support the recent recovery in the multifamily sector INVENTORY INVESTMENT The dramatic $ 21-billion shift from real inventory liquidation in to positive accumulation in was a major reason for the high rate of GNP growth last year. This year we expect continued growth in inventory investment as demand advances but the growth will be slower than last year. In real terms inventory investment should increase only by about $ to $ billion from to In view of some apparently undesired inventory buildup last year as well as uncertainty about the outlook for businesses can be expected to proceed cautiously in building new stocks NET EXPORTS In real terms net exports of goods and services are expected to be slightly lower in than in While the change in real net exports is likely to be small the composition of the growth in merchandise exports is expected to be very different from that in During growth in merchandise exports is expected to be concentrated in the industrial and capital goods categories with agricultural exports slightly below their level. This change in the composition of exports contrasts with that of last year when rising agricultural exports were an important factor. Because exports of industrial and capital goods have a larger effect on employment than agricultural exports do the overall economic effects of this shift could be substantial Developments on the import side are likely to be dominated by oil imports Because of a large oil inventory buildup late in in anticipation of a price rise imports early in are expected to be relatively low. By midyear they should return to normal levels but should begin to decline again in the fourth quarter when we project Alaskan oil to become available. The volume of nonfuel imports is expected to rise fairly smoothly and gradually throughout the year GOVERNMENT PURCHASES Government purchases are expected to increase rapidly in following a year of sluggish growth. Total government purchases of goods and services are projected to rise by about 3/2 percent in real terms with Federal spending growing somewhat faster and State and local purchases somewhat slower than the overall rate. In current dollar terms the President 's budget projects that Federal purchases will rise approximately percent in calendar At the State and local level the overall fiscal outlook for is significantly better than it has been for the last or years. State and local tax receipts should increase in line with nominal income by some percent Federal grants-in-aid which now account for nearly percent of State and local receipts are also expected to grow substantially from to A significant portion of the increase will be for public service jobs accelerated public works and other antirecession assistance. In addition general revenue sharing has been extended for years at about a $ 7-billion annual rate. Thus total State and local government receipts should rise by about percent. Allowing for a temporary increase in surpluses in their operating accounts ( which exclude receipts and expenditures from social insurance funds ) an to percent rate of growth in current dollar purchases in appears likely. If the inflation rate averages about percent the real growth would be between and percent. Indeed in view of the unusually small increase in expenditures in one could reasonably argue that some extra catching up may take place this year with real growth reaching the to percent range. On the other hand the conservative spending behavior from may carry over into in which case real growth could fall below percent Looking beyond the impetus for continued rapid expansion of State and local purchases is diminishing for several reasons. The growth in the school-age population has slowed notably thus reducing the need to build new schools and hire more teachers. Moreover salaries of State and local workers have now caught up with those in the private sector. Wages and salaries account for more than half of total State and local purchases and a major reason for the rapid growth of this sector in recent years was the drive for salary comparability. Now that parity has been achieved it is unlikely that the rise in State and local government wage rates will diverge significantly from the economy-wide trend in wages. Finally there appears to be strong sentiment among voters to curb the expansion of State and local spending These considerations point to more modest growth in State and local real expenditures in the years ahead ; and if inflation rates do not increase nominal expenditures should grow at a rate less than the percent average between and With sustained revenue growth States and localities taken as a whole are therefore expected to accumulate rising surpluses It is quite possible that those governments with positive operating surpluses will want to maintain them during the expansion to avoid the possibility of further tax increases or expenditure cuts during periods of weaker economic growth. But in the long run there is little reason for these surpluses to rise strongly and opportunities may exist in certain jurisdictions to lower taxes The one cautionary note to add to this optimistic longer-term outlook concerns the funding of State and local retirement plans. These plans have become an important part of the total compensation package of State and local employees and benefits are now paid to over million individuals Benefits have also become exceptionally large in recent years because they are not subject to a current budget constraint or debt limitation. Most State and local pension funds are not fully funded which means that the assets held by the funds are not sufficient to cover the present value of all promised benefits. Consequently there is growing concern that some of these funds particularly in large cities with a deteriorating economic base will eventually become insolvent as current contributions fail to keep up with benefits. This has already led to legal action by current and prospective beneficiaries asking that States and localities fund their retirement plans on a more current basis. At least one of these suits ( in Philadelphia ) has been upheld and an additional contribution has been ordered. To the extent that there is a general move toward current funding State and local expenditures will have to rise as will the taxes to finance them. These will be budgetary increases that do not result in a higher level of current services LABOR FORGE AND UNEMPLOYMENT It is expected that the civilian labor force will grow at about percent in compared with the percent average annual rate of growth for the last decade. The upward trend in the rate of labor force participation by women should continue and the proportion of young persons in the workingage population should increase. The trend toward earlier retirement however is also expected to continue. With real GNP expected to grow by to 5J/2 percent in a decline in the average unemployment rate for the year of a little more than one-half a percentage point would be considered normal. If labor force growth is somewhat higher however a slightly smaller decline is possible. By the end of the year the unemployment rate is expected to be near percent INFLATION The inflation outlook in should be heavily influenced by the behavior of production costs since the economy is still some distance from the point where aggregate demand would begin exerting generalized pressure on capacity. Given the cost increases expected in and the projected growth in demand the rate of inflation is expected to remain in the to percent range. To the extent that the nonrecurrent changes in food and energy prices during brought measured inflation rates below the underlying rates the forecast for represents a moderate slowing of the rate of inflation. To some degree this slowing is a reflection of the excess supply which still exists in many sectors of the economy Compensation per hour is expected to increase by about ll/i percent slightly below the percent increase in However productivity increases are expected to be smaller than in In the very short run productivity shifts are reflected primarily in profit changes. In the longer run however income shares tend to remain relatively constant. With most of the cyclical gains in labor productivity probably already realized the productivity growth rate is expected to be in the 2/2 to percent range this year. As a result unit labor costs in the private sector should rise by about percent. Additional improvement in the inflation rate will probably require a further slowdown in nominal compensation growth. The price of food often an erratic component of the total inflation picture is expected to increase only modestly in because of adequate supplies of most farm products. The rate of increase in energy prices will continue to converge toward the overall inflation rate in Wages. The decline in the rate of inflation since late has had a moderating effect on the rate of increase in nominal wage demands. This source of moderation is fragile however since fears of a renewed inflationary spiral and of wage and price guidelines or controls could generate anticipatory wage increases. But assuming that inflationary expectations do not increase and that the overall rate of inflation is about / percent the rate of increase in nominal wages in should be about percent. The translation of wage rate increases into compensation per hour depends on interindustry shifts in employment changes in the relative proportion of wage to salary workers increases in private fringe benefits and increases in publicly mandated supplements to wages. As noted above it is estimated that total compensation per hour of work in the private sector will rise about ^ percent in Although nearly one-fourth of all civilian workers are members of labor unions only about million or percent of total employees are under major contracts covering or more workers. Some believe however that wage settlements in these sectors have a disproportionate impact on overall wage developments because of a demonstration effect. Consequently in forecasting wages it is useful to examine the collective bargaining schedule for the year ahead The major collective bargaining contracts that expire this year or are subject to wage renegotiation cover nearly million workers ( Table ) This year will be the second consecutive year of heavy collective bargaining in the 3-year cycle. The average duration of contracts expiring in is months Thus most of these contracts were negotiated in or later after the end of the Economic Stabilization Program and during a period of high inflation The latter led to an expansion of coverage under cost-of-living adjustments ( COLA ) and high first-year wage increases. Hence some of the factors that TABLE Calendar of major private nonfarm collective bargaining activity Scheduled wage reopenings Contract expirations Period Principal industry Number : Total All years Workers covered ( thousands ) Number Workers covered ( thousands ) January. February March April... May. June Petroleum refining Food stores Construction food stores Construction Apparel construction lumber. Construction utilities. July August September October November. December. Construction mining Communications steel Maritime food stores Transportation equipment do Railroads mining. and beyond Year unknown or in negotiationl Bargaining units for which necessary information was not available include agreements which expired prior to October ( when these data were tabulated ) covering workers and contracts which expired between October and December covering workers Note. Major agreements are those covering or more workers Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics led to large first-year catchup increases in ( for example the absence of the COLA provision or a limit to it as in the United Rubber Workers and Teamsters contracts ) will be less significant in For example twothirds of the wrorkers covered by contracts expiring in are already under cost-of-living adjustments and thus have been well protected from the effects of inflation in the past years. The only major contract expiring in in which there has been a cap on the COLA is in the railroad industry The effective wage rate change that is likely to occur in for all persons covered by major collective bargaining agreements may be projected on the basis of current contract information. Wages change because of scheduled or deferred increases written into previous contracts automatic cost-of-living adjustments and first-year or currently negotiated wage increases. A tabulation of deferred wage increases excluding COLA scheduled for the million workers in the second and third years of their contracts shows an average increase of 5/2 percent for compared with percent for such agreements in This implies a contribution of 2/2 to percentage points to the expected wage rate increase in for all workers covered by major collective bargaining agreements. Cost-of-living adjustments are expected to add another percent while first-year settlements are likely to be in the neighborhood of percent. The effective wage rate increase in for workers covered by major collective bargaining agreements is thus expected to be about ll/i percent. Increases of this magnitude are consistent with our projected overall growth in compensation Food prices. Food prices are not expected to be a source of inflationary pressure in Though errors in forecasting food prices are large one may expect the consumer price of food relative to nonfood items to fall as it did in Commodity futures prices on organized exchanges are consistent with a food component of the consumer price index ( CPI ) about percent higher in than a year earlier about the same increase as in This projection is roughly in line with forecasts by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. While futures prices are often inaccurate predictors they do incorporate all the currently available information and therefore provide a useful point of reference for next year 's outlook for wholesale food prices There are important uncertainties in the outlook for food prices. Meat prices were primarily responsible for the stability of consumer food prices in However the supply conditions that led to lower meat prices last year are unlikely to persist throughout particularly for beef. Exactly when and how much prices for all meats will be affected is not yet clear for several reasons. First it is uncertain how long farmers will go on reducing cattle inventories. Marketing of breeding stock could continue to sustain total beef production. Second continued large supplies of pork and poultry will dampen upward pressure on the overall price of meat. Ample pork and poultry production seems assured through the first half of although low prices could cause this supply to taper off later in the year. Third the marketing margin costs added to meat prices between the farm and retail markets is difficult to forecast for It rose sharply in especially for pork as larger supplies increased the demand for marketing services. If supplies begin to slacken the reduced demand for marketing services could substantially lower the rate of increase in these margins. Thus while cattle prices above the average are expected in the ultimate effect on retail meat prices should be tempered by lower prices for hogs and poultry than in and by slower growth in marketing margins Prices of fresh fruits and vegetables are even more difficult to forecast than those for meat but they also carry less weight in the CPI. Generally supplies of fruits and vegetables for processing should be sufficient to limit the risk of sharp price increases. Coffee prices should continue to be high Cereal products are unlikely to be subject to significant upward price pressures in because of ample stocks of the principal food grains : wheat and rice. Milk production is expected to continue at high levels creating the possibility of some weakness in prices. Because of low stocks of the major feed grains and oilseeds for feed production of dairy and other livestock products late in the year will be sensitive to harvests of feed and forage crops. Current soil moisture reserve conditions in the upper Midwest are unfavorable ; hence crop prospects will depend more than usual on adequate spring and summer precipitation Energy prices. During the period from to wholesale and retail prices of fuel and related products rose on average at rates in excess of the increase in overall consumer and wholesale prices. In however these rates of growth began to converge and this movement should continue in ; prices of consumer energy products are expected to increase between and percent during the year. The recently announced increase in the price of petroleum exports imposed by members of OPEC does not alter this conclusion. The higher price of imported oil is expected to add about cent per gallon to the price of domestic petroleum products and to result in a to percent increase in the consumer price index for gasoline and distillate fuel oil Consumer and wholesale prices of natural gas contributed most to the increase in the wholesale and consumer price indexes of fuel and power during and largely owing to increases in the price of imported natural gas primarily from Canada and to regulatory actions by the Federal Power Commission. This trend will continue in as a result of recent decisions which permit higher prices to be charged for supplies of natural gas flowing from new domestic wells. In addition in July the FPC raised the ceiling price for gas supplies introduced into interstate commerce during and These actions will undoubtedly lead to continued large increases in wholesale and consumer prices for natural gas in the near term. In the longer run it is hoped that higher prices will bring forth additional supplies of natural gas which will tend to moderate future price increases Consumer prices of fuels during will probably not be affected by the removal of price controls on petroleum products. Controls were removed from distillate and residual fuel oils in mid-1976 without a noticeable impact on inflation. The supply of gasoline appears to be more than adequate to satisfy projected demand at prevailing prices so that the removal of price controls from gasoline would not have adverse inflationary consequences PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND RESOURCE UTILIZATION In designing economic policy to cope with cyclical fluctuations in economic activity it is important not to overlook the longer-term issue of growth. In the past years more than two-thirds of the increase in real national output has been generated by increases in average labor productivity or output per labor-hour. Over the past decade however productivity growth has shown a marked decline even after adjusting for cyclical effects. Since the trend rate of growth in measured output per labor-hour has decreased by about one-third from the rate attained in the 1950s and early 1960s. If productivity gains continue to be small real wages will continue to grow more slowly than in the period THE PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN Productivity growth in the private sector averaged percent per year between and almost percentage point above the average. Between and however the private productivity growth rate was only percent per year below the long-run trend. This slower advance may have contributed to increased inflationary pressures and may have led to lower growth in real wages As shown in Chart the reduction in private productivity growth is striking. While part of this poor performance can be attributed to the recent recession the falloff in productivity was evident even before Slower growth in capital per worker a larger proportion of less experienced workers in the labor force and the changing industrial composition of labor input have all contributed to this slowdown. Higher relative energy prices and slower technical progress may also have played a part. However the reasons for the slowdown are not fully understood at this time because the decline in productivity growth appears to be larger than the sum of the estimated effects of these factors Growth of Capital and Labor One important source of productivity growth is the increase in the amount of capital per hour of labor input. Between and capital per labor-hour in the private sector grew by about percent per year ; during the period this growth rate fell to percent per year. Since the growth of capital per labor-hour has apparently fallen to percent O Chart Productivity in the Private Business Economy DOLLARS PER HOUR ( RATIO SCALE ) / PRODUCTIVITY AT C i ACTUAL PRODUCTIVITY i i i _ i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i J/GROWTH RATE OF PERCENT PER YEAR SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR after adjustment for cyclical factors. The decrease can be attributed to a faster rate of growth of labor input not matched by corresponding increases in the capital stock. The larger growth in the labor force since the mid-sixties has been a result of the postwar baby boom and of an increased percentage of women in the work force. Although the average growth rate of fixed nonresidential capital in was higher than the average growth rate for the effective growth rate of capacity may well have increased less because of higher obsolescence rates and increased expenditures on pollution abatement and safety equipment. While both types of investment contribute to our well-being they do not in general increase our capacity to produce measured output. Estimates of the contribution of increases in the capital-labor ratio to productivity growth are very sensitive to the measure of capital stock used ; our analysis suggests that perhaps one-tenth to one-third of the productivity slowdown since can be explained by slower growth in effective capital per labor-hour Composition of the Labor Force In the last decade the proportion of the labor force made up of teenagers and young adults has been rising. Workers in these groups tend to be less productive to the extent that they have less experience and training than other workers. Productivity is measured by output per labor-hour and these labor-hours do not reflect differences in training and experience. Early retirement has also reduced the proportion of experienced workers. Thus lower productivity growth is a natural consequence of a fall in the average wrork experience of those in the labor force. Changes in the age-sex composition of the labor force can explain more than percentage point ( or about percent ) of the productivity growth differential between and Median educational attainment in the labor force has also increased more slowly in the past decade than it did in the previous years. In many age and sex categories of workers there has been a slight slowdown in the rate of increase in years of schooling. It is however unlikely that this small change had a significant effect on average productivity Employment Shifts Between Sectors in the Economy Changes in the industrial composition of employment have also been a factor in lowering average productivity growth. Before the shift of workers out of agriculture contributed to growth in productivity. Even though the rate of growth of productivity in agriculture was high the average level of productivity was below the general average and the movement of workers from agriculture to other sectors increased aggregate productivity. Since the late 1960s this shift out of agriculture has slowed and productivity growth from this source has been much reduced. Almost one-third of the difference between the trend rate of private productivity growth in and can be attributed to the higher rate of reduction in agricultural employment in the earlier period A higher rate of increase in the number of workers in the low-productivity service sector has also been a factor in the slowdown in productivity growth. However the effect of shifts in employment in the private nonfarm sector are much smaller than the effect of the movement of workers out of agriculture To some extent shifts in employment between sectors and changes in the amount of capital per labor-hour measure the same thing and thus represent double counting of changes in the capital-labor ratio. Low-productivity sectors may be less capital intensive and therefore a shift in employment toward low-productivity sectors can be accompanied by a decrease in the growth of capital per worker. There are also independent effects however since capital per worker can change within each sector Other Factors Affecting Productivity Productivity growth that is not caused by increases in capital per laborhour or changes in the composition of the labor force is attributed to a catchall residual category. Measurement errors of many kinds comprise part of the residual but most of it is probably traceable to various forms of technical progress such as improvements in the quality of capital and new techniques for combining inputs to increase production While allocation of resources to research and development should generate technical progress and increase residual productivity growth the quantitative relation between productivity and research is not well documented. Even though a close causal relation between aggregate research and development expenditures and residual productivity growth can not be proved such expenditures and their share of total output give some indication of probable productivity growth in the future. Research and development expenditures which grew rapidly from to have fallen in real terms since The share of research and development in GNP reached a peak of percent in and fell to percent in Although changes in labor force composition and slower growth in fixed capital per worker have been a partial cause of the productivity slowdown in the last decade much of it must be attributed to other factors. Significantly greater productivity may be generated by the technical improvements incorporated in new capital equipment a consideration which would increase the impact of the slowdown in the growth of the capital-labor ratio However it seems unlikely that the effect of this " embodied " technical progress could explain most of the large difference in residual productivity growth before and after Since the productivity slowdown coincides with the entrance into the labor market of those born during the post-World War II baby boom the slowdown in productivity may be in part a consequence of the time required to adjust to changes in relative factor proportions. If so productivity growth similar to that in may continue through since the labor force is projected to grow at relatively high rates until that time. After the growth rate of the working-age population will decline and the labor force will expand more slowly unless the slower population growth is offset by increases in the proportion of the population in the labor force THE FULL-EMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT RATE Assessing long-run trends in economic growth requires a standard to measure labor resource utilization. Although an explicit definition is difficult the full-employment unemployment rate is generally understood to mean the lowest rate of unemployment attainable under the existing institutional structure that will not result in accelerated inflation. Given the inexact relation between changes in the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment estimates are necessarily imprecise but in the early 1960s the Council of Economic Advisers selected percent as an estimate of the full-employment unemployment rate in the economic circumstances existing at that time. This estimate referred to the overall measure of unemployment as a percentage of the civilian labor force and was based on an examination of economic conditions in the mid-1950s when the overall unemployment rate fluctuated around percent. During the years since then a number of relevant changes have occurred which give reason to believe that the fullemployment unemployment rate equivalent to percent in the mid-1950s has increased Since the mid-1950s a dramatic change in the composition of the labor force has apparently led to an increase in the movement of workers in and out of the labor force. High rates of labor force turnover generally increase measured unemployment since first entry and reentry into the labor force generally involve a period of job search and are counted as unemployment in the labor force statistics. Hence for approximately the same tightness in the labor market the measured unemployment rate will be higher if a larger proportion of job seekers are persons formerly outside the labor force Data on reasons for unemployment indicate that the high rates of labor force entry and reentry account for most of the higher unemployment rates among youths compared with adults and that the unemployment rates for job losers and job leavers differ very little among demographic groups ( Table ) Youths are far more likely than adults to combine work in the labor market with some other activity such as schooling or work at home. Students move in and out of the labor force in search of part-time and full-time employment during the school recess and during the school term many search for part-time employment. A rising proportion of youths in the labor force would therefore be associated with a rising proportion of new entrants and reentrants and hence other things being equal with a rise in the unemployment rate. Since the mid-1950s teenagers and young adults have in fact constituted an increasing proportion of the labor force from percent in to percent in because of the postwar baby boom that has increased the proportion of youths in the working-age population and because of a rise in the labor force participation rate of students TABLE Civilian unemployment rates by age sex and reason for unemployment [ Percent ] All civilian workers * Age and sex years and over : Men __ Women Job losers and job leavers years : Men Women Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in proup specified Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force excluding new entrants and reentrants Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers The difference between the overall unemployment rate and that for subgroups of the population has widened markedly since the mid-1950s partly because of these changing labor force proportions ( Table ) The unemployment rates for adults experienced workers and the long-term unemployed in and were all roughly equal to the rates in a year in which the overall rate of unemployment approximated the full-employment estimate of percent. Yet for the later years the overall unemployment rate was much higher rising to percent in and to percent in TABLE Civilian unemployment rates for selected groups and [ Percent ij Group Experienced wage and salary workers. Long-term unemployed workers2 Age groups : years years and over years All civilian workers Unemployment as a percent of civilian labor force in group specified except as noted Unemployed weeks or longer as percent of total civilian labor force Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The apparent secular rise in the unemployment rate for young persons relative to adults suggests that the change in the composition of the labor force does not explain all of the shift between the overall unemployment rate and the rate for adults. Direct data are not available but some of this change in the structure of unemployment rates may be due to increased movement in and out of the labor force by youths. Among youths there has been an increase in school enrollment rates since the mid-1950s and students are more likely than other youths to alternate between working or job seeking and attending school There also appears to have been an increase in the measured unemployment rate for adult women relative to adult men but because of a change in the survey the data reported after are not strictly comparable with earlier years. Moreover how greatly this survey change has affected the difference in unemployment rates between adult men and adult women is uncertain. If there has been a rise in the actual unemployment rate of adult women relative to adult men it may be due to an increase in labor force participation for married women. Many married women leave the labor force when a child is born and return intermittently for several years. A disproportionate increase in the component of the adult female labor force in which the labor force turnover is highest would thus tend to raise the unemployment rate of adult females relative to that of adult men Because the estimates of these developments are still uncertain however it is difficult to assess their influence on the overall unemployment rate Other developments in the past years may have tended to increase the full-employment unemployment rates of all demographic groups. For example broader coverage of unemployment compensation is likely to raise the rate of unemployment associated with a particular degree of tightness in the labor market. The most recent extension of coverage in placed an estimated million wage and salary workers under the temporary special unemployment assistance program. As a result of legislation coverage under the regular State programs is to be extended to about million of these million workers. Other circumstances suggest that the financial burden of unemployment has been lessened for many families : the rise in the proportion of families with two adult earners because of the growth in women 's labor force participation ; and an increase in other public transfer programs for the low-income unemployed. These factors have tended to weaken the tie between current consumption and current earnings and they may have increased the extent of unemployment that is consistent with a full-employment economy Other changes may have had the opposite effect. These include the rising level of education the relative increase in white-collar occupations and more efficient job search because of improvements in transportation and communication. Because the reasons for differences in unemployment rates by education level are not well understood it is not clear whether the rise in education by itself has been accompanied by a stable or a changing education-specific full-employment unemployment rate for given age and sex groups. The effects of improved labor market efficiency are also ambiguous since it is not clear whether greater efficiency in the search for jobs lessens the rate of unemployment at full employment There is no unique procedure for adjusting the full-employment unemployment rate for the changing demographic composition of the labor force and for the changing relationships in the unemployment rates of various demographic groups. Moreover any estimating procedure is subject to sampling variability. Using available data on labor force composition and unemployment rates and adjusting for the increased proportion of young persons in the labor force and for the increase in their unemployment rate relative to adults the Council of Economic Advisers has estimated that the fullemployment unemployment rate equivalent to percent in is now percent. This estimate corresponds with the widening in the difference between the overall unemployment rate and the unemployment rate for adults observed in Table The effects of many of the other factors which are believed to influence the full-employment unemployment rate are much more difficult to quantify Partly because of this difficulty there is considerable dispute about their relative importance but it is likely that they have raised the full-employment unemployment rate even higher than the current estimate perhaps closer to 5J/2 percent. The current benchmark estimates however incorporate only the effects for which the evidence is substantial. As further evidence becomes available perhaps through more data on unemployed persons classified by reason for unemployment or perhaps through observed changes in wages and prices as actual unemployment rates decline the current estimate of the full-employment unemployment rate might be further refined It is important to bear in mind however that the full-employment unemployment rate will not remain constant. For example as the population ages and youths represent a smaller percentage of the labor force the full-employment unemployment rate will also tend to decline. The overall unemployment rate that represents full employment can be expected to change with time as demographic social and economic factors affect the rates at which workers move in and out of jobs and in and out of the work force GROWTH IN POTENTIAL OUTPUT Potential GNP is a measure of the aggregate supply capability of the economy or the amount of output that could be expected at full employment. More precisely potential GNP is the output the economy could produce with the existing technology under assumed conditions of high but sustainable utilization of the factors of production labor capital and natural resources. It does not represent the absolute maximum level of production that could be generated by wartime or other abnormal levels of aggregate demand but rather that which could be expected from high utilization rates obtainable under more normal circumstances The significant slowdown in average productivity growth suggests that the rate of growth of potential output was lower in the past years than has been previously estimated. The revision of the national income and product accounts also reduced the rate of growth of real GNP Moreover the widespread shortages of physical capacity and the resulting inflationary pressures experienced in suggest that previous estimates of potential GNP are overstated. The Council has therefore reestimated potential GNP taking into account the lowered rate of productivity growth the factors contributing to this slowdown and the increase in the fullemployment unemployment rate. The new estimates of potential output are experimental in the sense that they are based on highly aggregated measures of labor capital and output ; and they must therefore be considered interim revisions. A more definitive study would use disaggregated data on labor and capital inputs and more evidence on the education and experience of the work force Estimates of Potential GNP The benchmark level of resource utilization implicit in the Council of Economic Advisers ' previous estimates of potential output was an overall unemployment rate of percent ; it was assumed that full utilization of other resources such as capital and land would accompany percent unemployment. The new estimates of potential attempt to include explicitly the contribution to output of fixed capital ; hence a benchmark for capital utilization as well as for labor utilization must be set. Full employment of fixed capital is assumed to be attained when the manufacturing capacity utilization index calculated by the Department of Commerce reaches percent. This is the capacity utilization rate attained in the first and second quarters of In another year of high employment manufacturing capacity utilization was percent ; percent is thus a relatively optimistic estimate of sustainable capacity utilization. The capacity utilization index that represents the same degree of resource utilization may change over time since capital input is at least as heterogeneous as labor input. A higher proportion of old equipment in the capital stock would probably lower the capacity utilization benchmark. Inadequate data make estimation of such a variable benchmark very difficult however and it has not been attempted here The full-employment benchmark has been changed from a constant percent unemployment rate to a rate that varies over time. The new labor utilization benchmark adjusts for the increase in the proportion of younger workers in the labor force since and for the observed increase in unemployment rates for younger workers relative to those for adults. As discussed earlier these adjustments imply a rate that rises from percent in to percent in The definition of the new estimate of potential GNP in is then the output in dollars that the economy would produce if the Department of Commerce manufacturing capacity utilization rate were percent and the unemployment rate percent The new potential GNP estimates are compared to the previous estimates in Table and are shown graphically in Chart The average annual growth rate of potential from to is now estimated to be percent per year a reduction from the former estimate of percent per year ; and the rate is projected to be about * percent per year in the near future The reduction in the growth of potential GNP results in an estimate that is $ billion in dollars ( or about percent ) lower in than that previous estimate of potential. Most of the reduction in the estimate of the growth of potential output is due to slower growth in labor productivity since In $ to $ billion of the estimated reduction in potential output can be attributed to this factor Some of the reduction in the growth rate of potential output can also be attributed to the recent benchmark revisions of the national income and product accounts which incorporate new source data and estimating procedures. The revised real GNP estimates are evaluated in terms of rather than prices. The result of these changes has been to lower growth rates of real GNP The change in the unemployment benchmark lowers slightly our estimates of how the expanding labor force has increased potential GNP Using a full-employment benchmark of percent rather than percent in would raise potential GNP by percent to percent depending on how the reduction in unemployment is distributed over the labor force Thus between $ billion and $ billion of the $ billion reduction in potential for can be attributed to the change in the assumed unemployment rate at potential The downward revision in potential GNP results in a current growth rate for potential output that is about the same as the 3/2 percent per year originally estimated by the Council of Economic Advisers for the period from to Increases in the labor force growth rate since that time have been offset by decreases in the rate of productivity growth yielding a growth rate of potential output which is nearly constant. This downward revision does not appear to be sensitive to the particular method which we have used to estimate potential. Experiments with a number of alternative procedures give similar results and indicate that the new estimates are robust given current information. For example a calculation for the period from TABLE Potential and actual gross national product [ Billions of dollars ] Potential GNP GNP gap Year New Actual GNP Old New ( new potential less actual ) Old ( old potential less actual ) ^ fi i I i Preliminary Note. See text in this chapter on " Productivity Growth and Resource Utilization " for differences between the old and new potential GNP Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( actual GNP ) and Council of Economic Advisers ( potential GNP ) to which adds labor force growth of percent to productivity growth of percent and subtracts percent for the decline in average hours worked per week all at annual rates yields a growth rate of potential output amounting to percent per year. More research would be useful however to further our understanding of the determinants of the economy 's potential and the relation between the growth of potential and economic policy. The attempt made here to incorporate the effects of capital accumulation and labor force composition on economic growth is a step in this direction The decline in average hours worked is also a factor which contributes to a slower growth in potential output than might be expected from the high rate of growth in the labor force. Between and the tendency toward shorter workweeks accelerated somewhat. The slightly accelerated decline in the average workweek added to the effect of the changing composition of the labor force implies a growth rate of effective labor input ( labor hours weighted by average hourly earnings ) that is significantly lower than the growth rate of the labor force. For example from to the civilian labor force grew by percent per year while effective Chart Gross National Product Actual and Potential BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( RATIO SCALE ) SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES NEW POTENTIAL GNP OLD POTENTIAL GNP V ACTUAL GNP i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i NOTE.-SEE TEXT IN CHAPTER ON " PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND RESOURCE UTILIZATION " FOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE OLD AND NEW POTENTIAL GNP SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS labor input grew by only percent per year. Therefore although the rapidly growing labor force implies a high rate of growth in potential output reductions in the average workweek and changes in the age-sex composition of the labor force indicate that the increases are somewhat lower Productivity behavior since raises a further question about the current level of potential output. In the most recent downturn the productivity decline started earlier and was much more severe than might have been expected from earlier recessions. The data indicate that part of this decrease may have been a permanent downward shift in the level of productivity. A conservative estimate of this shift lowers potential output to $ billion in Thus the GNP gap may be about $ billion lower than indicated There is reason to expect such a drop in productivity to accompany the OPEC oil embargo and the subsequent quadrupling of crude oil prices. The new high energy prices should have made some capital equipment and some energy-intensive production processes inefficient with a consequent loss in economic capacity. This loss would not be included in capital stock estimates because the method normally used for estimating the aggregate capital stock depreciates new investment over a fixed period and does not adjust for short-term changes in obsolescence The statistical methods used to adjust for cyclical variations in productivity are necessarily based on the presumption that the variations in productivity over the business cycle are related in a stable way to measures of the cycle such as the unemployment rate and capital utilization rates Since the data indicate that the current slowdown may have produced an atypical reaction in productivity it is possible that productivity will continue to increase and reach its former trend in the next years. This possibility would imply private productivity growth rates for and well in excess of the percent trend On the other hand it has been nearly years since the recession reached its trough and there has been little evidence of cyclical productivity gains this late in previous recoveries. Because of this uncertainty regarding the permanence of the recent decline in productivity estimates of potential output will be similarly uncertain. The estimates of potential GNP presented in Table and Chart do not include a shift in the level of productivity in but instead assume that the downward movement will be offset by an equivalent upward movement as recovery continues. The performance of the economy over the next years will indicate whether or not a further revision in the estimates of potential GNP is necessary POLICY IMPLICATIONS Neither potential GNP nor the full-employment unemployment rate will be reached in However both may set limits to growth in coming years which can not be exceeded without risking accelerating inflation and renewed instability. For example the uncertainty that surrounds the estimates of potential output implies that caution must be observed as potential GNP is approached. If the reduction in the level of productivity proves to be permanent physical capacity constraints similar to those encountered in may appear well before an unemployment rate of percent is reached. If so they will seriously interfere with our full-employment goals As discussed previously there are reasons to believe that the fullemployment rate may be above the percent benchmark we have used to estimate potential output. In any case policy makers should realize that a percent goal is not likely to be sustainable in the current economic environment ; and because of the tentative nature of the full-employment rate estimates they should watch closely for signs of accelerating wage inflation when the overall rate of unemployment falls to about 5J4 percent The analysis suggests for example that the percent unemployment rate in may have been partly responsible for the accelerating inflation in although this interpretation is clouded by other events such as the wage and price controls and the extraordinary increases in the prices of food and fuel. It also suggests that economic programs which aim to reduce unemployment in particularly depressed areas or among disadvantaged groups can be a useful supplement to policies which focus on the economy as a whole. Moreover it must be remembered that even with our revised estimates the current output is far below potential and unemployment is much above full-employment levels. Thus aggregate demand policies such as the tax program proposed by the President are still necessary to reduce unemployment and close the existing gap between potential and actual output The uncertainty about the lowest rate of unemployment that will not result in accelerating inflation also has important policy implications. Not too long ago economic policy makers were able to illustrate the difficulties of achieving both a stable price level and a full-employment economy by referring to the fairly close negative association between the unemployment rate and the inflation rate during the 1950s and early 1960s. While it was never thought to be exact the relationship indicated the inevitable upward pressure of high utilization of labor and capital on prices and wages and it was used to calculate the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment According to this relationship the cost of an excessively low unemployment rate was a higher though not necessarily increasing rate of inflation During the last years however this relationship has shifted dramatically and the concept of a stable tradeoff has become untenable. Nevertheless it is difficult to deny the essential fact that excessive expansion and extremely low unemployment rates ultimately produce higher and perhaps accelerating inflation. Nor can one deny that a slack economy with low utilization of capital and labor resources is usually a moderating influence on prices and wages. However because of an economy-wide persistence in price and wage inflation these excess demand and excess supply effects sometimes seem to work very slowly with their influence spread over a long period In the long run the lower estimated growth rate of potential output if projected into the future implies a decrease in the " fiscal dividend " to be gained from full employment. Projection of the new potential GNP estimates through gives an output that is percent lower than the previous estimate a difference amounting to about $ billion in current dollars. The estimate of Federal tax receipts in is thus more than $ billion lower if output is assumed to be the new potential GNP rather than the old estimate Lower total output implies lower tax revenues available for further tax cuts or for new or expanded Federal Government programs The challenge for the future will be to devise new policies to cope with the problems of economic growth and productivity. Increased productivity growth is necessary if the economy is to provide jobs without incurring declines in the growth of real income for the many new workers in the labor force. Chapter in this Report discusses several areas in which microeconomic policies have been devised or are being considered to increase production and employment beyond levels attainable through the management of aggregate demand CHAPTER Economic Review of H P HE ECONOMIC EXPANSION continued last year. Real gross * national product ( GNP ) rose percent as projected in the last Report The growth of output was unexpectedly strong in the first quarter but fell below expectations during the rest of the year ( Table ) The rise in real GNP has been slightly greater since the trough in the first quarter of than the average rise over similar periods in the last four expansions partly because of the exceptional depth of the last recession. The depth of the recession also accounted for the substantial excess capacity that remained at year-end when the gap between actual and potential output was percent and the unemployment rate was just under percent. For the year as a whole the unemployment rate averaged percent percentage point lower than in and employment increased by million persons Excess capacity helped moderate last year 's rate of inflation. The GNP deflator slowed to percent last year from percent during in spite of the large year-to-year rise of output. The slackening of inflation is a reflection of slower rates of increase in both labor compensation per hour and profits per unit of output. Smaller rises in food prices and a legislated rollback of oil prices helped in the slowing of inflation At year-end there were signs of some reacceleration of the economy though real GNP rose at a percent annual rate for the last quarter as a whole. A rapid growth of retail sales took place within the quarter starting from a depressed September level and auto sales rose rapidly from low levels early in the quarter when supplies were limited. Housing starts and residential investment grew very rapidly from third-quarter averages. Business fixed investment which had been recovering for a year was little changed from the third quarter largely because of a sharp drop in car and truck purchases that also reflected limited supplies DEMAND AND OUTPUT The rise of real GNP initially accelerated to a percent annual rate but then decelerated to a % percent annual rate over the last quarters of last year. The unevenness of GNP growth was largely due to change in the rate of inventory accumulation. Early in GNP was increased by a large change TABLE Changes in gross national product in constant ( ) dollars, [ Percent change ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Component III II IV i Percent change in dollars : Business fixed investment Residential investment Government purchases. _ Federal purchases State and local purchases. __ Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods. Nondurable goods Services Total GNP Addenda : Final sales Domestic final sales Change in billions of dollars : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services i Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis in inventory investment while the pace of inventory accumulation slowed considerably at year-end pushing GNP growth to its lowest rate of the year The growth rate of final sales was much steadier averaging % percent during the year. Consumption expenditures slowed after a rapid growth in the first quarter but then accelerated at year-end. Consumption at midyear was restrained by a slow growth of personal income. The buildup of inventories in the first quarter led to cautious production and employment policies by business. Wage rates and government transfers also rose less than was expected and farm income declined. There was unexpected slowness in growth of government purchases early in the year when public spending in many categories was below expectations. Investment however was weak in the final quarter of the year PERSONAL CONSUMPTION Real personal consumption expenditures rose percent in After increasing percent in the year ending in the first quarter of real expenditures grew more slowly during the rest of the year Real disposable income is the most important determinant of long-run real consumption. Individuals tend to retain their consumption patterns for some time after a given change in income. In the short run the effects of income changes tend to be divided between savings and the purchases of durable items. During and the rate of growth in real consumption roughly followed the rate of growth in real disposable income ( Table ) After a period of relatively fast growth from the first quarter of through the TABLE Growth of real consumption expenditures and real disposable personal income [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Real personal consumption expenditures Period Real disposable personal income Percent change : to III From preceding quarter : : IV _ : II III IV _ Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis first quarter of the rise in real disposable income slowed especially in the third quarter. Because the slowdown in income growth may have been viewed initially as temporary and because a cushion was provided by the high savings of the slowdown in consumption was less pronounced and more steady. The personal saving rate ^ from percent in the first half of to percent in the last half Real expenditures for consumer durables have been the largest contributor to the recovery in final sales in the current expansion growing by percent from the very depressed last quarter of through the fourth quarter of After a percent annual rate increase in the first quarter of however the growth of real expenditures on durable goods slowed to a percent annual rate on average over the last quarters. These movements in durables were dominated by purchases of motor vehicles and parts which grew percent from the last quarter of through the first quarter of Growth slowed to and percent respectively in the second and third quarters and then declined by percent at an annual rate in the strike-affected fourth quarter The significant slowdown in growth of real consumer durables sales in the second quarter particularly sales of new domestic automobiles was influenced by factors other than real disposable income. Shortages existed in some intermediate and large car lines. Changes in the relative price of automobiles may also have had an effect. The deflator for new domestic autos grew at a percent annual rate from the third quarter of through the first quarter of as rebates and other discounts offered in were phased out and list prices on the domestic models increased. Some effects of this inflation in new automobile prices apparently continued beyond the first quarter. As individuals attempted to substitute used for new cars the implicit deflator for used cars rose by an extraordinary percent from the first quarter to the second and continued to rise strongly in the third quarter. The increase in domestic auto prices would appear to have been a factor in the rise in foreign car sales after the first quarter Relative price movements were apparently important in the real consumption of some nondurable items too. In particular food prices were virtually constant throughout and helped the real value of food consumption to rise percent for the year even though real incomes grew only percent Energy consumption was also significantly affected by relative price movements as noted elsewhere in this chapter BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Real business fixed investment increased percent last year about the amount forecast in last year 's Report. From lows reached in the second half of real business fixed investment grew at an 8J/2 percent average annual rate over the first quarters. Largely because of the Ford Motor Company strike growth slowed to a percent annual rate in the fourth quarter. Real investment apart from motor vehicles rose at substantially better than a percent annual rate in that quarter Probably most important in starting the recovery of investment were the optimistic sales expectations stimulated by the rapid increase in consumption expenditures through and early An additional thrust came from a much improved cash flow and somewhat lower interest rates particularly for firms with lower credit ratings. Rapidly rising labor and energy costs relative to fixed investment costs have also provided an incentive to invest in plant and equipment. The increases in the investment tax credit in further enhanced the after-tax profitability of equipment investment Plant and equipment expenditures by nondurable goods manufacturers increased more rapidly in than the expenditures by durables manufacturers. Industries showing strong growth include motor vehicles textiles food paper and electric utilities ( Table ) TABLE Changes in plant and equipment expenditures [ Percent change ] actual actual Industry expected Durable goods2 _ Machinery except electrical Motor vehicles Nondurable goods2 Food including beverages Textiles Paper All industries Manufacturing __ Nonmanufacturing2 Mining Electric utilities Based on actual expenditures in and expected expenditures in ( actuals for first quarters and expected for fourth quarter ) Includes some industries not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Last year 's Report noted that investment held up quite well during the recession in those industries which faced capacity constraints in In the past year capacity growth in the paper chemicals and petroleum refining industries has been above percent reflecting substantial investment in these industries over the past years. In paper however the operating rate is perhaps high enough that constraints on capacity for the most refined kinds of paper could occur in the next year. In iron and steel another industry of shortages in capacity has recently been growing at about percent annually close to the long-term trend growth rate of steel usage There was a slowing of investment last year by steelmakers however following the very sizable acceleration in Other industries are operating considerably below capacity levels and shortages in are unlikely INVENTORY INVESTMENT Real inventory investment in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) reflects the difference between aggregate production and deliveries. With real consumption expenditures growing strongly in the last half of and the first quarter of and with completion of the massive inventory adjustment of production increased very sharply in the first quarter of as firms moved to keep output in line with the anticipated growth of final sales. With an only modest rise in total final sales inventory investment in the first quarter was $ billion compared with a decline of $ billion in the fourth quarter of The $ 15.9-billion swing in the first quarter of accounted for more than half of the percent annual rate increase in gross national product in that quarter. Inventory investment did not accelerate later in the year since slower growth of retail sales gave rise to conservative orders and production policies in many businesses The NIPA nonfarm business inventory-to-sales ratio stayed in the neighborhood of throughout last year. This was below the peak levels of about at the trough of the recession but was still significantly above the approximately levels of the period a fact suggesting that inventory accumulation will not accelerate sharply in the immediate future The book value of manufacturers ' work-in-process inventories which was not rising at the beginning of the year rose in the second half reflecting the moderately strong growth in producers ' durable equipment HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT The recovery in residential investment reflected the recovery in housing starts which began in Real residential investment grew at an percent annual rate in the first quarters of and accelerated to a percent annual growth rate in the fourth quarter. Housing demand became one of the most favorable developments during a period of general weakness in the economy. A strong percent increase in total housing starts in August was followed by a percent increase in September bringing the seasonally adjusted annual rate to million units. Total starts then remained strong in the last months of the year Starts of multifamily dwelling units were important in the acceleration of starts in Rental vacancy rates fell from above percent late in and remained about / percent during most of A strong rise in multifamily rental absorption rates was also indicative of stronger demand for rental housing Federal assistance programs also encouraged housing construction. In January $ billion in Government National Mortgage Association l/i percent commitment funds was released with an additional $ billion in September and by the second half of the year the subsidized leasing program authorized by section of the Housing and Urban Development Act began to affect the building of new multifamily units. By the end of the year it was estimated that approximately apartment units had been started under the section program though the incremental impact on housing construction is smaller in that some of these units would have been constructed without the program Financial developments were favorable to housing in especially in the second half of the year. Interest rates in the short-term money markets did not increase in the way that many had anticipated and in fact they declined in the latter part of the year. By the end of the year market interest rates were below rates on time deposits of similar maturities at financial intermediaries. This situation encouraged continued savings flows into thrift institutions and made funds for home mortgages readily available. In addition the continued fall in all long-term interest rates in the second half of the year reduced mortgage interest rates. The Federal Housing Administration series on new-home mortgages in the secondary market fell from percent in December to percent last December but had a neligible impact on mortgage rates in the primary market in GOVERNMENT PURCHASES Total government purchases in real terms rose by percent in less than in and below the rate forecast at the beginning of last year Real Federal purchases grew by percent for the year. ( A detailed discussion of Federal spending is presented elsewhere in this chapter. ) Real purchases of goods and services by State and local governments rose by only percent in the lowest real growth since There has been a downward trend in rates of growth of real State and local government purchases since the late 1960s partly because the steady slowing of population growth has reduced the demand for additional services. The deceleration of spending appears to have been sharpened in by a delayed reaction to the recession and ensuing financial difficulties experienced by some States and local units. The widely publicized budgetary crisis of New York City emphasized the dangers of an excessive expansion of current services financed by borrowing. The unusually slow growth of State and local spending in was thus in part a cyclical correction to bring expenditures in line with receipts and eliminate operating deficits. By the fourth quarter of State and local operating balances in the aggregate moved back into surplus for the first time since late The slowdown in State and local spending was most pronounced in new construction which fell about percent in nominal terms in The bulk of the decline occurred early in the year and was concentrated in new school building and highway construction. In addition State and local employment grew by percent in compared with percent a year earlier and with an average rate of growth of percent between and Moreover most of the increase in employment came early in To some extent the slower growth in in employment can be attributed to the expansion of federally funded public service employment jobs in NET EXPORTS On an NIPA basis nominal net exports of goods and services declined by $ billion from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of In real terms the decline amounted to $ billion. The decrease largely reflects a return to more normal trade balances from the cyclically high export surplus recorded in Real exports increased percent during and real imports increased percent. Export prices rose percent over the same period while the increase for import prices was percent Most of the shift in real net exports was accounted for by changes in merchandise trade. Shipments from abroad in late were percent above their level at the end of Most of this increase in volume was accounted for by a percent rise in imports of fuels. The volume of merchandise exports changed negligibly as a rise in agricultural sales abroad offset a small decline in other sales. The real surplus on service transactions including investment income rose from $ billion in to about $ billion in This increase reflects in part a trend growth in the surplus on investment incomes PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS The rates of growth in both prices and wages were smaller last year than in any of the preceding years. Real wages increased after years of decline. Corporate profits also rose with the economic recovery PRICES The rate of inflation slowed significantly during to about percent for both the GNP deflator and the consumer price index ( CPI ) Increases from the four quarter of to the fourth quarter of in many of the main price indexes were significantly lower than during and at least percentage points below the figures ( Table ) The overall declines in the measured rates of inflation during probably exaggerate the decline in the underlying rate of inflation during the year. Declines in the prices of food and energy-related products in the first part of the year * which are not likely to recur in the near future helped bring the overall inflation rate below a currently sustainable level Although any decomposition of inflation changes into temporary and longerrun factors is subject to considerable error more restrained wage increases in most sectors indicate that some of last year 's decline in inflation may be more lasting. The absence of significant demand pressures on capacity and the damping of inflationary expectations have been important forces in this more permanent decline The rates of price increase for all major components of the CPI were well below the peak rates of Compared to rates the rates of price increase declined for durables and nondurables and did not change for services. Consumer price increases for energy continued toward convergence with the overall inflation rate rising at a much slower rate than during and In the first quarter the CPI for energy fell TABLE Changes in selected price measures [ Percent change ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] IV to IV IV to IV -J2.4 Price measure IV to IV i II III IV i GNP implicit price deflators : Total GNP Business Nonfarm Farm Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Food. Gasoline and oil Fuel oil and coal Services Consumer price index : All items Food Directly purchased energy3 All other items Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Energy 4___ ._ C Changes in GNP deflators are preliminary changes in consumer price index are preliminary estimates by tha Council of Economic Advisers Includes some groups not shown separately Gas and electricity fuel oil and coal and gasoline and motor oil Fuels and related products and power Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) except as noted primarily because of the removal of the tariff on oil and the initial price rollback features of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act. Despite moderate second-quarter increases and large increases during the summer months the overall percent rate from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of was substantially less than the percent rate during The rise in food prices decelerated to percent the smallest increase occurring within a year since the principal reason being abundant supplies of meats and cereals Wholesale prices for all commodities rose about percent from the last quarter of to that of ( see Table ) Following the second quarter prices rose more rapidly for most of the major industrial categories although some transaction prices may have gone up less than the reported list prices because of more discounting by sellers. Increases in list prices accompanied by larger discounts may reflect hedging against the possible return of price controls WAGES The rate of increase in wages although high by historical standards was lower in than in ( Table ) Real wages when measured by the adjusted average hourly earnings index deflated by the CPI increased by percent in after declines of percent and percent in and respectively. The continued high rate of increase in nominal wages last year was in part due to the lagged adjustment of wages to the very high rate of inflation in and It may have also reflected continued expectations of relatively high inflation TABLE Changes in labor costs and productivity in the private nonfarm business sector [ Percent change ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Adjusted average hourly earnings Period .__ III IV1976 : II III. IV2 _ : II Compensation per hour Output per hour Unit labor costs _.7 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and interindustry shifts Preliminary Note. Data for adjusted hourly earnings relate to production or nonsupervisory workers ; all other data relate to all employees Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics A broader measure of labor costs compensation per hour of work in the private nonfarm business economy covers all employees and includes supplements to wages and salaries. It represents the sum of labor costs to employers. Compensation per hour increased faster than average hourly earnings in the first quarter of partly because of the January increase in the base earnings subject to social security taxes. The rate of increase in compensation per hour was lower in the following quarters and it was lower in than in While only percent of the employed are covered by major collective bargaining settlements ( those which cover or more workers ) these settlements may have a disproportionate impact on wage settlements throughout the economy as the result of a demonstration effect. The rate of wage increases negotiated in such contracts declined in ( Table ) The first-year annual wage increases averaged percent for contracts negotiated in covering million workers and percent during the first quarters of covering million workers. ( Approximately * /i million workers were under major contracts scheduled to expire during the full year ) The effective wage rate change under collective bargaining agreements is the actual wage change going into effect in a quarter because of settlements negotiated in that year deferred increases agreed to in the past and escalator or cost-of-living adjustments ( COLA ) The effective TABLE Changes in major collective bargaining settlements [ Percent ] Type of change and industry group II III IV II III Wage settlements : First-year wage change ( annual rate ) _ Percent of workers covered in current quarter settlements Effective wage rate change : Total effective changes Adjustment resulting from : Current settlement Prior settlement Escalator provision Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing excluding contract construction Construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Services Preliminary Percent of estimated number of workers under major collective bargaining settlements. Individual quarterly data for are based on preliminary estimates that do not add to the current total for the year Effective wage rate changes are wage rate changes actually going into effect per worker under major contracts in the respective quarters resulting from major collective bargaining settlements made that calendar year plus deferred increases in accordance with prior-year contracts plus escalator adjustments Note. Data relate to settlements covering or more workers in private nonfarm industries. Effective wage rate adjustment for the year is the total of the four quarterly changes except as noted Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics wage rate change during the first quarters of was percent at an annual rate and was smaller than the increase in both because of lower first-year settlements and because the lower rate of inflation resulted in smaller cost-of-living adjustments PRODUCTIVITY AND UNIT LABOR COSTS Labor productivity or output per hour of work increased by percent in reflecting the cyclical improvement in the economy ( See Table ) Labor productivity rises sharply in the trough quarter of most recessions or in the following quarter and remains substantially above the trend growth rate for the first or quarters of recovery. Perhaps because of the severity of the recession labor productivity growth was above the trend rate for as a whole Both the slowdown in compensation per hour and the rise in productivity contributed to a sharp deceleration in the rate of increase in unit labor costs last year ( see Table ) The rate of increase in unit labor costs in is consistent with further declines in the rate of inflation. However as the economic recovery continues and the rate of growth in productivity settles to its long-run trend unit labor costs will rise more rapidly unless the growth rate of nominal compensation per hour continues to fall CORPORATE PROFITABILITY Pretax corporate profits were up percent last year to about $ billion. Inflation-based adjustments for inventory appreciation and for depreciation based on replacment cost increased moderately from and hence the rise in NIPA profits was also percent. Inventory appreciation rose about $ billion. The excess of the depreciation based on replacement costs used in the NIPA over the book depreciation that is still based on historical costs grew by $ billion about half of the increase. The slower rise of the excess of NIPA depreciation over book depreciation was due to the substantial deceleration of the rise in prices of investment goods last year Last year 's sharp growth in profits was a typical cyclical increase reflecting the marked rise in output and productivity characteristic of the early part of a business cycle recovery. Although productivity in the corporate sector as in the economy as a whole rose about percent in the rate of increase had tapered off to under a percent annual rate in the second half This moderation in combination with current rates of increase in compensation per hour of labor of 7/ to percent means that the normal cyclical increase of the share of profits in gross product has now tapered off The share of after-tax operating profits in the net domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business exceeded percent in the second half of after reaching a cyclical low of percent in the third quarter of ( Table ) Because of the large increase in debt financing in the past years it is more revealing to examine the share of corporate income accruing to holders of both equity and liabilities. This share is measured by net interest TABLE Output profits net interest and profit measures of nonfinancial corporate business Percent of net domestic product Year Net domestic product Corporate profits after tax with IVA and CCA i Net interest Corporate profits after tax with IVA and CCA Corporate profits after tax with IVA and CCA i plus net interest IMillions of dollars % % % > Seasonally adjusted annual rates ) I II III.. IV III * Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Preliminary Note. All data relate to nonfinancial corporate business Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis plus after-tax operating profits as a percentage of net domestic product of nonfinancial corporations. It rose to percent in the third quarter of While this figure is well above the cyclical low of percent reached in the third quarter of it is well below the peak of 12/2 percent in Low profitability may therefore still be exerting a damping effect on investment expenditures GOVERNMENT BUDGETS AND FISCAL POLICY The objective of fiscal policy in was to maintain the degree of stimulus provided during in order to keep the economy on a course of moderate sustained expansion. The full-employment surplus which had declined sharply in was expected to remain relatively unchanged in However fiscal policy unintentionally became less expansionary in the first half of when expenditures were lower than anticipated while receipts remained close to target. Had Federal expenditures followed the projected pattern the level of GNP would have been higher and the economic slowdown following the spring of would have been less severe The overestimate or shortfall in Federal spending in was small relative to the size of the budget and was typical of recent years ( Table ) These errors in estimating spending suggest that the ability to forecast Government expenditures precisely is limited and that the textbook notion of a truly deterministic level of Government spending is too simple. To the extent that a regular pattern exists in the difference between actual and predicted levels of Federal spending appropriate adjustments can be made when predicted expenditures are incorporated into economic forecasts. The shortfall last year is an important reminder of the difficulties in attempting to fine tune the economy with fiscal policy. This experience suggests that it is hard to measure the precise magnitude of the policy instruments as well as to assess their economic effects TABLE Comparison of projected and actual Federal expenditures national income and product accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Actual less projection Projection1 Fiscal year Actual Amount Percent of actual Projections made in the Budget of the United States Government published in January of the current fiscal year and except for fiscal year adjusted for revisions by applying projected percent changes to revised data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers FEDERAL EXPENDITURES AND THE SHORTFALL The percent increase in total Federal expenditures in * was a return to a more typical rate of growth after the exceptionally large increases in and caused by the high rates of unemployment and inflation in those years ( Table ) The deceleration in was due mainly to much smaller increases in transfer payments to individuals and grants-in-aid to State and local governments * Unless otherwise noted reference is to calendar years and to the Federal sector in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of changed the fiscal year from July 1-June to October 1-September beginning with fiscal The change necessitated a 3-month " transition-quarter " from July to September TABLE Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure category Federal Government receipts- January budget projectioni Actual ' _ To persons To foreigners _ Grants-in-aid to State and local governments ___ Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accrualsContributions for social insurance Federal Government expenditures Purchases of goods and services National defense. Nondefense Transfer payments _ _ Surplus or deficit ( ) i January projected percent changes applied to revised data * Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget The composition of Federal expenditures in continued the shift away from defense and toward domestic programs that has been under way since Defense purchases as a share of total spending were percent in down from percent in Conversely transfer payments now the largest single component of Federal spending and grants-in-aid to State and local governments have grown markedly in recent years as a result of wider coverage higher benefit payments and new programs. These two categories accounted for percent of Federal expenditures in compared with percent in There was much discussion about the unexpected shortfall in Federal expenditures in its relation to the slowing of real growth during the year and its implications for spending in Actual spending should be compared with the January projections presented in the Federal Budget because the latter incorporated the Administration 's plans and expectations early last year. Moreover a complete translation from the unified budget to NIPA concepts is readily available only for this set of estimates. On an NIPA basis the shortfall from the January projection for fiscal was percent of actual expenditures a difference within the range of recent experience ( see Table ) Despite the fact that the underspending for the year as a whole was neither exceptionally large nor unprecedented it was concentrated in a short period and produced a rather sharp rise in the fullemployment surplus in the second quarter ( see Table ) A shortfall in Federal spending of about $ billion distributed over a year as shown in Table could be expected to produce a decline in the annual growth rate of real GNP of roughly to percentage point Because the shortfall was not sustained throughout the year and because a major portion was in transfers which have a low GNP multiplier relative to purchases the expected impact of such a change would be smaller. But it does help explain the weakness in the economy after the spring of The Federal expenditure shortfall was concentrated in the second quarter ( Table ) By the third quarter the underspending was much reduced and in the fourth quarter total spending was substantially above projected levels TABLE Federal expenditure shortfall national income and product accounts calendar year [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual ratesi ) Category II Yeara III ~ L5 Total expenditures Purchases of goods and services. National defense. Nondefense Transfer payments. To persons To foreigners. Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Actual expenditures less adjusted January projections. See note below Preliminary Note. January Quarterly projections have been adjusted to revised data by multiplying the adjusted annual projection ( see Table ) by the ratio of the original quarterly projections to the original annual projections Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers The shortfall can be attributed to a combination of lower-than-expected rates of inflation unemployment and interest as well as to delays in making new obligations and outlays and to an apparent bias toward overestimation of expenditures in the budget. The obligation and payment lags primarily affected purchases particularly for defense where unused obligational authority unexpectedly rose about $ to $ billion in the 15-month period between July and September Obligation delays were also responsible for the slowdown in the Federal highway aid program which affects the grant component of total expenditures. The spending overrun in the last quarter of was almost entirely in transfers and grants and was due to legislation which differed from that assumed in January This increase does not appear to have been the result of spending delayed from earlier in the year In the unified budget the total shortfall from the January estimate for fiscal and the transition quarter was $ billion. This figure was significantly larger than in the NIPA Federal sector ( Table ) and was the TABLE Reconciliation of estimates of Federal expenditure shortfall unified budget and national income and product accounts fiscal year and transition quarter [ Billions of dollars ] Expenditure shortfall * Category Fiscal year Total Federal budget outlays3 Transition quarter Less : Financial transactions and other asset transfers. _ Equals : Federal expenditures in national income and product accounts. Plus : Defense timing adjustment Foreign military sales Other purchases Coverage netting and other timing differences Actual expenditures less January projections July-September Excludes outlays of the Export-Import Bank Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget basis for most of the public discussion about the shortfall. Differences between expenditures on the two bases result from financial transactions and other asset transfers included in the unified budget but not in the NIPA certain differences in coverage and netting and timing discrepancies between foreign military deliveries and payments and between cash payments recorded in the unified budget and actual deliveries recorded in the NIPA. Most of the difference between the unified and NIPA spending shortfalls in represents unforeseen changes in financial transactions and other asset tranfers and advance payments for military sales abroad. In addition the shortfall in defense outlays in the unified budget was not completely reflected in NIPA defense purchases. The slowdown in these outlays was a consequence of delays in making new obligations largely because of the delay in passage of the defense appropriations bill and a lag in adjusting to substantial increases in budget authority While the unified budget presents a fairly comprehensive record of all receipts and outlays of the Federal Government the Federal sector of the NIPA is generally considered a better measure of the Government 's impact on current economic activity. If unified spending deviates from targeted levels because of unexpected asset transfers or advance payments the Federal sector in the NIPA is unaffected since such transactions are likely to have little direct impact on economic activity. On the other hand because the economic effects resulting from defense spending for major procurement items may occur well before there is a change in NIPA defense purchases the latter may not immediately reflect the impact of a significant change in defense activity. Such a phenomenon happened in and may have occurred in The shortfall in new obligations and defense spending on a unified basis could explain the softness in defense orders in mid-1976 In the residual economic impact resulting from the shortfall will stem from a combination of delayed multiplier effects and possible revisions of spending levels where a catchup or continuing shortfall is expected. In the budget the fiscal outlay projections have been revised to incorporate the delayed effects of the shortfall. Outlays for some programs are expected to be higher than estimated in last year 's budget. In other cases outlays will continue to lag somewhat in But on balance no significant net increase or decrease in Federal spending is anticipated in as a result of last year 's shortfall TAX LEGISLATION AND FEDERAL RECEIPTS The antirecession tax cuts enacted in were continued throughout The Revenue Adjustment Act of extended the personal and corporate tax cuts in the Tax Reduction Act of for the first months of calendar For corporations this legislation included a doubling of the surtax exemption from $ to $ and a lowering of the regular corporate income tax rate on the first $ of taxable profits from percent to percent. In addition the maximum investment tax credit on qualified equipment was increased from to percent for utilities and from to percent for all other businesses. Altogether these provisions yielded a net reduction of about $ billion in corporate tax accruals in from what they would have been under law For individuals the Revenue Adjustment Act provided somewhat larger tax reductions than the earlier legislation in order to maintain the lower withholding rates in effect during the last months of The major provisions were : A $ tax credit per dependent or a credit equal to percent of taxable income up to $ whichever is larger An increase in the low-income allowance ( minimum standard deduction ) from $ per return to $ for a joint return and $ for a single person An increase in the percentage standard deduction from percent of adjusted gross income ( with a maximum of $ ) to percent of adjusted gross income ( with a maximum of $ for a joint return or $ for a single return ) An extension of the refundable percent earned income credit for families with dependent children and incomes below $ The tax credit on purchases of new homes was not extended beyond The permanent changes in the Tax Reduction Act together with extension of the temporary provisions in the Revenue Adjustment Act yielded a reduction of about $ billion in personal taxes in from what they would have been under law Although the Administration had proposed that the personal and corporate tax reductions due to expire in mid-1976 be enlarged and made permanent the Tax Reform Act ob merely extended the provisions of the Revenue Adjustment Act. In particular the higher low-income allowance and percentage standard deductions were made permanent ; the personal tax credits the reduction in the tax rate on the first $ of corporate income and the increase in the corporate surtax exemption were extended through calendar ; and the percent investment tax credit was extended through Thus the Tax Reform Act of did not produce any general tax cuts beyond those enacted at the end of Nor did it contain any of the special tax incentives proposed by the Administration to encourage specific types of economic activity. The total of the tax reductions was about $ billion in compared with $ 18/ billion in The Tax Reform Act of also made the first extensive changes in the tax code since These changes increased receipts by $ billion in and are expected to yield a $ 1.6-billion gain in Among the more important measures enacted in the new law were unification of estate and gift taxes a narrowing of allowable deductions for tax sheltered losses tighter rules on personal deductions and exclusions an increase in the minimum tax and an expansion of loss-carryover provisions. Numerous other revisions were made in the tax law which modified existing tax preferences and added new ones. Despite these changes the Tax Reform Act of did not achieve fundamental reform or simplification of the tax code The other tax legislation passed in was a temporary increase in the Federal unemployment insurance tax rate from percent to percent to become effective January The amount of wages subject to this tax was also raised permanently from $ per worker to $ per worker effective January These measures are designed to replenish State unemployment insurance trust funds. The legislation also extended coverage under the regular State unemployment compensation tax and benefit system to about million additional employees in State and local government and farm and domestic workers effective January The Congress did not enact the Administration 's proposed increase in the social security tax rate to percent. Under current law however the rate will rise from percent to percent on January and the taxable wage base will rise $ in both and Federal receipts increased by $ billion to $ billion in yielding a Federal tax share of nominal GNP of percent. The strong economy continued inflation and the absence of the tax rebate were responsible for the large growth in receipts THE FISCAL BALANCES The Federal deficit fell to $ billion in $ billion less than the deficit projected in January. The full-employment surplus rose by $ billion for the year ( Table ) The full-employment surplus measures the difference between total receipts and expenditures under the assumption that the economy is operating along its potential GNP path. Because the fullemployment surplus is calculated at a constant operating rate for the economy changes in receipts and expenditures that occur automatically in response to the cyclical behavior of output and employment are eliminated Since full-employment expenditures are intended to measure discretionary shifts in fiscal policy they include temporary expansions of unemployment compensation programs designed to counteract cyclical variations in the economy. For example full-employment expenditures for and include benefits under the Federal supplemental benefits ( FSB ) program and the supplemental unemployment assistance ( SUA ) program created in December The full-employment budget numbers presented in Table are based on the Council of Economic Advisers ' new estimates of potenTABLE Actual and full-employment Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts basis calendar years [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] State and local government Federal Government Surplus or deficit ( ) Calendar year Receipts Expenditures Amount Change Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Operating surplus or deficit ( ) Actual : : II III .__ Full-employment : : II... III ___ Surplus or deficit excluding social insurance funds Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers tial output and the full-employment unemployment rate which are discussed in Chapter Thus the levels of the surplus are different from those reported in previous years. The new benchmarks however have little effect on the period-to-period change in the full-employment surplus which is the appropriate measure of the thrust of fiscal policy The difference between movements in the actual deficit and full-employment surplus is an indicator of the normal cyclical changes in receipts and expenditures. Over four-fifths of the drop in the actual Federal deficit in was due to an improving economy which automatically raised tax collections and reduced unemployment insurance payments. The remainder was largely the result of the unintended shortfall in spending The State and local surplus rose to $ billion in Of the total increase slightly more than one-half was the result of higher tax receipts produced by the cyclical economic upturn and a significant increase in Federal grants. The rest as shown by the $ 3.1-billion increase in the State and local full-employment surplus was due to trend economic growth and discretionary reductions in the growth of expenditures relative to receipts. The most significant aspect of State and local finances in was the restoration of a surplus in their operating accounts ( exclusive of social insurance trust funds ) in the last quarter of the year. This was made possible by the unusually small increase in State and local expenditures in together with the rapid growth in revenues. This fiscal conservatism at the State and local level reinforced the unexpected restraint coming from the Federal sector THE NEW CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET PROCESS In Congress fully implemented its new budget procedures for the first time. The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of established a process whereby the Congress is forced to consider overall receipts and outlays and commit itself under a binding resolution to these totals. The First Concurrent Resolution on the budget which must be passed before May of each year sets targets for total receipts and outlays and for the division of outlays among the major functional categories to guide congressional committees in considering new legislation. These targets are revised in the light of the normal authorization and appropriations process and the changes are incorporated in the Second Concurrent Resolution which sets a binding floor on receipts and a ceiling on outlays for the coming fiscal year. The second resolution must be passed before the new fiscal year begins on October After the Second Concurrent Resolution has been approved legislation that raises outlays above the ceiling or reduces receipts below the established floor can not be considered unless both Houses of Congress first pass a revised concurrent resolution The most obvious benefit of the new procedures is that Congress now considers the budget as a whole and its impact on the desired course of fiscal policy and resource allocation. In earlier years legislation was enacted in a piecemeal fashion with little attention to the overall macroeconomic and al- O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis locative implications of the resulting tax and spending totals. By setting an overall ceiling on outlays and a floor on receipts the Congress is now forced to consider the tradeoffs among alternative programs. It must also weigh higher spending against lower taxes for stabilization purposes in making the long-term choice between a larger or smaller Federal sector. The new budget process also requires current and future cost estimates for all new programs thereby making more explicit the effects of current legislation on future budgets. The new budget process has thus institutionalized a more rational procedure for legislative deliberations on the budget and should make the Congress more aware of the costs and consequences of the programs it enacts MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS Monetary policy in must be interpreted in the light of financial and economic developments affecting monetary growth and interest rates during the year. Less extensive use of demand deposits for transactions purposes has apparently continued to shift the demand for money downward reducing the growth of Mi which would otherwise be needed to sustain the economic expansion. An unusually low rate of growth of Mi relative to GNP growth is hence not necessarily evidence of a restrictive monetary policy. But neither is the decline in interest rates during evidence of an expansive monetary policy. Both a slowing of economic growth in mid1976 and falling inflationary expectations as inflation rates declined during the year have contributed to lower interest rates than had been expected Appraisal of monetary developments in therefore requires a careful examination of monetary growth and the behavior of interest rates during the year GROWTH OF THE MONETARY AGGREGATES Over the quarters of the monetary aggregates Mi and M2 grew by and percent respectively. The very slow growth in Mi which began in the latter half of continued in the first quarter of when Mi increased by only percent at an annual rate. In the second quarter Mi expanded rapidly spurred on by a significant drawdown of U.S. Treasury deposits which transferred funds to private demand deposit accounts in April. After another slowdown in the third quarter the growth rate of Mx reaccelerated in the fourth quarter ( Chart ) The growth of M2 did not vary as much as the growth of Mi during In the first quarter the growth rate of time and savings deposits at commercial banks increased sharply because some market interest rates fell below the rates paid at banks. Thus M increased at a percent rate in the first quarter while Mi increased at only a percent rate. By the last months of the second quarter however the increase in market interest rates had caused some slowdown in the inflow to time and savings deposits For this reason although the rate of growth of Mx increased by percentage points in the second quarter the rate of growth of M2 increased by only percentage points. As interest rates on marketable securities began to decline in the second half of the year the growth of time and savings deposits picked up again and resulted in a substantial increase in M2 Chart Growth in Money Stock PERCENT CHANGE ^ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 1/ BASED ON AVERAGE OF DAILY FIGURES FOR THE QUARTER SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM The velocity of M the ratio of nominal GNP to Mi grew by about a percent annual rate during the last quarters of much more slowly than in the previous quarters. Both a faster rate of Mi growth and a slower rate of nominal GNP growth contributed to this slowdown. The important question thus raised is whether velocity will again accelerate in when nominal GNP growth is expected to increase. Some of the slower velocity growth in the last quarters can be explained by the usual lag in the adjustment of money balances to changes in nominal GNP growth. This same lag could provide some stimulus to velocity growth in if GNP growth accelerates Over the recovery as a whole Mi velocity growth has been somewhat higher than in previous recovery periods averaging more than percent at an annual rate over the last quarters despite the moderate decline in interest rates. Regulatory changes and financial innovations partly induced by the high interest rates which peaked in have apparently been a factor in this higher velocity growth as was noted in Chapter Estimates of how these changes affect Mi demand are necessarily imprecise however and should be used with caution in interpreting monetary developments and projecting actual monetary growth rates Another possible reason for the slow growth in demand for Mi is the unusually weak behavior of business loans at commercial banks during this recovery. Many banks require compensating balances for their loans in the form of demand deposits and businesses sometimes build up deposits at commercial banks to establish lines of credit in anticipation of loan needs If loan demand is unusually weak as has been the case in this recovery Mi growth thus tends to be unusually small. It is therefore possible that a recovery of loan demand in could cause an acceleration of the growth in the demand for Mx Econometric estimates of the demand for M2 as a function of GNP a money market interest rate and the average rate on savings deposits provide evidence that some factors perhaps the ones mentioned above have shifted the demand for money downward. Such an estimated money demand function incorporating lagged adjustments which has explained the data well during most of the postwar period began to shift in early This shift has continued during though at a moderately diminished rate FEDERAL RESERVE TOLERANCE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH In May the Federal Reserve began to report prospective ranges for annual growth rates in the monetary aggregates. This practice has continued with quarterly reports of projected growth rate ranges for the three main aggregates Mi M2 and M These ranges represent Federal Reserve projections of monetary growth rates using the available information about economic conditions and policy intentions at the time projections are made The ranges have been at least percentage points wide in each case the width of the ranges giving some flexibility to the projection procedure while preserving the information about the longer-run intentions of the Federal Reserve. The quarterly updating of the base period adds flexibility but when actual growth deviates significantly from the projected range some adjustment in the range may be necessary to prevent further deviations Moreover the ranges themselves are not inflexible and are modified when emerging economic developments require a change Experience with this practice of announcing monetary growth rates indicates that it can become a constructive addition to the economic policymaking process helping to stabilize inflationary expectations. The ranges have also provided information which permits a more enlightened discussion of monetary policy. Their forward-looking perspective has helped to promote general understanding of the tradeoffs between short-run and long-run economic goals and to clarify policy makers ' intentions With the exception of the first projection for the period from March to March each range has referred to growth from an average taken for the most recently completed quarter to an average for the same quarter a year later. The actual growth rates for the 1-year intervals ending in have not significantly deviated from the projected ranges ( Table ) though this alone is not an indication that monetary policy has been successful in achieving ultimate stabilization goals. The growth rate of M has been inside the projected range for all but one of the four periods with more frequent deviations of M above the upper boundary and of Mx below the lower. The largest deviation for Mx was from the third quarter of to the third quarter of when Mi grew by only percent. Some of this shortfall however may have been due to the unusually high base for this period a result of the tax rebates ' effect on the money stock. Thus a moderate smoothing of the path of Mi from May through September to adjust for the impact of these special payments would bring the growth of Mx above the lower boundary of percent TABLE Projected and actual growth rates of monetary aggregates Period M2 Mi M3 Percent change from a year earlier : March : Projected range * Actual. _ __ : Projected range1 Actual : Projected range i Actual __ __ _ IV : Projected range1 Actual ^ BMrlOMi ^ _ _ WrWA io79 Range of percent changes in Mi M2f and M3 forecast by Federal Reserve for the period and actual percent changes between periods indicated. Actual quarterly changes are based on quarterly averages Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System INTEREST RATES Short-term interest rates generally fell during and by December were at their lowest levels since ( Chart ) Only one marked fluctuation occurred during the year. In the last weeks of April the Federal Reserve took actions to slow the accelerating growth in the aggregates ; and the Federal funds rate began to rise reaching 5/2 percent in late May. Accompanying the rise in the key money market interest rate the Treasury bill rate and the commercial paper rate also increased ; but by June the short-term interest rates again began to decline Long-term interest rates also fell during Moody 's Aaa corporate bond yield fell to percent by early December from an average of percent in December Interest rates on less highly rated corporate bonds fell more sharply as indicated by the basis point decline in Moody 's Baa corporate bond yield. Mortgage interest rates in the secondary market also fell during but by the end of the year had only a negligible impact on home mortgage rates in the primary market Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER ANNUM ' \ \ FEDERAL FUNDS \ CORPORATE Aaa BONDS \ V HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New issues ) i i i i I i i i l I I i i i | i I i i i i i I | | i i I i i i i i ' SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION At the end of both short-term and long-term interest rates were well below the levels reached at the start of the recovery in early Declines in interest rates are not typical of an economic expansion. The experience results in part from a decline in the expected rate of inflation which has apparently accompanied the decline in actual inflation rates. The decline in longer-term interest rates however may have been smaller than the decline in the expected long-term rate of inflation. If so the real rate of interest one measure of the impact of monetary policy on the economy has not decreased OTHER FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS Nonfinancial corporations have lengthened the average maturity of their debt during the recovery. With severe liquidity problems at the start of brought on by unusually large short-term borrowing in previous years most businesses aimed at restructuring their balance sheets by increasing their long-term borrowing relative to short-term borrowing and by holding more liquid assets such as Treasury bills. The U.S. Treasury 's borrowing strategy has shifted in a similar direction in with percent of the increase in marketable interest-bearing public debt in the form of longermaturity coupon issues compared to percent in Partly as a result of the desire of business firms for increased liquidity commercial and industrial loans at commercial banks declined throughout the first half of the year as they have generally done during the recovery but a marked upturn in business loans began in October As was true of the temporary turnaround in late a large proportion of this increase was in the form of bankers ' acceptances short-term money market instruments counted as bank loans an indication that the turnaround again might be temporary In internal financing covered about percent of total capital outlays for nonfinancial corporate business compared with more than percent in when inventories were being liquidated. The fraction however remains well above any seen since the mid-1960s and business use of external funds remains relatively weak. As the growth of investment continues in the internal financing fraction should continue to decline and the dependence on external finance should increase Proportionately more of the increase in long-term funds raised from external sources by business corporations in early was in the form of equities ( Table ) but this trend was interrupted in the third quarter. Stock market prices were higher in than in although they remained relatively steady during the year Increased borrowing in the household sector absorbed most of the declining share of U.S. Government borrowing in Home mortgage borrowing increased sharply in the third quarter and accounted for most of the net change in total mortgages during this period. Flows into thrift institutions especially into savings and loan associations were stimulated by declining market interest rates relative to deposit rates and they provided the major share of funds to support this demand for mortgages TABLE Funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sector and credit market instrument Corporate debt instruments Corporate equities Households2 Home mortgages Consumer credit Foreign II III IV II Total funds raised _ U.S. Government State and local government _ Nonfinancial business l average Also includes farm and nonfarm noncorporate not shown separately Also includes mortgages other than home bank loans n.e.c and other loans Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System III EMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT AND INCOME TRANSFER PROGRAMS The improvement in the economy last year was reflected in the labor market : employment increased unemployment declined and benefits from income transfer programs were lower in comparison with The improvement in employment was stronger in the first half of While the unemployment rate fell during the first half it increased during the second half EMPLOYMENT Total civilian employment estimated from household survey data increased percent last year over the average ( Table ) The increase was TABLE Labor market indicators [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Indicator IV III Millions of persons EMPLOYMENT STATUS Civilian labor force Employment Unemployment Percent * Civilian labor force participation r a t e * UNEMPLOYMENT RATES All civilian workers Unemployed weeks or longer'___ Demographic groups Men years and over Women years and over Both sexes years Married men spouse presentOccupation White-collar workers. Blue-collar workers.. Industry Nonagricultural private wage and salary workers Construction Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods. Transportation and public utilities.. Wholesale and retail trade Finance and service industries Government workers Agricultural wage and salary workers Unemployment as percent of civilian jabor force in group specified except as noted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Includes mining not shown separately Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics widespread among demographic groups. Since the first quarter of when the trough in employment was reached civilian employment has increased by percent compared to percent in the quarters following the trough of the recession Payroll employment increased percent in over the level and percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of The rate of increase in jobs from the last quarter of to the last quarter of varied substantially among the sectors of the economy. Employment rose by percent in durable goods manufacturing and in the private service-producing sectors by percent. In other sectors however there was little or no change. Perhaps most notable is that State and local government payroll employment after growing by percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of increased by only percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of The percent increase in payroll employment since the first quarter of was little more than half the increase recorded during the quarters following the recession trough UNEMPLOYMENT Although the unemployment rate declined in it remained substantially above the level ( Table ) The official seasonally adjusted unemployment rate decreased from the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of and increased in the last quarters. The unemployment rate in the last quarter exceeded that of the first quarter The quarterly movements in the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate are sensitive to the seasonal adjustment procedure that is adopted particularly when there are large swings in unemployment because of a severe recession or sudden changes in seasonality. The Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) recognizes that analytically there is no unique or unambiguously superior seasonal adjustment procedure and provides data adjusted under several alternative procedures. The procedure used to compute the official unemployment rate gives a heavier weight to the more recent experience than the procedure applied to other statistics. Because large changes in unemployment occurred during the course of and the official seasonal adjustment procedure may have exaggerated the movements in the unemployment rate last year One of the alternative seasonal adjustment procedures used by BLS is to assume that there has been no change over time in the seasonality in employment and in unemployment within age-sex groups for the years to and to exclude the experience of the recent recession. Unemployment rates adjusted according to the stable seasonality procedure suggest more gradual changes throughout the year than the official statistics and about the same unemployment rate during the last quarter as during the first quarter of Under this procedure the unemployment rate was percent in the fourth quarter of percent in the first quarter of percent in the second quarter percent in the third quarter and percent in the fourth quarter. This approach however does not allow for possible changes over time in the seasonality of age-sex specific unemployment rates that may have accompanied the dramatic changes in the composition of the labor force. Of course differences in seasonal adjustment procedures have no effect on the unemployment rate for the year as a whole Last year 's decline in unemployment rates was widespread among demographic groups though the rate fell more sharply for men than for women One reason is the greater concentration of male workers in cyclically sensitive blue-collar jobs. Another was the rapid increase in the participation of females in the labor force an increase which retarded the decline in their unemployment rate in spite of the rise in female employment The decrease in unemployment rates by occupation and industry in mirrored the cyclical increase in By occupation the unemployment rate of white-collar workers was essentially the same in and but blue-collar workers ' unemployment rate fell by over percentage points In the unemployment rates in construction manufacturing and transportation and public utilities were lower than in but in the other private service-producing industries the unemployment rates in about equaled the levels. Unemployment rates in were substantially higher than in and for government workers and agricultural wage and salary workers The persistence of relatively high unemployment rates in for government and agricultural wage and salary workers may in part reflect the slow growth in government employment and a continued adjustment to SUA which came into effect in the first quarter of SUA provided unemployment compensation coverage for the first time for the million wage and salary workers not covered by a regular Federal or State program most of these being State and local government or agricultural wage and salary workers. The availability of these benefits may have encouraged some persons who became unemployed for seasonal or other reasons to extend their period of unemployment and job search rather than take a less desirable job or drop out of the labor force. ( The effects of the unemployment compensation system on the unemployment rate are discussed in greater detail in Chapter ) LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION The civilian labor force participation rate increased sharply last year compared to and ( Table ) The increase was largely concentrated among women. For women aged and over the participation rate rose from perecent in to in 1976,.more than offsetting a percentage point decline in the participation rate among adult men which continued a long-term trend. The teenage labor force participation rate increased somewhat by percentage point to percent in The increase in female labor force participation is in part a continuation of longer-term trends. Over the past decades for example the labor force participation rate of women aged and over has risen percentage points from percent in This change reflects a combination of related factors : increased potential earnings in the labor market ; later marriages ; a decline in birth rates ; more efficient production in the home because of such time-saving consumer durables as freezers and dishwashers and such nondurables as frozen foods and wash-and-wear clothing ; and a change in attitudes concerning the roles of men and women. The expanded employment opportunities in compared to the previous year may also have encouraged greater labor force participation by women The increase in labor force participation by adult females last summer appears to be larger than one would have predicted on the basis of the secular and cyclical factors. The rise in the participation rate from percent in the first months to percent in July and August and the decline to percent in the following months may be traceable in part to the effect of SUA which provided a new incentive for women in the educational services industry and perhaps in other sectors to remain in the labor force rather than withdrawing during the summer In summary the substantial increase in employment ( million persons ) last year was accompanied by a very strong growth in the civilian labor force ( million persons ) The labor force growth resulted mainly from the increase in the population aged and over the secular increase in overall labor force participation rates and the economic recovery to the extent that it encouraged persons to enter or remain in the labor force. The result of these factors was that only a moderate decline occurred in the number of unemployed persons ( million ) INCOME TRANSFER PROGRAMS A major concern of public policy in a recession is to mitigate the loss of family income among those who become unemployed. Cushioning this loss helps to maintain consumer purchases and thereby facilitates economic recovery. It also provides for a broader sharing of the economic burden created by a recession. With the improvement in the economy in benefits under income transfer programs declined ( Table ) Unemployment compensation is the most important countercyclical income transfer program. As unemployment increases because of layoffs the number of recipients increases ; with the recall of workers the number of recipients declines. This pattern appeared in the last years during the decline in economic activity and in the subsequent recovery ( Table ) The ability of the unemployment compensation system to respond to the economic downturn was strengthened by two temporary programs. Under FSB the duration of entitlement for persons covered by a regular program was extended in two 13-week installments to a maximum of weeks. Benefit durations under FSB were reduced in in States with lower insured unemployment rates and FSB is scheduled to terminate this March TABLE Income transfer programs Program Unit IV II III IV II III Unemployment : Total number of persons Millions Unemployment Compensation : Beneficiaries : Total Permanent programs FSB and SUA * Millions * do do Billions of dollars * _ do ...do Food Stamp Program : Beneficiaries Benefit payments _ Millions Billions of dollars <_ Aid to Families with Dependent Children : Beneficiaries : Total UnemD1oved fathers Millions5 do IV Benefit payments : Totals Permanent programs FSB and SUA Benefit payments3 __ Billions of dollars <_ Old-age Survivors and Disability Insurance : Beneficiaries : Total Retired workers and dependents Disabled persons and dependents do Billions of dollars * Medicare : Benefit payments Millions5 Billions of dollars * Medicaid : Beneficiaries Benefit payments do Billions of dollars * Benefit payments Supplemental Security come : Beneficiaries Benefit payments3 Millions5 InMillions Billions of dollars * Weekly average Federal supplemental benefits ( FSB ) and special unemployment assistance ( SUA ) Includes State as well as Federal payments < Annual rate Monthly average Total also includes survivors In current payment status Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Labor and Department of Health Education and Welfare SUA provided temporary coverage and a maximum duration of benefits of weeks for the million wage and salary workers not previously covered by a regular Federal or State program. Under the Unemployment Compensation Amendments Act of about million of the million persons covered by SUA are to be brought under the regular State programs by January and SUA will not take any new claims from that date The other cash transfer programs are less cyclically sensitive. Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) social security and the supplemental security income program ( SSI ) provide benefits largely to lowincome fatherless families the aged and the disabled groups whose employ- ment and earnings show little cyclical sensitivity ( Table ) These programs are nevertheless major sources of income redistribution. In total benefits were $ billion under AFDC $ billion under social security and $ billion under SSI The AFDC program for unemployed fathers ( AFDC-UF ) now available in States grew significantly in though it is still a small program. AFDC-UF benefits had been available only to families with low income and few assets and with an unemployed father not eligible for unemployment compensation. In June however the Supreme Court ruled that a State with the program could not deny AFDC-UF benefits simply because the father was eligible for unemployment compensation thus permitting such fathers to choose between the programs. For low-income families with several dependents benefits under AFDC-UF may exceed those available under unemployment compensation. The average monthly cash benefit among AFDC-UF families was $ in the first half of about the same as the average monthly unemployment compensation benefit Because they tend to have low earnings when they work the average AFDCUF claimant would have a lower than average unemployment compensation benefit. In addition participation in AFDC-UF includes categorical eligibility for food stamps and medicaid. As more low-income families became aware of these greater benefits and as more workers exhausted their FSB entitlement AFDC-UF participation increased. From June to June when the unemployment rate increased from percent to percent AFDC-UF participation rose from families to families. By June the unemployment rate had fallen to percent but participation had increased to families There are three major in-kind income transfer programs : medicaid medicare and food stamps. Medicaid subsidized medical care for persons on AFDC and for other low-income persons who are medically indigent at a cost of $ billion in Medicare provided medical insurance at a cost of $ billion for the aged and disabled receiving social security benefits and for persons with end-stage renal ( kidney ) disease. These programs exhibit some cyclical sensitivity. The food stamp program which provides subsidized food vouchers for low-income families is the most cyclically sensitive in-kind income transfer program. With the improvement in the economy the average monthly participation in the food stamp program decreased although at an annual rate the program costs were about the same as in ( Table ) One measure of the adverse impact of a recession is its effect on the poverty rate the proportion of the population represented by families or unrelated individuals with money incomes below the poverty level. The poverty threshold in for a nonfarm family of four was officially defined as $ in money income as measured in the March supplement to the Current Population Survey. Because of the growth over time in real family money income the poverty rate declined from percent in ( the earliest data available ) to percent in In the recessions occurring during this period poverty either declined more slowly or actually increased while during periods of rapid economic expansion the poverty rate fell sharply The most recent period is no exception. The poverty rate increased by percentage point ( million persons ) from to and by percentage points ( million persons ) from to Given the severity of the downturn as measured by the unemployment rate and real disposable personal income the increase in poverty is somewhat smaller than would have been expected. Past experience suggests that the increase would have been percentage point from to and percentage points from to Moreover the extent of the increase in poverty would have been smaller if the value of in-kind income transfer benefits such as the food stamp subsidy and the insurance premium value of medicaid were counted as income ENERGY DEVELOPMENTS Since late world petroleum prices have risen by over percent as the posted price of crude oil produced in the Persian Gulf increased from $ per barrel to about $ per barrel. The economic recovery in promoted an increase in energy consumption though higher prices held consumption below the previous peak. Adjusting the quantity and mix of sources of energy consumed in the United States has been slowed because such adjustment requires extensive changes in the capital stock of the country and because the prices of domestic petroleum and natural gas are held below world price levels by controls. The United States has apparently adjusted less rapidly than other developed countries. This has contributed to increased U.S. dependence upon imports exposing the economy to greater risk of externally imposed damage CONSUMPTION Energy consumption increased in after consecutive years of decline. The economic recovery was sufficiently strong to increase energy consumption by about 5/2 percent in spite of higher prices an abnormally warm winter and a cooler than usual summer. Energy consumption has been lowered compared with the level that would have existed if it had not been for the price increases of In the household-commercial sector changes in energy usage followed movements in real disposable income for the first years after the late price increase ( Table ) In the most recent quarters however changes in energy consumption have been far smaller than the growth in real disposable income suggesting a gradually growing response to price increases. In the manufacturing and transportation sectors as well energy consumption has increased less rapidly than would have been predicted on the basis of the growth in manufacturing production or real GNP and this also implies a continuing response to the price rise The amount of substitution of alternative energy inputs for petroleum to date has not been great. While coal is being substituted for petroleum increased amounts of petroleum are being used to make up for shortages of natural gas. Petroleum as a percentage of total energy inputs in manufacturing increased from percent in to percent in Usage of petroleum by utilities dropped percent. The share of coal in total energy used in manufacturing remained constant between and while utilities increased their consumption of coal from to percent of all fossil fuel inputs TABLE Changes in energy consumption and relevant economic indicators by final consumption sector [ Percent ] Energy consumption in household and commercial sector Real disposable personal income Energy consumption in industrial sector Manufacturing production Energy consumption for transportation : II III _ IV : II III IV. y -4.'8 : II III Period Real GNP Annual average change : to to to to to Change from preceding year : Change from a year earlier to : Note. Energy consumption includes distribution generation losses Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Interior ( Bureau of Mines ) Federal Energy Administration and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System PRODUCTION Imports of oil increased while domestic production of crude oil and natural gas declined again in ; however production of bituminous coal continued to grow The decline in the production of crude oil which began in continued in although the rate of decline slowed to percent from a percent decline in The decrease in petroleum production has to some extent been caused by price controls on all or part of the output of domestic wells since From May to February roughly twothirds of U.S. oil production was under price controls. From February to September all U.S. output was controlled. In September controls were lifted from stripper wells which produce less than barrels a day and account for percent of total U.S. output. The number of oil and gas wells drilled and the total footage of such wells increased in to the level last recorded in the early 1960s although many drilling rigs were idle through part of the year. Production from the Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve was begun and a number of problems which had prevented production of crude oil from offshore leases in California were surmounted After numerous delays progress on the Alaskan pipeline set the stage for delivery of the first production from the North Slope in late Production of bituminous coal increased by 2j/i percent in and reached a postwar record level. From to the production of coal increased percent as coal production capacity has expanded in response to higher coal prices Total marketed production of natural gas which had been declining since appears to have stabilized in The stabilization of production masks a continuing trend to withhold new production from interstate markets in favor of intrastate markets where a higher price is offered. The interstate market for natural gas has apparently been bearing the full brunt of the declines in total marketed production since Thus Federal price controls are not only causing reductions in U.S. production but also distorting the distribution of available supplies There were only small increases in production from other energy sources primarily nuclear power and hydropower. Hydropower production is limited by the physical capacity of hydropower plants as well as by the amount of rainfall. Production from nuclear power plants was constrained by licensing and operating problems. Although the maximum dependable capacity of nuclear power plants increased by percent from the end of to July production increased by only percent ; operating rates declined to percent of capacity from the average percent recorded in IMPORTS The increase in demand for petroleum and the decline in domestic production implied increased imports of petroleum during In some measure the increase in petroleum imports represents the natural response to the greater demand created by the economic recovery. Much of the increase however is the result of a policy which sets consumer prices by averaging higher-priced imports and lower-priced domestic output. Imports the marginal supply of petroleum in the United States are being subsidized by the price controls which discourage conservation and expansion of domestic production. Petroleum imports averaged million barrels a day up percent from The cost of petroleum imports has risen from $ billion in to $ billion in Imports currently represent percent of U.S oil consumption compared with percent in Although countries of the Western Hemisphere primarily Venezuela and Canada supplied about two-thirds of U.S. imports of petroleum in less than half came from the Western Hemisphere in The increase in imports was concentrated in crude oil rather than refined products. Since total petroleum imports have increased from million barrels a day to approximately million ; but imports of petroleum products have declined from million barrels a day to less than million. This substitution is a result of expansion in refining capacity and implementation of the Federal Energy Administration 's ( FEA ) entitlement programs which provide substantial price protection to U.S. refineries PRICES The increase in energy prices which had exceeded percent per year during and slowed significantly during Contributing to this moderation was the Energy Policy and Conservation Act which was passed by the Congress in December and became effective in February This act caused an initial reduction of percent in the price of crude oil produced within the United States and prescribed that the rate of increase of crude oil prices would equal the rate of inflation as measured by the GNP deflator plus up to percent as a production incentive until the act expired in In its attempts to comply with the provisions of the act FEA froze the price of crude oil at the June level as of July. Consequently U.S. crude oil prices have fallen even farther below the price of imports Prices charged to consumers did not reflect the decline in domestic crude oil prices last year ( Table ) The average price of crude oil entering refineries including imported crude oil increased during the last year although the price of domestic crude production fell percent. The prices of fuel oil and gasoline had surpassed the December levels by mid-1976 During price controls were removed from distillate fuel oils residual fuel oils and miscellaneous products. Gasoline commercial jet fuels propane and certain other products remained under controls. Consumer prices of products that were no longer under price controls rose no faster than prices of those products still under control The average price of natural gas continued to increase during ; but at about cents per thousand cubic feet ( mcf ) it remained well below the price of the nearest substitute oil owing to the effects of the continued regulation by the Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) of gas sold for resale in interstate markets. Prices of domestic gas entering the regulated interstate pipelines rose from cents per mcf for the months ending June to cents for the months ending June In mid-1976 prices for im93 O TABLE Changes in consumer prices of energy items [ Percent ] Period Total energy items i Electricity Fuel oil Gasolines Gas Average annual change : to to Change from a year earlier : Also includes coal and motor oil. not shown separately Fuel oil No. * Regular and premium gasoline Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ported and some newly contracted intrastate gas ranged between $ and $ per mcf During the FPG lifted the ceiling price to cents per mcf for gas first dedicated for sale in interstate commerce in and The price allowed for gas first sold in interstate commerce in and was set at $ per mcf. The FPC also raised the minimum price for what is termed old gas The extent to which these price changes will affect demand is limited by the practice of basing consumer charges on the average cost of gas including the gas purchased under the previously lower regulated price. Consequently these price actions will not eliminate the shortage of natural gas for interstate trade though they will help to reduce it The average price of coal sold under long-term contracts continued to increase during at a rate approximately parallel to the rate of inflation in the economy at large. The price of bituminous coal in spot markets however continued to decline during from peaks reached during the coal strike of Electricity prices rose at a percent annual rate through the first months of with rate increases awarded by regulatory authorities to offset the past decline in revenues from electricity consumption. As growth in the demand for electricity resumed in mid-1976 requests for these revenue-sustaining increases began to diminish AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS Increased crop and livestock production last year resulted in the smallest food price increases since the food CPI averaging percent above At the same time farm income remained close to the level Last year 's relatively stable situation provides a vantage point from which to assess the adjustments of the agricultural sector to the relative price changes of the preceding 3J4 years COMMODITY MARKETS AND FOOD PRICES World grain ( including rice ) production in the marketing year is estimated to be percent greater than the preceding year a record harvest and sufficient to add over million metric tons to world stocks. This would be the first substantial addition to world stocks in years While much attention has been given to weather uncertainties in recent years world production of all grains has been relatively stable. Because shortfalls in individual countries have to some extent been offsetting world production has not fallen as much as percent below trend levels in any year since However relatively small variations in production can cause large price fluctuations because of the inelasticity of world supply and demand especially with the much-reduced level of world carryover stocks of grain in recent years. Price fluctuations in the United States during were further increased in size by policies in other countries which attempted to insulate their prices from world supply and demand conditions. The result was to leave a disproportionate amount of consumption and production adjustment to countries which follow relatively free-trade market-oriented policies. Chief among these is the United States In response to the high crop prices of and accommodating farm policies U.S. farmers in harvested record crops of wheat and corn for the second consecutive year. The large crops allowed substantial rebuilding of stocks especially of wheat. U.S. carryover stocks from food grain supplies are expected to be around million metric tons for wheat and million tons for rice roughly half a year 's total utilization for each. At the end of farm prices were substantially lower than a year earlier for wheat and rice and slightly lower for corn. For soybeans however prices were much higher as strong domestic and foreign demand coupled with a reduced U.S crop indicated that carryover stocks might be drawn down near minimum levels in The lower food grain prices were reflected in an estimated percent decline between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of in the cereal and bakery product component of the CPI. But grain prices influence the food sector primarily through livestock markets. Favorable ratios of livestock to feed prices in resulted in large increases in meat production in Compared to production figures a year earlier pork production was up percent beef up S1/ ^ percent and broilers up percent Milk production increased percent the largest annual rise since Beef production was high not only because of increased marketing of grain-fed cattle but also because cattlemen continued to cut back their breeding herds which had been overbuilt in the early 1970s. The resulting addition to last year 's meat supplies helped depress prices but the reduction in cattle numbers set the stage for higher beef prices in the future Consumption of red meats and poultry last year rose an estimated percent from The relative price of meats as measured by the red meats and poultry CPI deflated by the overall CPI fell an estimated 6j/s> percent below the average. Taking into account changes in income and population the increased quantities consumed implied a larger response of consumption to the price decline or the income increase than is found in most econometric studies of demand for meats Consumer prices for other food categories including fruits and vegetables and dairy products increased faster than the overall CPI during There were especially sharp increases for coffee eggs and fish. But cereals and meats declined suffiiently during the year to make the increase in the food CPI only an estimated percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of and percent from year-average to FARM INCOME Preliminary estimates indicate that last year 's real income from farm and other sources per farm household was high by historical standards for the fifth straight year even though it was substantially below the peak. U.S Department of Agriculture data on disposable income per capita for the farm and nonfarm populations give some basis for comparing farm and nonfarm economic well-being ( Table ) Comparison is difficult however because of differences in the cost of living and in the number of persons per household as well as nonpecuniary differences between farm and nonfarm work and greater capital gains arising from farm real estate. Commercial farmers with annual gross sales of $ or more per year earned higher average incomes than the nonfarm population throughout the 1970s This group accounted for percent of the farm products sold in In they earned a mean income per household of $ after tax but including income in kind but the aggregate conceals wide variations in returns. In particular many cattle feeders and sugar beet and cane producers experienced losses last year although in some recent years they earned large profits The changes in product and factor prices that lay behind the farm income changes of the 1970s show the influence of sharply rising export demand for grains and oilseeds. In fiscal farm exports attained a seventh consecutive yearly record of $ billion of which $ billion was accounted for by wheat feed grains and soybeans. In addition domestic demand for food has continued to increase. Total domestic utilization of farm food commodities increased percent between and while the CPI for food consumed at home increased percent relative to the overall CPI Between and the prices farmers received for crops rose percent relative to the GNP deflator and the relative prices received for livestock rose percent The associated increases in factor prices reflect not only a greater derived demand but also the effects of energy price increases on production costs. The prices of all important groups of farm inputs increased in compari- TABLE Real income per farm and per capita disposable personal farm income as percent of nonfarm income Total income per farm ( dollars ) i Period Percent of farm opeiators ' income from farming Per capita disposable personal income farm as percent of nonfarm average average $ i Net farm income excluding inventory change plus off-farm income of farm households divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items = Source : Department of Agriculture son with the general price level. The indexes for farm prices paid deflated by the GNP deflator were up percent for fertilizers percent for tractors and self-propelled machinery percent for fuels and energy and percent for agricultural chemicals between and The index of farm real estate prices relative to the GNP deflator rose percent and the hourly real wage rate of hired farm workers rose percent during this same period FARM AND FOOD POLICY Through the Rice Production Act of a rice program that restricted output was replaced last year by the market-oriented approach already existing for wheat feed grains and upland cotton. That approach introduced in the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of provides income support by means of deficiency payments based on the difference between a legislated target price and the market price or support price received. The market price is supported at a lower level by way of the " loan rate " the price per bushel which is provided as a loan to qualifying farmers who put grain in storage and may then pay off the loan by turning grain over to the Commodity Credit Corporation. The higher target price has little effect on acreage because deficiency payments are made only on an allotment base which a farmer can not increase by expanding acreage Unlike that for wheat and feed grains the target for rice established for the crop is above market prices. Consequently deficiency payments on the crop of an estimated $ million will be made to rice growers The loan rate on wheat was increased by cents to $ per bushel in October with smaller increases for feed grains. This increase put the wheat support price near enough to market prices so that any further significant increase in the support price would threaten to reduce export and feed use of wheat Following a recent emphasis on international approaches to commodity policy the United States proposed in the International Wheat Council a system of nationally held food grain reserves. The reserves to consist of million metric tons of wheat and rice would be used to add to supplies during years of exceptionally low production rather than to defend any particular price band. They would be acquired and released with reference to quantitative triggers when world supplies exceeded or fell short of trend by a fixed percentage. No progress was made toward implementation of this plan. By year-end however prospective private carryover stocks of wheat and rice above working stocks in the United States amounted to perhaps million tons of the proposed 30-million world total There were significant policy developments in several other areas in The Administration attempted unsuccessfully to move toward a marketoriented program for peanuts to replace the current reliance on acreage controls and high support prices. Dairy price supports were reviewed at quarterly intervals and were raised in April and October to keep the price of milk used in manufacturing at percent of parity. By the end of the year substantial Government purchases of butter cheese and powdered milk were being made at the support prices. The President vetoed a bill which would have raised dairy supports to percent of parity and under which the accumulation of dairy products would have been still larger and the year-end prices still higher Other international policy developments concerned imported coffee sugar and meat which in fiscal accounted for $ billion of the $ billion U.S. agricultural imports. The Senate ratified U.S. participation in a new International Coffee Agreement which contains provisions intended to stabilize prices within a band agreed upon by producers and consumers. As with most such arrangements there is a danger that the agreement will be more effective in holding prices above the price floor than in holding prices below the price ceiling when a short crop occurs. The devastating Brazilian frost of July is likely to keep prices well above the highest possible support price for at least more years. In regard to sugar and meat measures were taken to protect domestic producers from imports. The tariff on sugar was increased cents per pound and quantitative restrictions were imposed on imports of beef Government regulation of agriculture continued to grow last year. The Environmental Protection Agency suspended most uses of the pesticides heptachlor and chlordane. The Grain Standards Act of will greatly increase Federal supervision of the weighing and grading of grain for export The Farmer-to-Consumer Direct Marketing Bill was enacted to encourage the purchase of food in places other than grocery stores. Other regulatory developments included increasing health and safety regulation the ban by the Food and Drug Administration of several food additives and the decisions first to permit and then to deny the use of mechanically deboned red meat for human consumption While circumstances have enabled a movement away from restrictive programs for grains and upland cotton most of last year 's policy developments were not in the direction of less regulated markets. With farmers pressing for intervention to forestall lower grain prices and with increased interest in achieving grain price stability through grain reserves the potential exists for a further turn from the market orientation that has been brought about in the last decade. The costs of such a turn are discussed in Chapter CHAPTER The World Economy in S. DREW TO A CLOSE there appeared to be some doubt \ regarding the strength if not the sustainability of the economic recovery. After moving very fast early in the recovery began during the summer to slow in many countries. This slowdown combined with pressures in foreign exchange markets associated with external payments strains in a number of countries brought about a renewed sense of uncertainty. Whereas policy concerns early in the year had centered on the risk that simultaneous recoveries in the industrial economies might reinforce each other and bring about an unsustainable pace in the second half of the concern shifted to the possibility that the flattening of the recovery might lead to an insufficient rate of growth Nevertheless the record for is quite positive in many respects. Output in the industrial countries is estimated to have risen about percent above its level in real terms the volume of world trade expanded by about percent and inflation rates though not diminished as much as would be desirable are significantly below earlier levels. Despite the pessimism of the summer months it should be clear that a cessation of growth is not expected this year. The consensus of government and private forecasters is that expansion in output will continue at a pace only slightly below the average rate of growth achieved in but nevertheless a pace that may not be sufficient to allow a significant reduction in unemployment. In fact although employment has been growing in many countries unemployment has remained high and has begun to rise again in some The experience of the past several years has shown that high and rising inflation rates are incompatible with the achievement of sustainable growth In recognition of this fact it was agreed at the Ministerial Meeting of member states of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and at the meeting of Heads of State and Government of the major industrial countries in the summer of that the restoration of full employment and normal levels of capacity utilization in the OECD area would take a number of years. It was also agreed that sustained recovery could be achieved only in a climate of price stability. For this reason excessively expansionary policies which would be interpreted as carrying the seeds of renewed inflation might at best bring only temporary relief from unemployment The policy actions taken in and early were aimed at establishing a sustainable recovery. Although several autonomous events in helped create severe inflationary pressures it is clear that overly expansionary policy measures bore part of the responsibility and eventually contributed to the worldwide recession of and it is this costly experience that authorities are determined not to repeat. Nevertheless the strategy set out in mid-1976 envisaged a considerable period of growth well above longerrun average rates to ensure a steady move toward full employment. But it also implied caution lest inflationary expectations revive. Therefore it should not be interpreted as a failure of policy if a mid-course correction now may prove to be necessary to keep the recovery on track in a number of countries The fiscal program recommended in the United States ( see Chapter ) and the possible adoption of fiscal measures supporting the recoveries in Japan and Germany reflect the conviction that demand management policies must aim at sustaining the recovery but should recognize the need to remain prudent even in the face of an apparent pause. This is particularly true since the latest indicators in some countries point to a strengthening of activity Attainment of sustained growth after a prolonged period of rapid inflation and recession as well as adjustment to the higher cost of energy require a rising share of investment in national output at least for some time. Now more than ever this necessity implies an avoidance of policies that in the end lead to abrupt shifts. Above all it involves a commitment by government as well as the public at large to realistic goals for the growth in incomes and the distribution of these incomes within and among nations THE DEMAND SITUATION At the beginning of the recovery from the deepest and most widespread recession of the post-World War II period was entering its second year. As one frequently finds at this stage some months after a turning point cyclical indicators in many countries are sufficiently mixed as to raise the question whether the recovery might lapse into insufficient growth or whether a broadening out into a sustainable expansion is imminent In late and the beginning of substantial increases in output were registered in most industrial countries. These increases in activity were transmitted to the developing countries in particular the primary commodity producers through a strong expansion in international trade and a sharp upturn in commodity prices that came unusually early in the cycle The early phase of the recovery was associated in part with the substantial amounts of fiscal and monetary stimulus that had been put in place during and early and in part with the cyclical recovery of inventory and consumption demand Because inventory decumulation in had been unusually sharp and private consumption demand had been weaker than in previous recessions there was considerable room for expansion in both these demand components once confidence in a stable recovery began to be established. Accordingly the main impetus to the expansion in output in late and early came from a shift in inventory behavior which turned from significant decumulation to moderate accumulation. As confidence about the economic outlook improved consumer spending began to contribute strength to the recovery. The historically high saving rates of the preceding period of inflation and recession began to decline to more normal levels especially in those countries where inflationary tendencies were subsiding as consumers began to feel more secure about their jobs as well as about a restoration of the value of their inflation-eroded savings ( Table ) As a consequence pent-up consumer demand reflecting earlier postponement of both replacement needs and new purchases of durable goods was released. And industrial production in OECD countries expanded at an annual rate of nearly TABLE Personal or household saving rates in selected industrial countries [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted ] Period United States Canada Japan France Germany United Kingdom average. : First half Second half : II III U6.3 i Estimate Note. For the United States Canada and the United Kingdom the rate is personal saving as percent of personal disposable income. For other countries the rate is household saving as percent of disposable income Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and national sources percent in the first quarter of the year ( Table ) Most of this increase was concentrated in the growth of output of industrial materials and consumer goods. Clearly industrial activity could not be sustained at such a pace and growth of output moderated in the second quarter of the year But as the summer passed and the temporary impetus to activity stemming from the reversal of the inventory cycle and the partial release of pent-up consumer demand spent itself the rate of increase of economic activity continued to be slow largely because investment demand did not revive significantly DEMAND AND OUTPUT IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES The continued slow pace of the world recovery after the vigorous upswing earlier in raised questions about whether or not the recovery might be faltering especially in the United States Germany and Japan where considerable progress had been made in reducing inflationary expec- TABLE Changes in industrial production in selected industrial countries [ Seasonally adjusted monthly rates ] Percent change from preceding period Period OECD total United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Latest month from prerecession peak : L II III IV _ _ July .__ _ Aug.._ Sept Oct Nov : April. May June '2 Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and national sources tations and where therefore policy could be more flexible than elsewhere. Current economic indicators in all three countries do not yet provide clear evidence whether and to what extent stimulative measures in addition to those already instituted or currently contemplated might be needed In Germany the economic recovery had started earlier than in most other countries partly because inflationary pressures there had been contained earlier than elsewhere. Because of the early reining in of demand pressures inventory accumulation in Germany was not as extensive in as elsewhere. Therefore with demand reviving the shift in inventory behavior did not contribute as much to the early stages of the recovery as in other countries. Initially the recovery was carried by the effects of a large income tax cut and a temporary subsidy on investment instituted in late By the end of it seemed that the impetus to final demand provided by the fiscal stimulus and by strongly rising export orders might broaden the recovery. Private consumption and investment demand were growing at annual rates of percent in the first quarter of Surveys of business intention and consumer sentiment pointed toward a continued firming of domestic demand After the first quarter however the pace of recovery slowed markedly Not only was there no further improvement in unemployment but employment remained below year-earlier levels. Domestic order inflows to industry began to weaken. Part of the slowdown in the pace of economic activity reflected a weakening of consumption demand. The saving rate stopped falling and stabilized well above its average though considerably below its recent peak and the volume of retail sales was flat through most of Only exports seemed to remain an expansionary force. Thus considerable concern arose about the ability of the German economy to move into a sustained expansion However industrial production began to pick up again toward the end of the summer. Later in the year order inflows especially from domestic sources appeared to strengthen and unemployment fell slightly. But business intentions remained weak through the third quarter of according to surveys and some part of the rise in domestic orders reflects subcontracting of export orders rather than a broad upturn of domestic investment Monetary policy has been accommodating and it appears that the target for monetary expansion set by the Bundesbank for will be exceeded. For the monetary authorities have announced that their target for monetary expansion in terms of Central Bank money will be percent implying a growth rate of * /2 percent from the last quarter of to the last quarter of In order to help ensure that the projected growth of gross national product ( GNP ) of percent for over will materialize the authorities have instituted a number of selective measures to increase labor mobility and curtail unemployment and a scheduled increase in value added tax has been postponed. In addition further measures to stimulate private investment are being contemplated Developments in Japan in certain respects appear to be similar to those in Germany. The early phase of the recovery was sparked by fiscal stimulus and activity picked up sharply toward the end of with a revival of export demand. In early the recovery appeared to broaden as private consumption demand rose rapidly and investment demand though not buoyant registered its first significant increase in years. Underlying inflationary tendencies seemed to have moderated substantially although price indicators were rising at a somewhat faster pace than in The faster rise of consumer prices largely reflected reductions in the subsidy elements of certain government services as well as other government price decisions. A regeneration of cost pressures did not appear to be a factor. In fact wage settlements last year at an average % percent were well below past trends and indicate that the moderation in price increases that occurred in the third quarter of may well continue. Furthermore the rate of saving in Japan as in Germany appears to have stabilized at levels above its long-run average and consumption demand is consequently a lesser expansionary factor than had been expected The Japanese recovery seemed to come to a virtual halt during the summer months. Industrial production fell toward the end of the summer and the growth in real GNP decelerated sharply from an annual rate of % percent during the first half of the year to somewhat less than percent in the third quarter of This slowdown reflected a decline in the volume of exports from the very high levels of the first half of the year and a flattening out in private investment demand. Finally in Japan as in the United States some underspending by public authorities may have contributed to the slowdown in the growth in output. In the case of Japan this underspending was associated with parliamentary delays in approving public financing bills Because of the sluggish growth in the third quarter of the Japanese authorities announced a number of stimulative measures in November. The economic package consisted primarily of fiscal measures on the expenditure side of the budget and the direct effect of this fiscal stimulus is estimated to amount to about percent of GNP. However because last year the Government failed to effect the usual annual cut in income taxes designed to reduce fiscal drag overall fiscal policy may not prove quite so stimulative on balance. The formulation of budgetary policy in Japan in was complicated by the tenuous political situation. Now that the December elections are over and a Government has been formed the course of fiscal policy may well be clearer in The slower growth in activity in the three large industrial economies the United States Japan and Germany was accompanied by similar developments in the other major industrial countries. In these countries however the fact that internal demand grew more slowly or stopped growing during the summer months of largely reflected domestic policy measures aimed at containing accelerating price pressures In Italy partly because the Government was under strong political pressures fiscal and monetary policies had turned decisively expansionary in the second half of As a result output expanded rapidly from the end of through May This expansion in output was accompanied however by accelerating price pressures largely reflecting rising wage costs a budget deficit that rose to percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) and an apparent loss of control of monetary expansion. These developments were in turn reflected in growing trade deficits and pressures on the exchange rate. The authorities attempted for some time to contain exchange rate pressures by foreign borrowing and heavy intervention in the exchange markets. But growing reluctance by foreign lenders to extend further credit and mounting pressures in the exchange markets partly caused by capital flight brought about a significant change in economic policy Systematic support of the exchange rate was discontinued early in and monetary policy was tightened as was fiscal policy. Partly to reduce domestic liquidity but mainly to arrest the drop in the exchange rate the authorities instituted a prior deposit scheme on most foreign currency transactions. Later in the year a temporary surcharge on all purchases of foreign exchange was imposed Stabilization measures which could strike at the root of Italy 's economic problems wage push which was largely self-perpetuating in a climate of accelerating inflation because of tight indexation schemes and excessive government deficits financed in large part by the central bank proved difficult to effect because of political uncertainties. Following the June elec- tions the authorities began to formulate a more comprehensive economic program partly in preparation for reopening negotiations with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) for financial assistance. The Government 's program took more definite shape in October with the announcement and subsequent parliamentary ratification of a series of increases in taxes administered prices and public traiffs. Monetary policy was tightened further and discussions with business and labor were begun to seek ways of reducing labor costs and in particular of modifying the linkage between wages and prices. These discussions are continuing and completion of the IMF negotiations awaits presentation of a satisfactory program of wage restraint Italy 's Communist Party which made considerable gains in the June elections as well as the country 's other major political parties have supported the Government 's stabilization efforts and have agreed along with key members of the union leadership that wage restraint must form an essential part of any stabilization package. However the form such restraint is to take still remains to be worked out In the meantime the recovery slowed though not quite as much as had been expected. Real GDP in the third quarter of increased at an annual rate of less than percent after strong increases in the preceding quarters of percent and percent respectively. Growth in the second and third quarters was largely sustained by exports and stockbuilding. Investment spending except for energy-related projects leveled off after some improvement early in the year. If the Government 's stabilization efforts are effective income growth may remain weak in In addition high nominal interest rates a weak demand outlook and poor profit opportunities may continue to inhibit private investment demand. A successful stabilization program and strong export orders however might do much to release longdeferred replacement demand for capital equipment In the United Kingdom it was hoped that an export-led recovery would bring about the structural shift of resources into exports and private investment that was needed for a sustainable expansion but these hopes flagged in the spring of The growth of exports began to slow and in volume terms they fell by percent in the third quarter of At the same time the recovery of private investment expenditures except on North Sea oil installations appeared to have come to a halt in the second half of Real GDP fell in the second quarter ; and although industrial production stopped falling in September by November it was only fractionally above its early level. As a consequence unemployment rose through most of the year The disappointing performance of the British economy was largely associated with continued high rates of inflation despite the wage restraint instituted in August and the agreement for further restraint reached in May in return for some tax relief. The high rates of inflation over percent at an annual rate as measured by the CPI in the first half of to some extent reflected higher import prices as commodity prices rose and the exchange rate weakened. But to a larger extent they reflected continued strong domestically generated price pressures partly emanating from the public sector The British Government therefore reassessed its policies toward the end of In a policy statement formulated partly in conjunction with the need to obtain conditional credit from the IMF the authorities set out their prospective policy guidelines and the reasons for them. An essential requirement aside from the necessity of further reducing inflation rates and of ensuring continuing support from the unions for the Government 's wage policy is the need to improve the nonprice elements of British competitiveness at home and abroad. Furthermore resources must be shifted from public and private consumption into exports and productive investment. The Government stated that " for this purpose an essential element of the Government 's strategy will be a continuing and substantial reduction in the share of resources required for the public sector. It is also essential to reduce the public sector borrowing requirement in order to create monetary conditions which will encourage investment and support sustained growth and the control of inflation. " Accordingly the Government is effecting public expenditure cuts phased over several years and raising some indirect taxes. These measures combined with earlier expenditure cuts an increase in employers ' social security contributions and some other revenue-raising provisions are expected to bring the public borrowing requirement down from its current level of percent of GDP to about percent in fiscal The fiscal measures are coupled with limits on the expansion of domestic credit designed to bring the growth of bank lending and of the monetary aggregates into line with the Government 's overall objectives of reducing the rate of price inflation and bringing down interest rates The economic program adopted by the British authorities was hammered out under intense political difficulties since the longer-term strategy clearly was difficult to accept in the face of high and rising unemployment. However the authorities decided that the past record of consumption-led growth policies had only weakened the industrial structure in the longer run Equally strong pressures to impose direct controls on imports which were to reduce both external payments pressures as well as pressures on the internal price level stemming from rising import prices were resisted successfully mainly on the grounds that such controls would help to perpetuate the structural weaknesses in the economy but also in recognition of international obligations agreed to within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) and the IMF. If the recent measures remove some of the uncertainties that have clouded the economic outlook for Britain and if the forthcoming budget as expected removes some of the tax disincentives to business expansion the outlook for the growth of economic activity in and beyond may have improved substantially compared with the trends apparent around mid-1976 In France as in the other major industrial countries the recovery initially sparked by fiscal measures and a turnaround in inventory investment slowed after the first quarter of The domestic economic situation is dominated by concerns about continued high inflationary pressures. Wholesale prices which had been falling in rose at annual rates of almost percent in the second and third quarters of and consumer prices increased at about a percent annual rate from early through late The revival of domestic activity and the relatively high inflation rates were reflected in a growing current account deficit and downward pressure on the exchange rate Although a severe drought and the effects of the depreciation of the French exchange rate contributed to the rise in the domestic price level the main pressures came from internal sources. Wages rose at an annual rate of percent through the third quarter of in part led by settlements in the government sector well in excess of the inflation rate. The budget deficit in had been financed largely by bank borrowing and monetary policy at that time was decidedly expansionary. As a result the growth of the broader money supply ( M ) accelerated sharply Faced with internal price pressures and external financial constraints the authorities tightened monetary conditions progressively during The budget for was designed to halve the public deficit compared with that of However aid to farmers to alleviate the effects of the drought and subsidies to the social security fund exceeding planned amounts may keep the deficit above anticipated levels. The proposed budget for is in balance. The growth rate of public expenditures is to be less than that of nominal GNP and increases in personal and corporate income taxes partially offset by a cut in indirect taxes and some investment incentives are to close the remaining gap between expenditures and revenues In addition ^ monetary policy is to continue to support the anti-inflationary measures. M is to grow by 12J/2 percent in over compared with a percent annual rate during the first half of The growth of regulated bank credit ( about percent of all bank credit extensions ) is to be held to percent for the large banks The authorities also instituted a general price freeze from mid-September to the end of and will keep public utility charges unchanged until April The price pressures built up during the 3/2-month freeze on private sector prices were to be offset by a reduction in value added tax in January and tighter control of profit margins is to limit price rises further. Finally the Government proposed a voluntary wage restraint under which real wages would remain constant The inflationary environment coupled with political uncertainties reflected in an early focusing on the parliamentary elections has brought about a pessimistic turn in business and consumer confidence according to latest surveys. Nevertheless capacity utilization has continued to rise moderately ; and private consumption reflecting somewhat larger rises in real incomes than elsewhere has continued to support economic activity GENERAL DEMAND TRENDS Economic developments in the individual countries clearly show a considerable divergence among underlying conditions and therefore among policy concerns. In those countries where marked progress had been made in turning around inflationary expectations Germany Japan and the United States for example concerns centered on the sufficiency of the policy stimuli effected earlier. In a number of other countries inflation rates had diminished only little or were accelerating once more partly because authorities in these countries had generally not moved to contain inflationary pressures during to the extent that other countries had done The authorities in these countries notably Britain Italy France and Canada were thus forced partly by external pressures to institute measures aimed at cooling the inflationary climate during Despite the growing divergence of policy aims among major countries however the shape of the recovery revealed a number of striking similarities The slowdown in the growth of output over the summer months of aside from the expected diminution of the stimulus derived from earlier expansionary policy measures and inventory changes generally reflected one major shift in the demand outlook : private investment demand failed to revive to the extent that might have been anticipated on the basis of surveys of investment intentions and general economic developments. This sluggishness occurred in many countries despite the fact that replacement needs have been cumulating for some years and a general recognition that a return to sustained full-employment levels in most countries presupposes a shift of resources toward investment In Germany and Japan for example past recoveries have usually shown a considerable rise in investment demand following an export-led upturn In the current cycle this pattern has not been repeated despite the fact that the early stages of the recovery were clearly export led. Further in a number of other countries as well investment is turning out to be less strong than past historical relationships would indicate. Econometric evidence based on models for a number of countries participating in Project LINK supports this view The financial position of the business sector in many countries does not appear to be a factor restraining investment decisions at this time. The considerable improvement in the liquidity positions and in the structure of balance sheets of nonflnancial corporations that had been evident in apparently continued at least into the first half of The cyclical rise in corporate profits and the improved climate in bond and equity markets allowed corporations to bring their internal financing and debt-to-equity ratios into better balance. Flow of funds data for the United States Japan Germany France and the United Kingdom collected by the OECD show O that this phenomenon was general among industrial countries. Of course it reflects to some extent the weakness of investment demand but the structure of the financial flows themselves was a significant contributing factor If neither the low level of capacity utilization nor financial constraints can fully explain current investment behavior the explanation for the failure of investment demand to turn up decisively in the second year of recovery may be linked to a number of the longer-run factors discussed in Chapter Data for most countries show that there has been an erosion of profits apparent since at least the late 1960s and earlier in some countries. At that time however concerns regarding the downward trend of profitability were alleviated by a growth-oriented business climate. Hence private investment demand responded strongly in the upswing. The current pause in investment spending appears to reflect a stronger awareness of the earlier underlying uncertainties and the addition of new ones The risks associated with committing capital for long periods therefore appear to be weighing more heavily on the appropriation process and the risk premiums required have increased. The costing out of rates of return into the future never easy is compounded by the fact that recent experiences have led to greater uncertainties regarding future changes in demand inflation rates and financial conditions. The lack of clear guidelines regarding government policies in various areas but more generally also a fear that governments may have lost control over economic conditions and that the economy in a number of countries may fall into stop-go cycles have added to the difficulties involved in the forward projection of profitability A major new element affecting investment decisions is the large increase in the relative price of energy that was effected in by the OPEC cartel. By raising inflation rates and making many processes in industrial and agricultural production uneconomic the sextupling of the export price of OPEC oil since has had much more far-reaching effects than the directly obvious ones of deepening the world recession and creating serious international financial problems. The success of the OPEC cartel has also raised uncertainties regarding future price decisions and the security of supply. Investment decisions have become vastly more complicated under these circumstances ; and adjustment while creating new needs for physical capital may take a long time. In the meantime capital shortages may appear in various sectors and intensify inflationary tendencies which in turn will inhibit the adjustment In countries where for one reason or another nominal interest rates have risen to recent cyclical highs the problem surrounding investment decisions is further complicated by the fact that interest payments on debt create cash flow problems. Under such circumstances the longer-run problem of building and sustaining confidence is therefore compounded by the more immediate financial situation PUBLIC SECTOR DEFICITS The economic programs adopted or proposed by the British Italian and French authorities as well as some others during all stressed the need to stabilize the growth of the public sector and to reduce budget deficits In most of these countries it was felt that both inflationary tendencies and disincentives to private sector initiatives were closely linked to the fact that the longer-run trends and the past years of inflation and recession had led to an excessive growth of government expenditures. The expenditure levels that have resulted are not expected to be sufficiently reduced as recession effects wear off. During government efforts in a number of countries were therefore largely concentrated on achieving immediate cuts in public expenditures as well as better longer-run control of the government sector. The focus on expenditure policy was owing in part to the fact that in a number of countries it was felt that marginal tax rates were approaching effective limits. In Britain and Italy efforts were also directed specifically toward reducing the very large public borrowing requirement since financing of the deficit during the year involved a high rate of monetization thus giving impetus to inflationary expectations and toward the end of the year to rising nominal interest rate levels. The latter lessened the effectiveness of the governments ' policies directed toward increasing private investment demand By itself the growth of the public sector does not necessarily imply a loss of vitality in the economy. In fact at times there is a perceived need for the expansion of certain public sector activities such as infrastructure investment which while leading to a growing absorption of resources by the public sector sustain or increase the vitality of the private sector. Germany is a good example of this proposition. If the public sector provides the type of services the public desires and is willing to pay for there is no loss in either productivity or private incentives. However if public sector services are such as to cast doubt on the willingness of the public at large to pay for them they imply an increase in the tax burden that the public would be reluctant to bear. In such a case the struggle between business and labor about the distribution of net income could be exacerbated. Such struggles inevitably lead to inflationary pressure and to a loss in efficiency for the economy at large. In this sense the growth of the public sector may be seen as inhibiting growth in the economy The closest link between transactions by the public sector and their effects on the overall economy is the direct claim on output and labor that derives from government spending on goods and services. A large part of such spending is concentrated on consumption or on investment in areas that may not necessarily reflect an optimal use of resources. One example is extensive government aid to ailing sectors of industry or individual firms when aid directed at phasing out such activities might represent a better use of resources. In such instances the overall ability of the economy to grow may be affected negatively One element in the rise in government spending has been the increasing claim of the public sector on labor over time ( Table ) In some cases TABLE Private and public employment in selected industrial countries Percent of total civilian employment Sector and country Private sector : _ United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands Sweden United Kingdom Public sector : UnitedStates Canada Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands Sweden United Kingdom _ Data for Data for a Includes public corporations Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and national sources a shift of labor to the public sector has been part of a general change in resource allocation that as noted above has been conducive to or at least has not hampered overall growth. But sometimes it has led to increased inflationary tendencies particularly in countries where the government tends to be a wage leader. This appears to have been a problem especially in the United Kingdom in the early 1970s and in France during In a more indirect way government policies may have influenced wage formation and price pressures through the timing and extent of increases in social insurance contributions. When such contributions represent a large and in some cases rising share of total employment compensation they may create problems. These problems however do not lie in the programs that are financed but in the fact that in wage negotiations workers do not normally regard employers ' contributions to social security funds as a part of compensation. To the extent that unions in a number of countries have begun to negotiate on the basis of after-tax compensation rising contributions by employees have also added to wage demands and thus to price pressures. The need to increase contributions to social insurance programs has become apparent in a growing number of countries as recession and inflation have reduced surpluses or have increased deficits of social insurance funds. The requirement that such programs be put on a solvent basis has necessitated increases in contributions and to the extent that such increases put pressure on wages and prices they provide a good example of the problem mentioned earlier that can arise with regard to income distribution The unpredictability of changes in social policies as well as their increased cost may also be inhibiting investment decisions. There is some evidence that this may have been a significant factor in the United Kingdom and Italy. In this connection the recent decision to raise employers ' social security contributions in the United Kingdom may well hinder the industrial revitalization which other British policy actions were designed to foster The size of the public sector and the way it is related to inflation and overall growth of the economy must be viewed in terms of a balance between public services and private output representing a social consensus. In particular expansion of public sector expenditures for purposes of short-term demand management without an appropriate linkage to longer-term public objectives can disturb this balance. Because programs once phased in to fill a temporary need tend not to be phased out with matching speed there may be an unintentional residue of additional public expenditure after each cycle that is possibly wasteful from a longer perspective. However some countries Sweden for example have institutional arrangements that minimize such effects Because it has proved difficult in most instances to restrain the growth of public expenditures or in any event to increase tax revenues at an equal pace public sector deficits aside from cyclical effects have been growing in most countries. A number of countries have been able to keep domestic consumption high by drawing on foreign savings to finance their public debt. But it has become increasingly clear that there are limits to the willingness of foreign lenders to extend such credit. Although in some countries external debt levels might have reached excessive proportions in any event the time was telescoped by the need to finance external deficits resulting from the increase in the export price of OPEC oil. Consequently in some cases the level of external debt has begun to force authorities to adopt domestic retrenchment programs. The situation has become increasingly acute in those countries where inflationary expectations have remained high and where inflation is eroding trade positions THE EXTERNAL SECTOR The recovery was accompanied by a sharp upturn in the volume of world trade. In contrast to when world trade in volume terms fell by percent trade is estimated to have expanded by or percent in Clearly this substantial growth of world trade has helped to sustain the recovery but it has also brought to light the serious underlying imbalances which exist among countries but which had been masked by the recession Among the industrial countries those with the most stable domestic conditions have apparently had a larger share in the expansion of world exports than those with continued high inflationary pressures. This development has occurred despite the large exchange rate adjustments during and which helped to offset differential developments in inflation rates ( Chart ) The full effects of changes in relative exchange rates are felt only after a considerable lag. Given the existing slack in capacity utilization and the vigorous upturn in world trade however one might expect that countries with depreciating currencies would have shared at above-average rates in the trade expansion. In the event throughout the United Kingdom for example has been unable to maintain its export market shares at least in trade in manufacturers compared with other industrial countries. Italy 's share was reduced through the first half of the year and France may have begun to lose shares as well ( Table ) The failure of trade flows to respond quickly to changes in exchange rates is often attributed to the failure of such changes to show up immediately and fully in transaction prices. But the price side tells only part of the story. If export prices expressed in foreign currency are not adjusted quickly to reflect exchange rate changes profits on export sales will rise and selling abroad will become significantly more lucrative compared with domestic sales. It is therefore reasonable to presume that particularly at times of low general profitability the leverage exerted by exchange rate changes on the supply side may be greater at least in the short run than the leverage on demand arising from increased price competitiveness. Because there is considerable evidence that some countries which have recently experienced relatively large depreciations of their currencies have not adjusted their export prices in foreign currency to the extent that might be expected the profit argument would have provided further grounds for expecting these countries to maintain if not to improve their export market shares In view of the above discussion it may be surprising that some " strong currency " countries especially Germany and Japan have not only maintained but increased their shares in export markets. Several explanations suggest themselves. Countries with relatively low inflation rates tend to have lower interest rates and may therefore be able at a time of high domestic liquidity to offer more competitive financing terms. Unfortunately data on such nonprice components of export transactions are not available. But because a number of countries exempt export credit transactions from the effects of tight domestic monetary policies and because the cost of forward cover may partly offset differences in uncovered rates this explanation takes one only part of the way. Stronger circumstantial evidence exists for a structural explanation relating largely to so-called big ticket items. It is thought that countries with a relatively stable price performance and relatively little social strife and labor disruption such as Germany and Japan have a structural advantage in cap- TABLE Export shares in trade in manufactures of industrial countries [ Seasonally Period United States i United Kingdom adjusted ] Germany France Italy Japan Others Percent of total value * : III IV. : L._ II5. III K Percent of total volume * : IV.. : l | _ III5 Excluding special category exports Including reexports and adjusted for underrecording Belgium-Luxembourg Netherlands Sweden and Switzerland * Total value and total volume refer to total exports of manufactures of the countries in this table Partly estimated Note. Details may not add to totals because of rounding Source : National Institute Economic Review London turing large contracts. The certainty of timely delivery and the relative assurance that contracts will not be reopened because of cost overruns apparently make it worthwhile for the purchaser not to speculate on the possible exchange rate advantage that might derive from placing contracts in a " weak currency " country. If this interpretation is correct improvement in underlying deficits may take a long time to become evident even after the adoption of adequate measures to correct the underlying conditions The large swing in world trade from an actual decline in to abovenormal growth rates in equaling about twice the rate of growth in GNP has eased external payments strains for a number of countries especially the primary producers. The worldwide trade expansion was reflected in a shift in the U.S. trade balance of about $ billion ( at an annual rate ) from a surplus of almost $ billion in the fourth quarter of to a deficit of about $ billion in the fourth quarter of This change in the U.S. trade position which was in large part cyclical was not however accompanied by similar changes in the trade positions of Germany and Japan Chart Exchange Rates for Selected Industrial Countries INDEX = ( RATIO SCALE ) _ UNITED STATES I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i JAPAN I I I I I III III I III I III I I i GERMANY I i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i I i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i i i t i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i NOTE : INDEXES ARE BASED ON TRADE-WEIGHTED AVERAGE EXCHANGE RATES AND ARE FOR THE LAST WEEK IN THE MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM i Chart Continued Exchange Rates for Selected Industrial Countries INDEX = ( RATIO SCALE ) i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i FRANCE i i i i i I i i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i UNITED KINGDOM I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i NOTE : INDEXES ARE BASED ON TRADE-WEIGHTED AVERAGE EXCHANGE RATES AND ARE FOR THE LAST WEEK IN THE MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM i In fact trade surpluses of both these countries toward the end of were larger than they were the year before a reflection not only of their strong export performance but also of a relatively slower growth rate of imports particularly in Japan As the recoveries in Germany and Japan as well as in the United States proceed demand for imports is likely to rise concurrently. But the total effect on world trade in exerted by about or percent faster growth in each of the big countries which would imply rates of growth that are at the upper limit of what authorities currently judge to be compatible with noninflationary growth might raise the currently projected percent rate of growth of the volume of world trade to 9/ percent. This increase would help smooth the adjustment problems of the rest of the world but it could not be enough to make a crucial difference to those countries which still find themselves in payments difficulties despite the large growth in aggregate foreign demand registered in the past year ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND GOVERNMENT POLICIES The slowing of the world recovery after the vigorous upswing earlier in raised questions about whether or not the recovery may be faltering Nevertheless with the policy measures now in place or contemplated estimated growth of real GNP in for the OECD area as a whole based on national projections may amount to / to percent. This rate of growth approximates the percent or so achieved for In the three big industrial economies recovery paths actually may not diverge substantially from earlier recoveries. Further it must also be remembered that the breadth and sustainability of every upswing in the recent past has been put into question at some time or other before it moved into the broader expansion phase. The difference in the current recovery lies in the greater role that inflationary expectations and other uncertainties may be playing in business decisions. Thus the judgment must be that demand management policies in the three large economies need to remain prudent if the gains achieved so far are not to be jeopardized especially because the risk inherent in stimulating considerably faster growth than the to percent rates now aimed for may be too high. Nor would faster growth lead to an appreciable easing of the policy problems that are being faced by other countries A growing number of OECD countries are facing large and in some cases rising external deficits as recoveries proceed. In many of these countries the progress on the inflation side has been less than satisfactory particularly compared with achievements in the three major industrial economies Consequently after underlying deficits which were masked by the recession surfaced once more private capital inflows proved insufficient to cover such deficits. In fact inflation fears have in a number of cases caused such capital inflows to shrink at the same time that current account deficits widened and the possibility of borrowing abroad began to reach its limits As a result adjustment policies are being forced on a number of countries Besides Italy and the United Kingdom a growing number of smaller countries are now experiencing problems in attracting a sufficiency of foreign capital. Consequently in late the monetary authorities in several countries moved to raise interest rates and tighten monetary conditions. This was particularly evident in countries adhering to the European snake arrangement where exchange rate policy forced an adjustment in monetary policy. Nominal interest rate levels in the second half of were approaching recent cyclical highs in Italy the United Kingdom the Low Countries and the Scandinavian countries ( Chart ) These policy actions clearly bring out the dilemma faced by many authorities : how to deal with continued inflationary pressure without diminishing private investment incentives since the latter are requisite to a resumption of a stable growth path and a lasting reduction in unemployment. In this respect the strong reliance on monetary policy exhibited in a number of countries raises questions regarding the appropriateness of the policy mix given longer-term policy goals The reliance on monetary policy reflects what are perceived to be political constraints in a number of cases. Where social friction is growing and union support of demand management policies has been gained on the basis of understandings regarding transfer payments and public sector employment opportunities it is proving difficult to change the policy mix. Partly because of such dilemmas a number of these countries have looked increasingly to rising demand in the United States Germany and Japan to resolve their external payments difficulties as well as to encourage domestic investment As noted above however stronger demand emanating from the three large industrial countries can help to smooth the adjustment process but it can not take the place of well-conceived domestic stabilization programs STABILIZATION POLICY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY Countries have recently had to make difficult adjustments as a result of the severe shocks the world economy has undergone in the past several years The large exchange rate changes that occurred during and partly reflect this process. The task of formulating domestic stabilization policies never an easy one has been made even more difficult by these circumstances Serious social and political problems had to be faced by authorities as they attempted to bring their economies back to a path of balanced growth. Because of these difficulties it is not surprising that there has been a search for external sources of stability which might ease the hard choices faced by governments and the social partners in the private sector business and labor. In particular some have looked to exchange rate stability as a means of reducing inflationary pressures Chart Interest Rates in Selected Industrial Countries PERCENT PER ANNUM UNITED STATES SHORT-TERM RATE * * \ LONG-TERM RATE ' ' / DISCOUNT R A T E n i l I I I I I i i i i I l I ii i iMI MI l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I JAPAN ' * " ' ^ N .y * ' * I i i i i i ! i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i I I I I I I I I II i i i i i i i i i i GERMANY i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i I i i i i i Ii i i i i Ii i i i i Ii i i i i i i SWITZERLAND vui ^ .tr. ^ ^ ^ * J ^ * ,t T I l I l I I l l i i I I I l I I I I I I I I 1I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I1 NOTE : SHORT-TERM RATES ARE GENERALLY 3-MONTH MARKET RATES AND LONG-TERM RATES ARE GENERALLY GOVERNMENT BOND YIELDS ; THESE RATES ARE FOR THE LAST WEEK IN MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Chart Continued Interest Rates in Selected Industrial Countries PERCENT PER ANNUM CANADA LONG-TERM RATE / ; | > <>I ^ * " \ ^ .r- ^ ' " * _ * V SHORT-TERM RATE DISCOUNT RATE I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I \ / : \ ^ ^ ^ I I I I I I I i I I i I I i I I i i I I I I I I i I I I I I I i I i J I I I I I I I I I I FRANCE / J ITALY " ' / ? \ * ^ * ^ V'vA Jy ' / ' * % / r I " i I i i I i i i i i i i i i I i i i i I i i i i I I i I i i UNITED KINGDOM I I I I I I I l I I l I I I I I I I I I I I l I l I I I l I l I I l l I I I I l I I l I I I NOTE : SHORT-TERM RATES ARE GENERALLY 3-MONTH MARKET RATES AND LONG-TERM RATES ARE GENERALLY GOVERNMENT BOND YIELDS ; THESE RATES ARE FOR THE LAST WEEK IN MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM One of the theories put forward in support of substantial intervention in exchange markets is that currency fluctuations as they occur under the floating rate system provide an independent source of inflationary pressure. In its flattest terms this view is that wherever inflation has led to currency depreciation the decline in the exchange rate will create further inflationary impetus because of its effect on the domestic price level and will therefore make stabilization policies increasingly ineffective. In other words exchange rate changes under these circumstances have a destabilizing effect by creating more inflation leading in turn to further depreciation and so on. Some proponents of this theory conclude that this so-called vicious circle can be broken by official intervention in the foreign exchange markets because this action will prevent further depreciation of the exchange rate That theory however ignores the usual basic cause of the initial depreciation of a currency : domestic policies that have allowed inflationary tendencies in a particular country to diverge substantially from those in surrounding countries. Stabilization of the exchange rate through intervention or borrowing abroad subsidizes imports and thereby suppresses already present domestic inflation and prevents needed adjustment. This effect is possible only for a limited period and when differentials in inflationary expectations are moderate. In the longer run an exchange rate change must be seen not as an independent cause of inflation but as a release of inflationary tendencies that had been suppressed earlier A more sophisticated variant of the vicious circle theory states that even when adequate adjustment measures are in place import prices may be forced to adjust to anticipated inflation. Because adjustment takes a considerable period of time depending on the size of the disequilibrium needing to be corrected the exchange markets may in some cases bring about an initial rate of depreciation that anticipates the length of the adjustment process. In such instances the longer the expected adjustment period the greater the initial overshooting of the exchange rate. Such overshooting at the beginning of the adjustment period may indeed cause inflationary pressure. In the short run therefore downward pressure on the exchange rate resulting either from overshooting or from autonomous movements in exchange rates independent of inflation trends may complicate the effectiveness of stabilization policies. This possibility is all the stronger in relatively open economies in which indexing arrangements establish a close link between price and wage movements. But clearly such a process will be sustainable only if policies are followed that validate the resulting inflation. Thus even this more sophisticated variant of the theory of a vicious circle is incomplete. To the extent that adjustment measures cause a reversal of inflationary expectations and reestablish a stable economic environment the likelihood that a reflow of capital will occur is increased with a consequent tendency for the exchange rate to move upward. The changes occurring through the current and the capital accounts are hence likely to be offsetting. Thus the notion of a generalized vicious circle phenomenon is unwarranted Where stabilization policies are perceived to be adequate and are firmly in place bridging finance to cover the period until external deficits can be reduced adequately and intervention in the market to counter disorderly conditions that can arise without being related to inflation trends may be helpful. In most cases where sound programs are in place and government intentions to hold to them are felt to be firm the need for such intervention will usually be small. One should also note that the inflationary impact of exchange rate depreciation often conceals the important role of these adjustments in restoring competitiveness and accommodating a reallocation of resources toward the external sector It is not useful to ascribe the possible overshooting of exchange rate changes and their consequences on the domestic price level to one exchange rate system or another. If domestic policy goals diverge and in consequence inflation rates also diverge among countries linked together by trade and capital movements participants in the foreign exchange market will act upon their expectations regardless of the international monetary system under which they are then operating. If a fixed exchange rate system prevails considerable speculation will occur and capital flows will after a while push the rate off the peg. If the system is flexible the response will be similar. The underlying economic conditions and how market participants perceive a government 's determination to deal with underlying problems are what determine actions in the market. And market participants will use whatever system is available to them to obtain the adjustment they consider necessary. Because they have perceived the reluctance on the part of various governments to institute politically difficult measures their actions in the exchange market have leaned toward the pessimistic side But under these circumstances most observers would judge such reactions to be realistic rather than pessimistic. Hence it is not clear that market actions have ordinarily led to an overdepreciation of exchange rates or indeed that they have been destabilizing Government intervention in the exchange markets aimed at holding a rate when there is increasing evidence that this rate is not in line with underlying economic conditions is likely to prove costly and wasteful of scarce official financial resources. If anything is to be learned from the experience of the 1960s and early 1970s it is surely that intervention policy by itself does not bring about needed adjustment and that the markets are fully aware of this fact. In recognition of this reasoning the Heads of State and Government of the six major industrial nations agreed in November that the aim of intervention policies should be " to counter disorderly market conditions or erratic fluctuations in exchange rates " and further that stable underlying economic conditions are requisite to stable exchange rates. This agreement was affirmed in a wider context by the meeting of the Interim Committee of the IMF in early CURRENT ACCOUNT POSITIONS AND FINANCING The changes in the world payments pattern from to largely reflected the upswing in economic activity. Thus the current account deficit of the industrialized countries as a group increased substantially while the deficit of the non-oil developing countries ( non-oil LDCs ) shrank and the surplus of OPEC rose ( Table ) But current account positions of individual countries reflected both the recovery itself and underlying disequilibria that became apparent once more during the recovery. For a number of countries the appearance of a current account deficit or a diminution of a surplus is a healthy sign from the point of view of both domestic activity and international equilibrium. As long as the oil-producing countries are unable to spend all their current earnings on imported goods and services a corresponding current account deficit must be shared among the oil-importing countries. However the distribution and the size of such deficits are compatible with international equilibrium only if the countries sustaining them exhibit a sufficient degree of economic vitality to attract offsetting capital inflows TABLE Current account balances for OECD OPEC and other countries [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Group of countries OECD OPEC Non-oil developing countries Other countries Unexplained discrepancy 2H -V4 l A 70H -VA ^ 39H -15H Partly estimated Projection Sino-Soviet area South Africa Israel Cyprus Malta and Yugoslavia Sources : Department of the Treasury and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) OECD CURRENT ACCOUNT POSITIONS The shift in the current account balance of the United States from a surplus of $ billion in the second half of to an estimated deficit of $ * billion in the second half of contributed to smoothing the international adjustment process ( Table ) No such support to better international equilibrium was apparent in the shifts in the current account positions of the other two major industrial countries. The Japanese current account swung from a deficit of about $ / billion in the second half of to a $ ^ 4-billion surplus in the second half of This shift however masked the diminution during the second half of the year from the very large surplus accumulated in the first half of The recent downward trend in Japan 's current account balance indicates that some further cyclical adjustment may still be expected. Nevertheless the persistent Japanese surplus has complicated adjustment for other countries and has led to voluntary agreements to restrict certain trade flows. In Germany the current account surplus in was about unchanged from its level. But because import demand in Germany grew more in line with output than it had in Japan there is less reason to believe that Germany 's current account surplus is likely to dimmish significantly in the coming year TABLE Current account balances for OECD countries ( Billions of U.S. dollars ; seasonally adjusted ] Country First half Second half First half OECD : Total.__ United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Other OECD- _ _ -m Second halfi % -2H X IH Estimate Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and national sources Because of the strong current account positions of Japan Germany and a number of other countries including Switzerland and the Netherlands the shift in the combined position of the OECD countries from a deficit of $ 55/2 billion in the second half of to a deficit of more than $ billion in the second half of included substantial increases in the deficits of OECD countries other than the United States. Particularly large shifts were recorded for France1 and some smaller OECD countries. The improvement in the Italian position reflects in part the adjustment measures taken throughout the year but it also results from the direct actions taken to curtail increases in imports and to limit purchases of foreign exchange. The position of the United Kingdom was little changed on a year-to-year basis but a deterioration occurred during the year partly reflecting an export performance that was somewhat disappointing even after initially perverse effects of the exchange rate depreciation were taken into account Thus for the OECD countries was a year of adjustment difficulties and of wide disparities. However measures taken toward the end of to help sustain the recovery as well as further actions contemplated for early in some " strong currency " countries should help smooth the adjustment process this year. Nevertheless remaining difficulties must not be underestimated nor must the danger that they could lead to growing pressures for restrictive trade measures be taken lightly. Because such pressures may be increasingly difficult to resist it is important that progress in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations ( MTNs ) be substantial. In particular aside from the increase in general welfare that would result from trade expansion associated with tariff cuts and the removal of nontariff trade barriers the strengthening of the general framework of the GATT is important in this context http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis OPEC SURPLUSES Adjustment problems of many countries continue to be complicated by the large surpluses accruing to OPEC. In line with the upswing in economic activity the OPEC current account surplus began to rise again in Import absorption possibilities have turned out to be very high for most OPEC member states even for Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Nevertheless the rise in the current account surplus for OPEC in is a reflection of increases in the surpluses of the latter countries and Kuwait as import expansion possibilities for these countries lag well behind the inflow of oil revenues. The increase in the export price of OPEC oil agreed upon at the end of will serve to raise the OPEC surplus further in Because of port congestion disarray in development programs that were accelerated too quickly and surfacing financial constraints a number of OPEC members have begun to reconsider their domestic requirements. For this reason and because much of the prospective increase in production will probably be in Saudi Arabia it is not likely that much of the addition to oil incomes from price increases will quickly be translated into foreign orders. Thus the investible surplus of OPEC is likely to increase in assuming that economic growth in oil-importing countries will continue albeit at a moderate pace The way in which OPEC members have invested their financial surpluses has changed markedly over time ( Table ) Whereas OPEC funds in were largely invested in short-term assets the flow into bank deposits and Treasury bills has declined sharply since then while equity investments and purchases of bonds and notes have continued to grow. With the termination of the Oil Facility in the IMF and some diminution of OPEC grant aid in a larger share of OPEC 's investible surplus flowed to the market. However considering the decline in the current account surplus investible funds in are likely to have totaled about $ billion compared with almost $ billion in The geographical distribution of OPEC 's investment flows has also changed considerably over the past years. Investments in the United States have risen from percent of the total in to an estimated percent or so in the third quarter of On the other hand OPEC 's placements in the United Kingdom fell from % percent of the total investible surplus in to nearly zero in ; and for the first quarters of last year there was a net liquidation of $ * billion of sterling assets NON-OIL LDCs The increase in the OECD 's current account deficit last year was reflected largely in a narrowing of the deficits of the non-oil developing countries. Because official financing flows to the non-oil LDCs from both OECD countries and OPEC were little changed from the diminution of the non-oil LDCs ' deficit reflected primarily market transactions. Adjustment TABLE Estimated disposition of OPEC investible surplus [ Billions of dollars ] Disposition United States Banking and portfolio placements Short-term bank deposits and Treasury bills Long-term bank deposits U.S. Treasury bonds and notes Other domestic bonds and notes Equities Other ( includes real estate and other direct investment prepayments on U.S. exports debt amortization etc. ) __ United Kingdom Other developed countries Less developed countries ._ Non-market countries Euro-banking market International financial institutions ( including IMF Oil Facility ) Total investible surplus ( identified above ) ESTIMATED INVESTIBLE SURPLUS Error of estimates of surplus and unidentified investments Preliminary Includes shift of over $ million from prior year " direct investment " in a U.S.-incorporated petroleum company to banking and portfolio assets Less than $ million Claims on banks in currencies other than that of the country in which bank resides ; excludes banks in the United States Not available Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of the Treasury measures taken by a number of non-oil LDCs in late and in were reflected in lower import flows. But a more important factor in the smaller deficit was the resumption of growth in the volume and even more in the value of exports. Commodity prices began to rise early in the recovery. The London Economist 's " Index of Commodity Prices " in dollar terms showed a rise of percent between July and July With the pause in the recovery at midyear price increases appeared to come to a halt for some commodities and to moderate for others. The overall result however was that by the end of commodity prices on average at least as measured by the Economises index had reached the inflation peaks reported in This upward shift in the price level for commodities will continue to be reflected in the export earnings of commodity producers EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES The financing of external deficits in was accompanied by a very high rate of activity in foreign exchange markets. The trade-weigh ted exchange rates for certain major currencies showed considerable movement despite relatively large balance of payments financing and heavy intervention by for- eign central banks in exchange markets ( Chart ) The strains experienced within the European snake arrangement were a major factor in the heavy intervention activity. Early in the year heavy pressure on the French franc led the authorities to break the link with the currencies adhering to the snake Upward pressures on the German mark reflecting both the large German current account surplus and the continued significantly better inflation performance of the German economy compared with its trading partners caused considerable strain among the currencies remaining in the snake. In the fall of therefore the central values of the currencies within the snake were realigned with the mark appreciating by percent the Swedish krona and Norwegian krone depreciating by percent and the Danish krone depreciating by percent. The largest changes in the foreign currency markets however involved the pound sterling the Italian lira and the Mexican peso which depreciated by percent percent and 37J/i percent respectively against the U.S. dollar between the end of and the end of INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS The unrest in the exchange markets and the financing difficulties that surfaced during the year for a number of industrial and developing countries obscured the relative ease with which deficits of many other countries continued to be financed. Activity in the international capital market was brisk during On the demand side expectations that borrowing costs would rise in buoyed activity ; in addition there was an exceptionally strong surge in Canadian demand for long-term funds. Concurrently the supply of funds to the bond markets was encouraged by low demand for domestic credit in the United States and Europe resulting in declines in short-term interest rates during the year. As funds became more abundant bond yields began to fall. Medium-term credits arranged in the Eurocurrency market also showed a substantial increase last year as rising demands for finance from almost all the main categories of borrowers were met by increases in supply sufficiently large to allow borrowing costs to decline. Total borrowing in the markets for medium-term Eurocredits Eurobonds and foreign bonds amounted to $ billion in the first months of the year representing an annual rate of $ billion an increase of more than one-third from the total New issues of Eurobonds during the first months of the year at $ 12j/2 billion were well above the volume issued in the corresponding period of a previous peak for the Eurobond markets. Industrial countries issued percent of all bonds during the first months of taking a considerably lower share of loanable funds than in Japan was very active in the market but some borrowers from countries in deficit for example the French the British and especially the Canadians also increased their use of the Eurobond markets. Canadian issues of $ % billion in the first months of last year were more than twice as large as in all of because of exceptional needs for long-term finance relatively high domestic interest rates and tax changes that facilitated foreign issues by private companies Developing countries floated loans whose volume in the first quarters of was more than twice that of the preceding year ; their share of the market consequently rose to * percent percentage points of which were accounted for by oil-producing countries ( Table ) TABLE Borrowing in international capital markets [ Billions of dollars ] First half Total Second half First half Third quarter * October * Industrial countries. Denmark France Spain _. _ United Kingdom Other Oil-exporting countries Algeria Indonesia Iran Venezuela Other '.5 '.6 ill Nonmarket countries and organizations International organizations and other _ __ f ] ( ) n ( ) ._ __ _ Foreign bonds Canada IBRD Other o.4 Other developing countries Argentina Brazil __ Mexico Philippines Other _ Medium-term Eurocredits2 Total borrowing Eurobonds. Canada France Japan Other Capital market i Preliminary Publicized credits of over 1-year maturity ; represents commitments Less than $ million Source : International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) The brisk activity in the Eurobond market was in part related to a shift in interest rate differentials that may have contributed to the willingness of investors to reduce their liquidity positions and extend the maturity of their holdings. Short-term rates exhibited a sharp cyclical decline while long-term rates fell relatively little partly because inflationary expectations appeared to change slowly. Thus yield differentials changed greatly. Whereas at the time of historically high short-term interest rates the differential between Eurodollar deposit rates and Eurobond yields had been as high as percentage points Eurodeposit rates in were generally below Eurobond yields Bank lending also rose substantially in Like the rising activity in the Eurobond market the expansion of Eurocurrency loans and the increase in claims on foreigners by head offices reflect the high level of liquidity in the private sector in the main financial centers and the low loan demand from domestic borrowers. Although there has been considerable discussion in private and government circles regarding the structure of the balance sheets of the banking system particularly regarding the exposure vis-a-vis certain countries bank lending to foreigners has risen briskly at least through the third quarter of ( the latest date for which overall data are available ) Publicly announced Eurocurrency bank credits for at over $ * /2 billion exceeded credit extensions in by percent. Morgan Guaranty estimated that the size of the market net of interbank deposits expanded from about $ billion at the end of to nearly $ billion in September In the first months of last year U.S. banks increased their short-term claims on foreigners by $ 5/2 billion $ ^ billion of which was accounted for by loans to Latin America. The continued extension of bank credits to developing countries was not confined to U.S. banks : European banks have also increased their assets vis-a-vis this group of countries. The risks associated with some of these loans are reflected in the rates that are being charged. For example in the medium-term Eurocurrency markets the premium charged some developing countries has risen to at least $ / $ percentage point at a minimum in recent months. There seems to have been a marked shift in the way banks view the creditworthiness of certain countries Whereas in earlier periods the fact that a government had not touched its reserve position in the IMF was taken to indicate a relatively low risk in extending loans banks now seem to favor lending to countries operating under IMF-suggested surveillance. Because banks can not attach macroeconomic conditions to their loans or in any event monitor them they apparently feel more comfortable with debtors operating under IMF conditionality OFFICIAL FINANCING Official financing flows in constituted a somewhat larger proportion of the financing of external deficits than they did in Total borrowing from the IMF in amounted to SDR billion as compared with SDR billion in Although this change appears relatively small funds drawn from the IMF in reflected a higher amount of drawing on regular IMF facilities subject to stricter conditionality as the Special Oil Facility came to an end in March Access to IMF resources was eased because credit availability in the IMF had been increased temporarily by percent of quotas pending the ratification of the Amendments to the Articles of Agreement which among other things will put into effect the particular quota increases agreed upon in Jamaica at the beginning of Access to official financial resources was also considerably increased by liberalization of the Compensatory Financing Facility in the IMF. This facility is designed to help countries overcome shortfalls in export earnings which are largely beyond their own control. During drawings approved under this facility amounted to SDR billion compared with a total usage for the preceding 13-year period of SDR billion. The more liberal access to the Compensatory Financing Facility has clearly done much to ease external financial constraints and cyclical payments problems that non-oil primary producing countries both developed and developing were experiencing during the year. In fact the non-oil LDCs as a group were able to increase their reserve positions by SDR ^ billion during the first months of However this aggregate increase combines a number of countries that experienced increasing external financing problems with others that experienced an easing of financial constraints Finally official financing resources available to developing countries are being augmented by the disposal of part of the IMF 's gold holdings. Onesixth ( million ounces ) of the IMF 's million ounces of gold is being sold at public auction over a 4-year period for the benefit of developing countries. A portion of the profits are being transferred directly to developing countries in proportion to their quotas in the IMF. The remainder of the profits is being used to finance a Trust Fund separate from the IMF but managed by the IMF as trustee. This Trust Fund will provide balance of payments support on concessional terms to the IMF 's poorest members. An additional million ounces of the IMF 's gold holdings are being sold to all members in proportion to their quotas or " restituted " at the present official price of gold in exchange for currency usable by the IMF. Restitution is being carried out in four annual installments of approximately % million ounces each In May of last year the IMF announced a program of auctions at roughly 6-week intervals over a 2-year period covering sales of 5/2 million ounces of gold with ounces to be offered for sale at each auction Five auctions were conducted under this program during in which a total of million ounces of gold was sold at an average price of $ per ounce and at a profit for the Trust Fund of $ million. The first loans under the Trust Fund program were being approved by the Executive Board of the IMF at the turn of the year In late the Executive Board of the IMF reviewed the results of the auction program and decided that it would be desirable without disturbing any of the basic tenets of the general agreement on gold to shift to a definite schedule involving somewhat more frequent auctions at which slightly smaller amounts of gold would be sold. The first installment of restitution was to take place in the first weeks of January to be followed on January by the last auction to be held at the 6-week intervals established in May of last year. Beginning March auctions will be conducted on the first Wednesday of each month each involving the sale of ounces The general assessment of the experience gained so far following some initial uncertainty about the potential effects of the IMF 's sales and about market interest and participation is that the IMF 's sales program has been quite successful. All of the auctions were oversubscribed and the IMF was able to obtain prices on each occasion that were very close to prices prevailing in the market. The absence of a definite timetable for sales however gave rise to questions about the timing and amounts of auctions and has raised needless questions and speculation in the market about the IMF 's intentions The IMF 's announcement in late of a definite schedule of dates and amounts for auctions over the next few months should remove any remaining uncertainties about the periodicity of IMF sales or the amounts to be offered ADEQUACY OF OFFICIAL FINANCIAL RESOURCES Despite the fact that official financial resources were augmented considerably during there is some question about the adequacy of such resources for the period ahead. As noted earlier the financing of external deficits except in a few instances was managed relatively smoothly during Extension of bank credit remained large although during the year there was a growing perception of the need for banks to become increasingly selective vis-a-vis their debtors and this was reflected in a growing desire on the part of private lenders to see commitments backed by some kind of conditionally in terms of adequate economic policies. As a result a number of authorities may have become less reluctant to draw on their credit with the IMF Since the large increases in OPEC 's export price of oil external debt levels in nominal terms have cumulated well beyond historical highs for many countries. The OECD has estimated that current account deficits for the OECD area since the first year of the high oil prices have cumulated to $ billion. The comparable figure for non-oil LDCs is $ billion In a number of instances debt levels are such as to make private lenders reluctant to extend further credit It is important that countries which have adopted satisfactory adjustment measures to deal with underlying external disequilibria and high external debt positions have access to international financial resources to carry them through the adjustment period. The need for such bridging financing is obvious because adjustments can not take place quickly. Furthermore in the absence of such financing there is a growing risk that political pressures to institute trade restrictions can not be resisted But in addition because of the continuing need to adjust to higher import prices for energy further financing may need to be available. As long as OPEC surpluses persist there can be no reversal in total debt positions. On the contrary external debts will continue to grow. In the interest of international equilibrium and the continuation of economic growth worldwide it is necessary that the strongest economies be willing not to resist either a widening of their current account deficits ( or lessening of surpluses ) or an increase in purchases of their assets by foreign investors For a large number of countries balance of payments financing continues to be available from private sources. But a very high proportion of such financing flows through commercial banks which perform a large share of the intermediation between OPEC surpluses and the deficits of other countries. There are internal risks in this situation : banks may at times make financing too easy for certain countries and thus delay needed adjustment ; in other instances banks may be reluctant to promote adequate financial flows to a particular country although the country in question could reasonably be expected to be able to service such flows. In terms of the world financial structure there are therefore advantages to conditional multilateral financing of some proportion of the oil-importing countries ' current account deficits. The IMF is the indicated institution to provide intermediation between the strong creditor countries on the one hand ( certain members of OPEC as well as certain industrial countries with strong payments positions ) and the deficit countries on the other. It is important from this point of view as well as to strengthen the IMF 's liquidity position that the enlarged quotas agreed to under the Sixth Review of Quotas should go into effect as early as possible in This will require that the second Amendment to the Articles of Agreement be ratified by many members who have not yet done so. Further in recognition of the possible greater financing needs the OECD countries have negotiated a Financial Support Fund submitted to the Congress last year. In addition the IMF has advanced the date of the normal quinquennial review of its resources by years. However needs may materialize sooner than the advanced completion date of that review would allow ; and in any case additional means may be required to augment the IMF 's resources either generally or in terms of certain currencies NORTH-SOUTH ECONOMIC RELATIONS The growing external financial problems that have followed the inflation the large increases in the price of energy and the recession of the past several years make it more important than ever that the economic interdependence between the developed and the developing countries be fully recognized During discussions between developed and developing countries were carried on mainly at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) in Nairobi and the Conference on International Economic Cooperation ( CIEC ) The central issues raised by the developing countries were : ( ) Generalized debt relief ; ( ) preservation of the purchasing power of export earnings ; and ( ) official development assistance With regard to generalized debt relief the view of most developed countries was that adequate channels already exist to handle acute cases of financial crisis efficiently. During for example there was a need to re- schedule the external debt of Zaire. This was dealt with promptly through the so-called creditor club channel. Apart from the specific instances of acute cases of financial crisis where countries are forced to seek debt rescheduling it is not in the interest of debtor countries to seek debt relief. Indeed an abrogation of debt contracts would put into question their creditworthiness and would inevitably hamper their future access to capital markets. In fact the easing of such access is an agenda item of considerable importance to a number of developing countries In addition the question of generalized debt relief really involves the broad external financial situation of developing countries. Debt constitutes only one aspect of the overall financial situation in a particular country ; therefore general debt problems address the basic question of the adequacy of transfer of resources to developing countries. The availability of and need for such resources are reviewed periodically. Such reviews may lead to the conclusion that increases in aid flows are required either on a multilateral or on a bilateral basis. It is important however that questions regarding debt problems and possible defaults not be confused with those relating to the adequacy of development assistance The level of export earnings of developing countries constitutes a crucial element in their economic development. The purchasing power of export earnings is therefore of considerable importance to policy planning. It is directly related not only to economic conditions in the country in question but also to those prevailing abroad. Stable noninflationary growth worldwide is thus the basic prerequisite for continuing growth in the purchasing power of domestic incomes and export earnings It must be recognized that developed and developing countries each in their own way need to seek improvements in the conduct of their economic policies with a view to achieving the most effective use of available resources and assuring steady growth in years to come. Artificial ways of achieving such stable conditions in lieu of appropriate policy measures will of their nature be self-defeating in the longer run. Such artificial means exemplified by attempts to relate the price of a particular good to that of some other good or bundle of goods or to freeze the so-called terms of trade of a particular country will inevitably introduce distortions into the economy in question as well as into the world economy. If prices thus determined tend to be higher than normal supply and demand relationships would produce they will add to the inflationary impetus in both consuming and producing countries. This will occur directly through the price mechanism and indirectly through overinvestment in production facilities either for the goods in question or for substitutes whose production was uneconomic at competitive prices. If the price were to be lower than market forces would indicate underinvestment would occur. In each case the eventual outcome would be detrimental to producers as well as consumers. Further competition the major catalyst for economic growth would be adversely affected domestically and internationally A freezing of relative prices either partially or fully would thus inhibit the attainment of the stated goals of both developed and developing nations It has long been recognized that large fluctuations in export earnings that can arise outside the control of the exporting countries can have important detrimental effects on the well-being and growth of developing countries. But it is not realistic or useful to attempt to introduce new mechanisms when existing ones are being improved and are likely to deal adequately with the basic problems. The recent liberalization of the Compensatory Financing Facility in the IMF is an example of a major improvement effected in an already existing mechanism. The scheduled review of this facility will determine the extent to which participants consider current access to be adequate. In order to help minimize economic fluctuations which are detrimental both to the countries in which they occur and to their trading partners systematic consideration in producer and consumer forums of ways to improve the stability and efficiency of specific commodity markets can be useful. More generally in the interest of both commodity producers and other trading nations the consultative machinery on general economic developments and on their interaction among countries could be improved. The possibilities for recognizing and solving mutual problems and mutual needs could thereby be strengthened CHAPTER Policies to Increase Supply ACROECONOMIC POLICIES are designed to encourage growth in aggregate demand and to ensure full utilization of our resources without accelerating inflation. However there are limits to what demand management policies by themselves can do in achieving these objectives. It is therefore necessary to supplement such policies with programs that will promote the efficient use of human and material resources and thereby increase productive capacity. This microeconomic approach has received less emphasis than monetary and fiscal policies in the past. Nevertheless more efficient markets and greater effective supply can complement increases in aggregate demand to bring about larger gains in employment and real growth with less inflationary pressure In Chapter we discussed the sources of the recent productivity slowdown in the private sector. To some extent the lower rate of productivity increase and the accompanying decline in the growth of potential output are related to the impact of the Federal Government on various sectors of the economy. This chapter discusses some major issues and possible approaches to policy in several areas where Government is involved in economic activity : labor markets the regulation of business agricultural markets and tax policy M STRUCTURAL AND INDUCED UNEMPLOYMENT Output and employment can be increased by improving the efficiency with which labor resources are utilized. Improvements can be accomplished by a redesign of public programs to reduce involuntary unemployment and by lessening the incentives that induce unemployment. Unemployment problems and proposed policies have been discussed in some detail in recent Economic Reports. This section summarizes some of the major issues regarding structural and induced unemployment focusing on policy measures intended to generate a more efficient use of the Nation 's labor resources An examination of policies to reduce unemployment requires an understanding of the kinds of unemployment and their causes. Frictional unemployment arises from the normal operation of the labor market ; cyclical unemployment is the result of a less than full utilization of productive capacity due to a recession ; induced unemployment is a consequence of implicit and explicit subsidies built into public programs ; and long-term or structural unemployment is caused by rigidities that create an imbalance between the skills and other characteristics possessed by workers and those demanded in the labor market FRICTIONAL AND CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT Frictional unemployment exists even in periods of very low overall unemployment. In a dynamic free-market economy layoffs occur as employers adjust their level of employment to such factors as changes in the relative demand for goods and services changes in the relative efficiency of firms and seasonality in production or consumption. In addition workers leave jobs to search for better employment opportunities and they enter and leave the labor force at will. These layoffs and quits facilitate the process of reallocating workers to more productive activities. Furthermore when workers enter the labor force for the first time or reenter after having been outside the labor force for a time they engage in a period of job search There is usually a time lag in finding an acceptable job offer in part because workers regardless of the cause of their unemployment may not accept the first offer they receive. These lags result in periods of unemployment that are generally short and are required if labor resources are to be used efficiently Other types of unemployment are likely to be socially wasteful. Much attention has been given to the hardships and waste associated with cyclical unemployment. Cyclical unemployment the primary target of macroeconomic stabilization policy will be eliminated when unemployment is reduced to a level where further increases in aggregate demand will affect primarily the rate of inflation with little impact on employment and output Policies to reduce cyclical unemployment are discussed in Chapter Yet even at what economists regard as full employment some unemployment may exist in addition to that which is purely frictional. A part of this unemployment is a consequence of or is induced by public policy ; and some is structural the result of rigidities in the labor market that make it difficult for some persons to find a job and remain employed for a long period INDUCED UNEMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION Induced unemployment arises from incentives built into some public programs. One source of induced unemployment is the unemployment compensation system. Unemployment compensation has proved to be an extremely useful instrument for macroeconomic and income distribution policies. It serves as an important automatic stabilizer. Without the necessity for new legislation additional benefits are paid as unemployment from job layoffs increases thereby helping to maintain the purchasing power of the unemployed. The system also serves as a means of distributing the costs of a recession more equitably : it replaces part of the earnings lost as the result of a downturn in economic activity. For some an important function of the system is to enable an unemployed worker to decline an offer during the early stages of job search if the wages are low and the working conditions poor compared with the worker 's previous job Despite its highly beneficial effects the unemployment compensation system has some undesirable consequences. The system tends to increase unemployment above the socially efficient level largely because workers and their employers do not pay the full cost of their increased unemployment. The implicit subsidies in the system are the result of the weak " experience-rating " in the payroll tax paid by employers and the favorable income tax treatment of benefits relative to earnings from employment. In principle the employerpaid payroll tax that finances the unemployment compensation system is experience-rated. That is the tax levied on an employer should vary in direct proportion to the benefits received by the employer 's workers ; and this in turn varies with the unemployment experience of the firm 's workers. In practice however the difference between the maximum and the minimum tax rates is small and for many employers a reduction in layoffs does not lower their tax liability. There is therefore an economic incentive during periods of slack work arising from cyclical seasonal or other factors for the employer to place workers on a job layoff or keep them on the layoff for a longer period rather than retaining them on the payroll. For this reason firms in seasonal and cyclical industries tend to be subsidized at the expense of those in more stable industries and the extent of seasonal and cyclical variations in employment and output is increased The unemployment compensation benefits that workers receive are not subject to Federal payroll or income taxation. Employers and employees may view the system as a means of providing tax-free income to workers The implicit subsidy tends to promote more and longer layoffs The failure to tax benefits also creates inequities among workers. The extent to which the benefits replace earnings net of taxes depends in part on the other income of the family. Because of the progressive tax schedule for workers with the same earnings and work history the benefits will replace a larger proportion of after-tax earnings the higher the income of other family members. This situation is clearly contrary to conventional notions of equity If unemployment compensation benefits were taxed as earnings and pretax benefits were raised so that average after-tax benefits for low-income workers were unchanged the average unemployed low-income worker would be unaffected. Raising pretax benefits would also require an increase in the employer-financed payroll tax and if the tax were fully experience-rated the tax increase would reduce the incentive for layoffs In recent years there has been extensive research by economists on various aspects of the unemployment compensation system. Although the estimated magnitudes of the impacts vary the studies tend to arrive at the same qualitative conclusions. For example they find that increased coverage of the work force and a longer duration of benefits tend to increase the unemployment rate and lengthen the duration of unemployment. In addition the larger the unemployment compensation benefits relative to earnings net of taxes the longer the duration of unemployment is likely to be. The requirement that recipients actively search for be available for and accept suitable employment appears to be unevenly administered. Some research suggests that more stringent enforcement of these requirements results in a lower State unemployment rate Reduction of the implicit subsidies currently built into the unemployment compensation system would lead to a more efficient utilization of labor resources. This may be accomplished by greater use of experience-rating of all employers in the payroll tax and by taxing benefits as if they were earnings. These changes would not reduce the effectiveness of unemployment compensation as an automatic stabilizer. These and other issues concerning the unemployment compensation system are to be studied by the National Commission on Unemployment Compensation due to be established in accordance with legislation enacted in STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT Even after the economy has returned to full employment some groups in the population may still have considerable difficulty finding and retaining employment. Unemployment among such groups may arise from the lack or obsolescence of skills from regional mismatching of workers ' skills and job requirements and from wage rigidities. The mobility of workers and enterprises makes it likely that the decline in unemployment in the coming years will be fairly widespread across the country. Although regional growth rates of employment will differ it is not likely that large depressed areas like Appalachia in the 1950s will emerge as a serious problem. The long-duration unemployment rate the number unemployed weeks or longer as a percentage of the labor force was percent in However with the approach to full employment it can be expected to decline toward the prerecession level of about percent A number of groups however including youths with little schooling and in particular black youths and older workers laid off during the recession who have had a long period of unemployment may continue to encounter substantial problems in finding work. Policies that reduce the barriers that are chiefly reponsible for structural unemployment would do much to promote equality of employment opportunities. It is therefore useful to review current and proposed policies designed to expand job opportunities for persons with difficulties in finding and retaining employment. These policies include public service employment job training programs and an employment tax credit Youth Employment Youths have much higher unemployment rates than adults ( Table ) Most of this higher unemployment however is frictional and arises from the frequency with which youths enter and leave the labor force. Labor force entry generally entails a period of job search during which the person is unemployed. Many unemployed youths are entering the labor force for the first time. Others are entering it again after leaving it for a time frequently because of the dovetailing of schooling and work or for young women the dovetailing of household responsibilities ( including child care ) and work in the labor market. In addition in an attempt to gain experience in different types of employment youths are more likely than adults to quit a job and search for another. Thus although the unemployment rate of youths in the most recent year of low unemployment was substantially higher than that of adults there was little difference in unemployment rates arising from the loss of a job The average duration of unemployment among youths is about half that for adult males : in weeks for teenagers compared with weeks for men aged However the long-duration unemployment rate those unemployed weeks or longer as a percentage of the labor force was greater for teenagers : percent compared with percent for adult men aged Although teenagers are less likely to be employed than adults are the number of youths who are neither enrolled in school nor working is not likely to be large when the economy is near full employment. Of the million teenagers ( aged ) in the civilian noninstitutional population in October only million ( of whom million were females ) were not enrolled in school and not employed. Most of the female teenagers not in school and not employed were providing home care for their own children TABLE Civilian unemployment rates under alternative definitions by age and sex [ Percent ) All civilian workers * Age and sex Job losers and job leavers2 Job losers8 years : Men Women years and over : Men Women years both sexes Percent of civilian labor force Percent of civilian labor force excluding new entrants and reentrants Percent of civilian labor force excluding new entrants reentrants and job leavers Note. All unemployment rates are based on civilian labor force ( as indicated in footnotes ) for age and sex group specified Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers For some youths unemployment is involuntary and they have considerable difficulty in finding and retaining jobs. This may be especially true for those who come from disadvantaged families and those with little schooling. An appropriate role of public policy has been to expand job opportunities particularly for the youths who on their own would not easily find and keep jobs in the private sector Youths need to develop the skills habits and job-related experience in productive activities that lead to successful employment in the private sector. About percent of all civilian employment is in the private sector ; and as youths mature this is where most will find jobs. The sheltered environment of prolonged public service employment appears to be an inappropriate mechanism for generating employment for youths. On a shortterm basis however disadvantaged youths in particular may derive important training or educational benefits from the experience provided by public programs Substantial investments have been made in public programs to employ and train disadvantaged youths. In the Government financed at a cost of $ million nearly million job slots in local prime sponsor programs for the employment of disadvantaged youths in the summer. The Job Corps program provided training for economically disadvantaged youths ( the equivalent of full-year positions ) at a cost of $ million in fiscal Under Title I of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act million persons the majority of whom were youths received job training or work experience at a cost of $ billion in fiscal These programs are preparatory to regular jobs in the private economy For youths job opportunities in the private sector should be expanded to permit these young people to take full advantage of the training they have acquired in school or in special public training programs. Although aggregate job creation is largely the function of macroeconomic policy there are significant impediments to attaining high rates of employment for youths even when the labor market for adults approaches full employment The Federal minimum wage has been identified as one such impediment A substantial body of research suggests that minimum wage legislation tends to diminish employment opportunities for teenagers but does not have a significant net effect on adult employment. Though estimated impacts vary some recent studies suggest that a percent rise in the ratio of the minimum wage to the average wage would decrease teenage employment by about to The reason is that many employers find it too costly to employ teenagers particularly those with few skills given the Federal minimum wage ( currently $ per hour in most jobs ) and mandated payroll taxes and fringe benefits. Coverage under Federal minimum wage legislation has been extended substantially in recent years from percent of the private nonsupervisory workers in to percent in This extension of coverage especially at a time when youths make up an increased proportion of the population aged and over has limited the increase in youth employment and labor force participation In recognition of the adverse effects of the minimum wage on employment there has been an expansion in the number of exemption certificates which permit employers in certain circumstances to pay youths and the disabled a wage below the applicable minimum wage. In fiscal exemption certificates covering persons were issued of which three-fourths were for full-time students working part-time in their educational institutions The exemption program entails a number of problems and the effectiveness of allowing more exemptions needs to be considered. The special applications that are required raise the administrative costs to the Government and employers. In addition the program discriminates among employers of youths doing essentially the same job : a subminimum wage can be paid to a student working in a private university but because of limitations on the number of exemptions it need not apply if a student is working in a comparable job in any other nongovernmental enterprise. The program also discriminates between youths in school and those out of school For these reasons many believe the exemption program should be extended to all employers and to all youths regardless of school enrollment This could be accomplished by incorporating a teenage differential into the minimum wage law. Alternatively some believe it would be more appropriate to let the Federal minimum wage lag behind the growth in average wages with the aim of promoting job opportunities not only for youths but also for partially disabled or low-skilled adults Long-Term Unemployment For some adult workers who have experienced long periods of unemployment reemployment opportunities may be limited even after macroeconomic policies have reduced the unemployment rate to nearly the full-employment level. The situation would be particularly distressing for those who had exhausted their unemployment compensation entitlement. Public service employment ( PSE ) and job training programs are often viewed as mechanisms for expanding job opportunities for persons with long-term unemployment Thus far however these spending programs have had little net impact on employment compared to tax reductions that increase the deficit by the same magnitude. With appropriate modification of programs however the favorable effects could be larger In terms of overall macroeconomic effect the long-run job-creating impact of federally financed PSE programs appears to be quite limited. Initially most of the State and local government jobs funded by the program may represent a net increase in the number of jobs in comparison with what would otherwise exist. With normal attrition and the expansion in regular State and local government jobs an increasing proportion of the funds are soon used to pay for job slots that would exist in any case. Preliminary estimates suggest for example that after quarters about percent of federally funded PSE jobs are net additions to employment ; but after years the net addition may be as low as percent. Thus the funding for the other percent of the jobs becomes essentially a form of Federal revenue sharing with State and local governments. Then the job-creating impact of a PSE program is little different from an expansion in revenue sharing Persons with prospects of finding a regular job in the private sector during the expansion in economic activity might be less inclined to search for a regular job if they are in a PSE job. On the other hand adults with longterm unemployment problems are the ones who would appear to be the most suitable candidates for the more than public service employment job slots currently funded by the Government Several factors make it difficult to target PSE programs toward persons with long-term employment problems. For example State and local governments tend to hire the more able among the unemployed for federally funded PSE jobs. As a result PSE participants are more likely to be persons in the prime age groups and to have more schooling than the average unemployed worker. This has the advantage of maintaining the current employment practices of State and local governments. Yet persons with these characteristics are also those who have the least difficulty in finding a job in the private sector. There is therefore a tradeoff between attempting to maintain State and local government employment practices and inducing these governments to hire persons with difficulty in finding a job The relatively high wages in PSE jobs also attract persons who are employable in the private sector. In for example the average annual Federal contribution to wages and benefits in a PSE job was about $ ( some localities supplement the Federal contribution ) over percent more than a worker could receive in wages and benefits for full-time full-year employment at the minimum wage. It has therefore been suggested that these jobs be limited to persons with long-term unemployment such as those who have exhausted their unemployment compensation entitlement and that they be paid only the minimum wage or the subminimum permitted under Department of Labor exemptions ( generally percent of the applicable minimum wage ) While the amendment to the temporary employment assistance program addresses in part the long-term unemployment aspect of these suggestions it retains the requirement that the PSE jobs pay the prevailing wage. The need to keep wages low has been subject to some criticism. The payment of such low wages may adversely affect the efficiency of workers holding these jobs. Some are also concerned that a family could not be adequately supported on such low wages. However the regular income maintenance system ( AFDC food stamps medicaid ) would provide supplementary support to low-income families which include a participant in a PSE program. In addition a low PSE salary would permit a program with a larger number of participants for the same budget cost ; as a result more workers would gain job experience and fewer workers would be discouraged from taking a private sector job when employment opportunities improve. Indeed this approach would make it more explicit that creating jobs and reducing poverty are separate issues since many persons with longterm unemployment may not be in families with very low incomes Job training programs are designed as a means of upgrading the skills of the structurally unemployed. These programs seem to promise a satisfactory solution to the structural unemployment problem. The evidence currently available however suggests that the experience has been disappointing If adjustment is made for the probability that a trainee would eventually become employed without the program the effects of the training programs on real wages and employment appear to be small. This outcome is not surprising since persons with good training characteristics and prospects would acquire the training on their own or on a job. Persons with few skills and a record of long-term unemployment are largely those for whom successful retraining is most difficult. Part of the problem may be in identifying the programs that are most likely to be successful for particular trainees The difficulties with past public service employment and job training programs should be considered before expanding the present programs. Much may be learned however from careful evaluation of the present programs and from small-scale experimental programs EMPLOYMENT TAX CREDIT Employment tax credits have been suggested as a means of increasing employment during a recession or increasing employment opportunities for persons who experience structural unemployment. The purpose of an employment tax credit is to encourage the direct use of labor relative to capital and other inputs. Under different variants of such a program in addition to counting wages as a regular cost of business firms could claim a credit against their corporate income tax for some portion of the wages or payroll taxes paid for all workers on their payrolls workers added to their payrolls compared to some base period or workers drawn from designated groups in which high rates of unemployment exist. These approaches pose a number of problems One problem in using an employment tax credit as a countercyclical tool is that the largest effects on employment may not appear until the economy is well on the road to recovery. This delay could occur because the substitution of labor for capital and other inputs which the tax credit encourages becomes greater the longer the period of adjustment. To be countercyclical an employment tax credit would need some mechanism through which the subsidy gradually decreases as overall unemployment declines If employment in a recession trough is used as the benchmark during a business cycle recovery an employment tax credit would tend to subsidize firms for increases in employment that would occur in any case. This effect might be ameliorated if employment prior to the downturn were used as the base. If firms anticipate a renewal of a countercyclical employment tax credit in the future cyclical swings in employment and hence in unemployment would be intensified. An inequity would arise among firms some receiving large subsidies through the tax credit and others particularly those with stable employment deriving no benefit from these subsidies. As a result of an employment tax credit there would be additional disincentives to firms to maintain stable employment There are also difficulties in attempting to use an employment tax credit to expand job opportunities for particular groups. It is difficult for example to identify individuals with long-term unemployment problems unless the program is limited to those having exhausted the unemployment compensation benefits available to them. Employers would have an incentive to hire the most employable persons in any group ( such as aged or disabled persons and teenagers ) which is eligible for the subsidy. Jobs may therefore go to persons who would not have difficulty finding employment in any case even though they are members of a demographic group broadly defined as hard to employ. Moreover the narrower the group eligible for the subsidy the greater the administrative costs to certify eligibility for the tax credit. Experience with the present tax credits for persons on welfare for example the WIN tax credit suggests that an employment tax credit is not likely to expand substantially the job opportunities for persons with difficulty finding and retaining employment. The result could be to subsidize many jobs without achieving much increase in the employment of those individuals whom the program was intended to assist While superficially there is much appeal to an employment tax credit the problems of implementation are great and the result is likely to be a less efficient utilization of labor resources SUMMARY Macroeconomic policy is necessarily the primary mechanism for reducing the current excessively high unemployment. As the economy continues to recover cyclical unemployment will decline. Much of the long-term unemployment which currently appears to be structural will also lessen as job opportunities expand. As a result of increasing employment the amount of job training will increase since much training occurs through work experience Declines in unemployment beyond those attainable by macroeconomic policy may be brought about by reducing the incentives for unemployment currently built into the unemployment compensation system because of weak experience-rating of employers and the tax-exempt status of the benefits These issues will be studied by the National Commission on Unemployment Compensation. Job opportunities for teenagers may be improved by allowing the applicable minimum wage to be lower in relation to average wages Public service employment programs are most likely to increase job opportunities for persons having difficulty in finding employment if eligibility is restricted to the long-term unemployed ( for example unemployment compensation exhaustees ) and if the wage is low relative to wages in the private sector. Income maintenance objectives are more successfully addressed by the means-tested income transfer programs which focus on family income The summer employment program may be helpful for disadvantaged youths by providing experience with a work environment and routine Thus far training programs for adults with employment difficulties have not been shown to have more than very limited benefits and they have incurred substantial costs. The problems of structural unemployment and training mismatches that remain despite private initiatives appear to be very difficult to solve. Until we learn how to ameliorate these problems effectively small-scale experimental programs and careful evaluation of present programs should be useful. The current large-scale public employment and training programs should not be expanded at this time Although it has much superficial appeal an employment tax credit may create far more difficulties than it can resolve. The impact on employment is likely to be small particularly in the near term and new distortions in the use of resources as well as new inequities may emerge GOVERNMENT REGULATION The Government regulates a substantial part of the economy in an effort to improve economic performance and promote individual welfare. Such regulation has created costs as well as benefits and some anticipated benefits of regulation have never been realized. Regulation has also been difficult to reform or abandon even when recognized as counterproductive because elements of regulation frequently tend to satisfy certain special interests. Historically some business enterprises have sought to avoid competition and have sometimes been aided in doing so by regulation ; other rules and procedures create vested interests and capital values which reform would endanger The motives behind efforts to regulate economic activity have generally been commendable and the net effect of some Government regulatory activity has been positive. Unfortunately it often turns out that regulatory processes are not capable of achieving their intended goals or have generated greater costs than would result from the original problem. In some instances the problem prompting the adoption of regulation has passed but the regulations remain. In other cases the regulatory process has proved too inflexible to accommodate changes in the economy and a previously beneficial regulatory activity may become ineffectual or harmful. In each of these instances reform of the regulations would lower the nonproductive use of Government resources and would free private resources for productive tasks. More important some regulation is harmful as well as wasteful since it distorts the allocation of resources and thus lowers the potential output of the economy The reform of such regulations would increase efficiency thus making the economy better able to provide current consumers with goods and services and to ensure growth in output for the future A major purpose of regulation is to control prices charged and services rendered in industries considered to be natural monopolies especially those in the transportation and public utility sectors in order to prevent firms in these industries from exercising market power. The economic characteristics of these industries are such that it is more efficient for a single firm to supply the entire market. Price regulation is therefore usually accompanied by entry restrictions. Price and entry regulations have been extended however beyond the select cases where control of monopoly power justifies their implementation. They have been applied to many industries which seem capable of vigorous and healthy competition under less restrictive regulations : for example trucking and airlines. In these cases it is appropriate to compare the results of price and entry regulation with the level of price and output that would be realized in a freely operating market If a regulated price exceeds the market-determined price consumers will purchase less and output will be reduced. If a regulated price is below the competitive level firms will provide less output than they would if they were not regulated. In both cases price and entry controls reduce the production of goods and services in the regulated markets. Resources are then reallocated to alternative uses which are less valuable to consumers. The result coupled with the administrative costs of imposing and enforcing regulations is to reduce efficiency and production Most regulatory legislation since the mid-1960s affects business activity in much more direct ways and in much greater detail than is true of simple price controls. The Federal Government has intervened in such matters as product quality producer liability conditions affecting the health and safety of employees waste disposal and equal employment opportunity. Much of this legislation is an attempt to deal with the problem of externalities real costs or benefits that affect individuals other than those directly involved in a transaction. Economic efficiency requires that prices appropriately reflect the full cost to society of producing each good or service. External costs or benefits must be incorporated into each transaction or internalized for efficiency to be achieved. The internalization should be accomplished in the least costly manner. Unfortunately some of the regulations concerning health safety and the environment appear to be ineffective and we bear their costs without enjoying much if any corresponding benefit. In other cases the benefits might have been achieved at a smaller sacrifice of other goods and services There are costs of extending regulation in a free-market economy that go beyond the direct impact on supply. First the regulatory process itself uses public and private resources which could be used to produce other more valuable goods or services. Second some regulatory procedures reduce the ability of industry to respond to changing supply and demand conditions and so create bottlenecks in regulated sectors of the economy. For example the lag in implementing price adjustments to reflect the changing supply or demand conditions confronting public utilities can influence the timing of their investment decisions causing shortages or excess capacity. Third regulations which protect existing firms from potential competitors may reduce incentives for technological improvement and innovation. Fourth the uncertainty introduced by the regulatory process itself will cause resources to be used in unproductive ways. Finally if price controls lower the expected returns to new capital investment capital formation will be retarded and the economy will grow more slowly The effects of regulation on supply can be organized into three categories : cases where the regulated price exceeds the long-run free-market price ; cases where the regulated price is less than the long-run competitive market price ; and cases where regulation increases the costs of production Regulation reduces the flow of output from the regulated industry in all three categories REGULATED PRICE ABOVE MARKET PRICE In a number of instances a government-dictated price has been established at a level exceeding the free-market price. This situation might arise from a public effort to ensure profitability and encourage investment in a new industry. Or it might develop from a private industry 's securing legislative protection against " unfair " price competition from another industry producing a substitute product. Or it could occur when regulation prevents relative prices from responding to changes in supply or demand conditions Regardless of the circumstances which bring about the excessive price government price control can develop into a legal and enforceable means of attaining the goals of a private cartel The establishment of a higher price is usually accompanied by restrictions on entry or output as well. When a regulated price is higher than the freemarket level existing producers seek to expand output and new firms are attracted to the industry by the prospect of high profits. Alternatively an excessive price may deter the withdrawal of firms and production capacity from an industry with declining demand. At the same time consumers confronted by increased prices restrict their purchases. Because firms offer a larger supply than consumers wish to purchase at the regulated price pressures are generated for the regulatory authority to limit entry and restrict expansion of output in order to protect the profits of the existing producers Restricting entry however will not necessarily result in higher profit rates The higher expected profits per unit of sales encourage each firm to try to increase its total sales by using nonprice methods of competition such as advertising and quality competition. Because these activities are costly profits are dissipated. Under such circumstances competition leads to higher costs because price competition is precluded. Consumers may derive some benefits from such nonprice competition but they are denied the opportunity to choose among alternative price-quality options as they can in the free market and thus are made worse off Motor Carriers Trucking provides a good example of the economic costs of regulations that hold prices above the free-market level. In interstate trucking an anti- trust exemption permits motor carriers to agree upon rates through rate bureaus which are groups of truckers that function like private cartels Rates tend to be set high enough to cover the costs of less efficient carriers The result is higher prices to consumers. The Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) regulates both the entry of new carriers and the expansion of route authority by existing carriers. These restrictions frequently require some trucks to drive extra miles on circuitous routes prohibit access to intermediate points on routes limit the commodities that can be handled by some carriers and prohibit certain kinds of freight on the return trip. The result is excessive truck miles and unproductive consumption of motor fuel labor time and other resources Where more than one carrier gains a certificate to provide service competition tends to occur on the basis of service quality frequency of departure faster delivery and so on rather than through prices. As a consequence trucks are often dispatched with smaller loads than they might otherwise haul. Equipment and labor costs are thus spread over fewer ton-miles and costs and prices are higher than necessary. The regulation of rates precludes price competition and consequently the range of price-service options available to shippers is restricted. Those shippers who would have chosen less frequent service if it were offered at a lower price pay more for services they do not want. In markets where only one trucker has route authority this process of rate setting may permit lower costs since the trucker exercising his monopoly control may reduce the frequency of scheduling with the result that a higher proportion of trucks is dispatched fully loaded However because such a trucker has no competitors he is unlikely to lower prices to fully reflect the lower-quality service A comparison of the transportation of small parcels with large or bulky shipments illustrates the advantages of multiple price-service options. Shippers of small parcels have several options. The scheduled airlines carry small packages as baggage at substantial prices but with a guarantee of delivery the same day. Some air freight firms collect packages at various cities fly them first to a central sorting location then on to their final destination each evening and provide overnight service at slightly lower prices than those charged by the scheduled airlines. Intercity bus lines and special firms that deliver small packages use surface transportation to furnish delivery service at even cheaper rates. Finally the U.S. Postal Service offers slower but widely available parcel delivery. The advantage of having multiple options is that shippers of small parcels may choose between various degrees of service at different prices. Although shippers of large or bulky freight have some flexibility many are chiefly limited to motor carriers where the range of price-service options is much more limited because of regulation The problems of excess capacity higher prices and too few price-service options would be reduced if entry into the trucking industry were not restricted. Unlike public utilities trucking does not exhibit scale economies Thus price competition is not likely to result in a single survivor a monopolist. In trucking fixed costs are low and except for Government restrictions entry is relatively easy. Competition not monopoly would be the natural condition in the trucking industry if it were not for Government regulation Recent research has demonstrated that common carrier truck regulations cause large losses in production and efficiency. Freight rates in countries that do not regulate motor carriers are significantly lower than rates in countries like West Germany and the United States where regulation is strict. Excessively high motor carrier rates cause some shippers to substitute alternative modes of transportation or to provide their own transportation services. These responses to regulation reduce economic efficiency The motor carrier reform legislation submitted by the President to the last Congress would have increased both price competition and entry into the trucking industry. The legislation proposed pricing flexibility subject only to later ICC review which would allow individual carriers to raise or lower their rates as much as percent annually and it would eventually remove the lower limit on price changes entirely ( as long as the price was not set below direct costs ) The legislation also proposed eliminating the antitrust immunity that currently protects the collusive rate setting through rate bureaus. Barriers to entry would have been reduced by lifting the hauling restrictions on certain existing carriers and by liberalizing the criteria for route certification. Entrants could no longer be barred simply because the proposed service was already provided by existing carriers. This legislation would constitute a major step in the reform of regulation inhibiting the efficiency of the motor carrier industry Airlines In the airline industry restrictions on price competition have likewise led to higher fares and emphasis on nonprice methods of competition In intrastate markets in Texas and California carriers are subject to Federal safety regulations but are free of Federal restrictions on fares and routes. In these markets prices have been consistently lower than prices in federally regulated markets which have similar characteristics The regulated air carriers have not earned unusually high profits as a result of regulation restricting price competition. Potential profits have been dissipated through advertising and service competition most visibly in the form of in-flight stereo free meals and other amenities. Less visible but more expensive forms of nonprice competition are capacity increases and scheduling additional flights. More frequent departures and a higher probability of obtaining a seat on a preferred flight do yield benefits to consumers but recent studies have shown that the cost of operating the additional flights is considerably greater than these benefits. The popularity of air charter flights illustrates the willingness of many consumers to accept the inconvenience of less frequent service less flexible scheduling and fewer amenities in order to purchase less expensive air travel. Increased flexibility permitting adjustments in prices to meet market demands liberalized entry into specific air routes and the removal of antitrust immunity would help assure a wider range of consumer choices for air transportation and lead to lower air fares than would otherwise occur The need for reform in air transportation is compelling and is now generally acknowledged. The 94th Congress considered reform bills submitted by the President various members of the Congress and the Civil Aeronautics Board. None of the proposals recommend any change in the safety standards enforced by the Federal Aviation Administration ; they all focused on economic regulation. Each of the proposed bills would place greater reliance upon competitive market forces. Each recognizes that increased pricing freedom must be accompanied by a significant lowering of regulatory barriers to entry if truly competitive performance is to be assured. The current issue appears to be not whether a change needs to be made but rather how far and how quickly it should proceed REGULATED PRICE BELOW MARKET PRICE At a regulated price below the competitively determined market price consumers want to purchase more output than producers are willing to supply. The result is a shortage : more is demanded than will be supplied at the regulated price. A shortage means that some potential customers who place a value on the product higher than its cost of production are unable to purchase it because the low price has discouraged its manufacture Price ceilings also require that nonprice methods be used to decide who is to get the limited supply that is available. Although the monetary price to those fortunate enough to meet the nonprice criteria for purchasing a regulated commodity or service may be lower all those who want to purchase it but can not must pay a higher price corresponding to the price of the best substitute product. They are forced to seek more costly substitutes to satisfy their demand or else to do without. In addition because the costs of nonprice rationing waiting in line at a gas station for example are sometimes substantial the realized price paid by those who do meet the criteria may be greater than the free-market price would be even though the monetary price is lower. As a rule nonprice rationing methods are less efficient and more costly than price rationing Natural Gas Price controls on natural gas provide an illustration of the losses resulting from a price fixed below the competitive market-clearing level. The Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) regulates the price of gas sold to pipeline companies for resale across State boundaries. Since the regulated price is below the price in unregulated intrastate markets most new gas has gone to the intrastate markets. As a consequence there has been a shortage in certain areas where gas must cross a State line to get from producer to consumer. Many businesses and institutions have had to substitute more expensive energy for natural gas in the past few years ; and where natural gas is critical for some industrial uses work stoppages and unemployment have also resulted. Few residential customers already subscribing to gas service have encountered problems but some new applications for gas service have been denied. Since as an example no new customers have been accepted by the Columbia Gas System which serves consumers from Virginia to Ohio and New York Recent forecasts indicate a growing shortage of natural gas to meet the contract requirements of pipelines for gas deliveries to local distributors and portend future problems even for residential customers The economic costs of the natural gas shortage emerge in various forms First under the nonprice allocation system that has been devised by the FPC distribution companies are allocated gas on the basis of a set of FPCapproved priorities. This allocation system does not directly consider the relative cost of switching to an alternative energy source or the relative productivity of natural gas in alternative uses. The gas that is available may therefore not be going to its most productive uses. Second natural gas is underutilized as an energy source in favor of more costly alternatives because gas producers responding to the artificially low prices undertake less exploration and development than would occur in an unconstrained market. During the last decade total annual additions to natural gas reserves declined slightly while demand was increasing steadily. Third because intrastate sales of gas are not controlled by the FPC producers prefer to sell as much gas as possible at the higher prices prevailing within the producing States. As the controlled price of natural gas has lagged behind the rising price of alternative fuels this problem has become more serious. About two-thirds of the natural gas reserves committed to markets went to interstate markets in the late 1960s but this fraction had declined to less than percent by The unregulated price of natural gas in gas-producing States is sometimes lower than the price of equivalent energy in nonproducing areas where businesses occasionally can not obtain gas at any price. Moreover for some industrial processes natural gas is less costly to use than alternative fuel sources which could supply the equivalent energy. As a result firms may find it advantageous to move from regions served by regulated natural gas to regions where supplies are available. Instead of being based on true relative locational advantages this migration to gas-producing States is induced because the regulated price of gas is held below the competitive level Last year the FPC announced a threefold increase in the regulated price of " new gas " ( gas coming from wells on which drilling commenced after January ) FPC efforts to raise the price ceilings can contribute to economic growth but any long-term solution to the natural gas shortage necessitates legislative action to eliminate price controls. Although increased prices will undoubtedly affect residential consumers one should not ignore the current costs to consumers caused by regulation-induced misallocation : those which are now hidden in the prices of goods and services produced with higher-cost energy sources and those which primarily burden residential consumers who are unable to obtain gas supplies at any price REGULATIONS THAT DIRECTLY AFFECT COST A free-market economy can not allocate resources efficiently unless prices reflect all of the costs of producing and consuming each good and service and unless buyers and sellers have adequate information on which to base their market decisions. If the external costs that spill over to outsiders are ignored the price of a good or service will be too low and consumers will buy too much. The output that is purchased will entail a greater social cost of production than the benefits that its consumers will derive. The effect would be similar to a direct subsidy of certain economic activities : economic decisions would be distorted toward the production and consumption of the subsidized product. In addition if producers or consumers have inadequate information market decisions will not necessarily reflect relative costs. The more prominent cases of Government efforts to correct for spillover costs and inadequate market information in recent years concern health safety and the environment Unfortunately in many instances it is extraordinarily difficult to estimate the external cost of private decisions or the public benefits which would stem from policies to alter those decisions. Errors in estimating either the benefits or the costs can result in programs which are socially more costly than the externalities they are attempting to correct. The inadequacy of information frequently means that these decisions must be made in the presence of considerable uncertainty Several problems hinder the development of efficient regulations that will correct for external costs and inadequate information. The appropriate degree of pollution removal or reduction of risks to health and safety must be determined. Eliminating absolutely all pollution or risk to health and safety would be so expensive that it would preclude other national goals. By analogy in their private lives individuals rarely try to lessen the risk of incurring injury or contracting disease to the technologically feasible minimum. People recognize that the incremental benefits of health and safety are limited and must be balanced against having more resources available to satisfy other needs. In those instances where the private sector is unable to generate a socially efficient amount of information there is scope for Government research and dissemination of data. Finally whatever is chosen as the target of environmental cleanup or health and safety improvement should be achieved at the minimum sacrifice of other goods and services Electric Power Regulations have been imposed on the generation of electric power in an effort to internalize the spillover costs associated with air and water pollution. Although it is difficult to measure the benefits these goals have clearly been expensive to achieve. Investments to meet air and water standards are estimated to add about percent to the total capital expenditures in electric- ity generation. If the regulations are set properly they should improve the efficient operation of our economy. The methods adopted for this task however have not always been consistent with another objective of cost internalization achieving it with maximum efficiency For example because certain types of power plants are required to prepare environmental impact statements and have been hampered by frequent legal disputes considerable delay has occurred in the construction of some electric generation plants. The spasmodic and still evolving development of environmental regulatory policy can create an atmosphere of uncertainty and increase the risk attached to new construction projects for generating power. The uncertainty of regulatory policy can have particularly severe effects on the building of power plants because they involve long commitments and have little flexibility once they are constructed. Hence the caution that utility companies have shown in planning the expansion of future capacity is not surprising. However the delay in getting power plants under way may cause a switch to alternative types of generating plants which though less efficient can be constructed more quickly as demand pressures intensify. The absence of confidence in the stability of environmental regulations may thus lead to a less efficient and more costly mix of generation capacity in the future Occupational Health and Safety Government efforts to improve health and safety conditions in and around the workplace provide another example of the difficulty of using direct regulatory efforts to achieve social goals. The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of mandates the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) to assure " so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions. " Under the act each employer is required to comply with the standards promulgated by OSHA. These standards are intended to furnish for each employee a job which is " free from recognized hazards that are causing or likely to cause death or serious physical harm. " Without OSHA 's standards employers would remove work-related hazards whenever the benefits to them of doing so would exceed the incremental costs. If employers confronted the full costs of illness and injury from poor working conditions by having to pay higher wages or incurred other costs that varied directly with the dangers to health and safety in workplaces they would tend to operate at an efficient level of occupationally related health and safety. For a number of reasons however employers do not actually face the full costs of injuries and illnesses and some of these costs are borne by others than the injured or ill employees The workers ' compensation system does not fully reimburse workers and the rest of society for the loss in earnings and the additional medical and rehabilitation expenses that arise from job-related injuries and diseases. Two reasons for this failure are the extraordinary difficulty of estimating the private and the social cost of work-related injuries and diseases and the problem of establishing efficient methods of internalizing these costs. The society at large pays part of the costs of occupational illness and injury through other transfer programs for example social security disability medicaid and vocational rehabilitation. In addition the workers ' compensation insurance premium paid by the individual employer does not vary in direct proportion to the benefits paid out to its injured workers. Employers are not given the incentive to respond optimally even to those losses for which the system provides direct compensation. Finally wage differences may not fully adjust to otherwise uncompensated hazards present in the workplace if workers are not well informed of the actual risks that they face or do not have enough mobility to avoid risks for which they do not feel fully compensated A system of health and safety standards is one mechanism for further internalizing accident and illness costs borne by parties other than employers. To implement an efficient system of health and safety standards the Government needs detailed knowledge about the many different causes of accidents and disease and the relative costs in different firms of alternative methods that may reduce them. There are important differences in the risk of injury and damage to health among occupations and employers and perhaps also among employees. For administrative and legal reasons however it is difficult to impose different standards on different employers Because of these problems any system of health and safety standards will inevitably be arbitrary and inefficient to some extent. OSHA has usually mandated " engineering controls " for reducing workers ' exposure to hazards rather than allowing firms and employees to determine for themselves the least-cost means of achieving health and safety goals. Given the diversity among firms the application of engineering standards requires more information is less likely to result in uniform treatment and thereby entails higher costs than performance standards or " injury fees " for the same reduction in injuries In situations where sufficient information exists to permit a reasonably precise estimate of the social loss from work-related injuries and diseases health and safety objectives can more efficiently be achieved through the use of performance standards or injury fees rather than by mandating particular means of reducing injuries. Performance standards levy charges against firms according to the incidence and severity of all job-related injuries or to increases in injuries above some predetermined level. If information permits the fees could be tailored to the frequency and seriousness of accident or illness and might be incorporated in a workers ' compensation system. These charges should be large enough to fully compensate those directly harmed and to cover the external costs as well. Individual firms would be left to seek least-cost methods of reducing accidents and disease and they would adopt them to the point where the costs of reducing accidents and illness exceeded the charges levied on the occurrence of accident and illness The present state of knowledge is not sufficient to extend this approach to all problems in relation to health and safety. It is frequently difficult to identify the causes of a disease and the link between health and working conditions is difficult to establish. Many occupationally related diseases appear long after exposure to their causes. The charges might follow so long after the hazardous conditions had caused harm that they would not play much part in decisions affecting the health of employees. The assignment of liability is further complicated because firms may disappear as time passes or avoid responsibility in other ways Information problems and the long latency of many occupational diseases make it very difficult to estimate costs and therefore the level of exposure that society is willing to tolerate. In addition even if these problems were resolved it would be hard to embody the results in an operational system of levying the appropriate charges and internalizing the costs. These same difficulties confront the engineering standards approach. But for occupational health objectives there is often a correct preference for standards that prohibit or severely limit exposure rather than for an injury fee approach that might allow substantial exposure. In the presence of considerable uncertainty the desire to err in the direction of too much health and safety may require a standards approach. Where the relevant information is available and the risks involved are not excessive the use of performance standards may be a more effective means of achieving desired levels of safety and health Because of the substantial externalities that may be involved and the difficulty of generating private sector financing of basic research an important role for Government lies in financing research relating to occupational disease IMPLEMENTING REGULATORY REFORM In spite of the widespread recognition that reform of certain Government regulatory policies could yield substantial economic benefits there remain major obstacles to achieving reform. Compared to those who would benefit by reform those who would be hurt are fewer ; but they are also likely to be more aware of the losses that they would incur. Many potential losers are well organized and have an effective system for communicating their views to policy makers and the public. On the other hand the beneficiaries of regulatory reform ( especially the ultimate consumers of products of the regulated industries ) are numerous and the benefit per individual is usually small. Beneficiaries of reform are less likely to understand their stake in regulatory reform are not usually organized and generally have little success in effectively communicating their views to decision makers and the public Those in a position to lose from regulatory reform are not always the ones who have gained from prior restrictive economic regulations. In a wellfunctioning market the sales price of capital assets reflects the future earnings stream they are expected to generate appropriately discounted to account for delay in the receipt of those earnings. The value of regulated industries ' assets are likely to be elevated sufficiently to reflect the expectation that regulation and its associated benefits to existing firms will continue in the future. Consequently current stockholders ot such industries who purchased shares after regulation was introduced are unlikely to earn more than a normal return on their investment. When regulatory reform threatens to alter the economic environment on which they based their future profit expectations they will naturally resist In many instances income distribution considerations are cited in support of holding regulated prices below free-market levels. Allowing prices to rise however may not affect low-income consumers more adversely than higherincome consumers. There are substantial differences in consumption patterns among households at the same income levels and the effects of deregulation on family well-being are likely to differ greatly. For these reasons it is preferable to use the regular tax and income transfer systems rather than price regulations to achieve society 's income distribution objectives Another problem facing regulatory reform is the difficulty often encountered in bringing regulatory reform initiatives before the full Congress. Individual congressional committees responding to the pressures described above are sometimes reluctant to consider significant reform bills. Thus although there is a growing consensus that regulatory reform is needed the process of achieving it may be hampered by fragmentation of individual proposals It may therefore be desirable for policy makers to address a number of regulatory reform issues simultaneously. Such an approach was contained in the proposed Agenda for Regulatory Reform submitted by the President to the 94th Congress. This proposal would have required the Administration to introduce legislation to effect major regulatory reforms over a 4-year period. Another provision would have ensured congressional action by placing the Administration 's proposals before the full Congress after a specified time if similar proposals were not reported out of committee SUMMARY Major policy initiatives are required to address the kinds of regulatory problems described above. Two types of efforts are needed. First the statutes under which some agencies operate need to be modified. This approach is particularly applicable to the independent regulatory agencies which have jurisdiction over specific industries. The principal goal should be to eliminate regulations that inhibit competition prevent innovation and otherwise distort the allocation of resources. Second the quality of agency decisions under the existing regulatory statutes needs to be improved. This approach appears particularly suited to those regulatory agencies which deal with matters of health safety and the environment Several specific reforms deserve consideration in First reform that increases rate flexibility and eases entry restrictions in the airline and trucking industries would reduce the costs imposed by prices set in excess of competitively determined free-market levels. The reduction in the quantity of resources absorbed unproductively would increase the ability of the economy to produce more goods and services of all types including those of the regulated sector O Second the economic costs generated by price ceilings could be reduced by the elimination of many price restrictions. Decontrol of natural gas prices is the most urgent need. This would increase economic efficiency and by increasing supply move us toward greater energy self-sufficiency Third regulations related to health safety and the environment need to be carefully evaluated. These regulations are aimed at some important though elusive social goals. But some generate hidden economic costs that are being ignored and some may not be effective in achieving the goals of their enabling legislation. A sound comparison of the realized benefits against the total costs generated by each of these regulations is necessary to ensure that the regulatory goals chosen by society are desirable and are achieved at the least possible cost AGRICULTURAL POLICY Farm programs over the years have reduced real GNP by imposing a variety of restrictions on pricing production land use and trade in farm commodities. Some of the most important of these restrictions have been eliminated in recent years but others remain. In major pieces of farm legislation will expire and there will be pressures to return to past approaches which have caused an inefficient allocation of the Nation 's agricultural resources. This section reviews the progress made in farm policy the threat to that progress and the direction we believe that future farm policy should take THE MOVEMENT TO MARKET-ORIENTED FARM PROGRAMS Beginning in the 1930s the pursuit of income protection for farmers led to programs which have raised average farm prices above competitive market-clearing levels. These programs have produced the general consequences of price-increasing regulation discussed in the preceding section : the regulated price induces more output and less consumption than would otherwise have occurred and the excess production and capacity generate pressures to restrict output For grains and some other commodities the regulated price has been supported by Government acquisition of commodities. The existence of excess capacity is then revealed in the accumulation of stocks of commodities held by the Government. To prevent stock accumulation schemes have been tried under which a relatively high price was paid for commodities used domestically while exports were made at a lower world price. If sufficient quantities could not be exported at world market prices export subsidies have been paid notoriously in the case of wheat when subsidies were paid during the period of the Soviet purchases of In addition subsidized exports have been made through the Food for Peace program and through subsidized credit to foreign purchasers. Domestic food consumption has been subsidized through the school lunch food stamp and other special programs Because no demand-increasing approach has been able for long to equate demand and supply at support prices there was continued resort to production control schemes. Measures taken to restrict production have included : acreage allotments and marketing quotas for the major crops ; Government purchase and slaughter of sows and baby pigs in the 1930s ; payments to farmers to turn cropland to less productive use under cropland adjustment conservation reserve and cropland conversion programs ; and more recently requirements to " set aside " cropland acres as a prerequisite to participation in price support programs supplemented by diversion payments to induce further reduction in crop acreage The typical result of these programs was a reduction in food output or at least in domestic consumption and inefficiency in the allocation of resources. Establishment of domestic prices above world market levels required measures inconsistent with our overall trade liberalization objectives. Food prices were more stable but at the cost of higher average prices than if prices had been unregulated. Apart from efficiency losses costs to the nonfarm public included many billions of dollars in direct payments to farmers. In annual budget outlays for farm programs averaged $ billion and Government payments amounted to over one-fourth of total net farm income. Over the years the program benefits were largely capitalized into land values so that they accrued primarily to owners of farm real estate Reductions in some crop support prices in the mid-1960s began a reorientation of farm policy toward unregulated market prices and since increases in world market demand have permitted an almost complete abandonment of restrictive features in U.S. farm programs for major crops. Reforms which only a few years ago were considered a practical impossibility have now been put into effect. At the same time extreme price increases following the sharp reduction in U.S. and world carryover stocks of grains in have renewed interest in measures to stabilize prices. This concern for stability together with a desire for farm income protection could open the door to a return to past restrictive approaches THE THREAT TO MARKET-ORIENTED POLICIES Farm programs differ from other regulatory activities in that regulated prices and means of controlling production are more often specified in legislation. Consequently the features of farm programs tend to be a more direct political issue and more subject to sudden change in approach than is the case in the regulation of most other industries. Farm policy will be considered by the Congress in because much of the legislation authorizing current programs will expire including the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of which covers the major crops. The machinery set up under the act allows the separation of farm income support from price stabilization measures to a greater degree than was possible under preceding programs. Farm income support can be provided by means of deficiency payments which are based on the difference between a legislated target price and the market price or support price received Farmers in the aggregate can not increase their payments by expanding output since payments are limited to a given base production. Thus although this approach could be very costly to taxpayers if the target prices were high enough it can provide farm income support without Government stock buildup and without restricting food supplies. To date the strength of world markets has kept market prices above target prices and therefore no deficiency payments have been made although payments for rice are a certainty in fiscal Recent weakness in the price of grains especially wheat and rice has rekindled farmers ' interest in price support programs. The threat of declining farm incomes coupled with appeals for policies to promote food price stability by means of grain reserves could lead to higher support prices and hence a turn away from full-production market-oriented policies The United States has proposed an international system of food grain reserves of limited size which would not be used to defend any particular price band. An alternative but one which would also involve important issues in international policy coordination could be a unilateral domestic buffer stock of grain which would be built up when prices are low and sold when prices are high. This idea fits in naturally with Government storage of grain acquired to support prices. The main new elements would have to do with whether the stocks would be open-ended in size or would specify maximum quantities to be acquired and the rules for placing stocks on the market to moderate price increases While a publicly owned buffer stock can reduce price fluctuations it involves substantial costs and risks. The principal risk is that support prices and resale prices as well as quantities to be acquired and released will tend to be determined by political criteria. The result if past history is a guide will be to stabilize prices in a range which on the average is above competitive market-clearing levels. Such regulated prices would probably return us finally to the acreage restrictions production controls and export subsidies which have characterized past farm programs THE FUTURE OF MARKET-ORIENTED POLICIES Farm policy should not only resist bringing back the restrictive grain and cotton programs of the past but should also move toward market orientation for the commodities where price-increasing measures remain effective. Commodities covered by effective price supports include milk tobacco and peanuts. Price supports for milk used to manufacture other dairy products are currently resulting in substantial Government purchases of powdered milk cheese and butter and they require import controls to keep out foreign dairy products attracted by the high prices. The existing programs for tobacco and peanuts rely on economically objectionable production controls Rights to grow and market these crops have become valuable assets. Even with stringent controls on peanut acreage and tobacco production the support prices are high enough to result in Government stock accumulation Milk and some fruits vegetables and nuts are marketed by large cooperatives under the auspices of Federal marketing agreements and orders. Apart from those for milk there were orders and agreements in fiscal covering farm products valued at $ billion. Regulation in these cases does not establish prices by legislative or executive action but grants powers to producer groups sufficient to influence prices paid to them. To attain " orderly marketing " flows of products to market during peak production periods are cut back or diverted from fresh to processing uses or to export markets The result is a higher price for fresh products for domestic uses. The quantitatively most important case is the higher price established for milk sold in fluid form compared to milk for other dairy products. Size and grade standards have in some instances been used to reduce flows of imports notably of winter tomatoes from Mexico. While most producers ' associations have found it difficult to control total supplies they have in some cases notably for hops and celery been able to do so and thereby to raise prices Farm policy besides avoiding production controls under commodity programs should actively promote efficient food production in other ways Perhaps the most important means is basic agricultural research the benefits of which are difficult for private business to capture. Another is to make sure that efficient food production gets appropriately weighted against other social goals for example by insisting that more stringent environmental or safety regulations do not impose greater additional costs than their expected additional benefits The goal of eliminating excessive price instability can be served by more promising means than direct market intervention. Provision of timely and accurate production and market information is a valuable service which may be inadequately supplied by the private sector because of the difficulty of capturing the benefits. By fostering efficient futures markets which assist commodity producers and users in risk management and which translate the market information that exists into price signals easily interpreted by and readily available to market participants Government may play a useful role Domestic price stability would be furthered by reducing protectionism and increasing market orientation abroad. Adjustment to world supply and demand fluctuations would then not occur as disproportionately as it does now in the United States. Freer trade in agricultural products is a chief U.S. goal in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations currently under way which suggests that the United States should resist undermining its position by protectionist measures to favor our own domestic producers. Bilateral negotiations may also prove useful. The 5-year grain sales agreement with the Soviet Union which covers shipments of wheat and corn after October may reduce the year-to-year fluctuations in Soviet grain imports and is a step toward making the grain export policy of the United States steadier and more predictable. In all of these respects agricultural policy can promote price stability without the risks inherent in direct intervention in commodity markets Farm programs also influence the efficiency of resource utilization in agriculture by helping farmers bear the risks of crop failure caused by bad weather pests or disease. For most commodities production risk is paid for by consumers in the higher prices needed to induce people to undertake risky activities. For grains and cotton current legislation provides free insurance through disaster payments when bad weather prevents planting or when a harvest of two-thirds or less of normal production on allotment acreage is realized. These payments totaled about $ million in and together. The economic arguments favor replacement of the disaster payment scheme by an expanded system of nonsubsidized general crop insurance Subsidized crop failure encourages farmers to use marginal land too intensively contrary to the conservation goals of agricultural policy and could reduce the output of our agricultural resources in the future Farm programs offer both opportunities and pitfalls in the effort to make the most of our agricultural resources and thus increase real GNP. Opportunities offered by the commodity price boom of recent years were used to establish a potentially valuable legacy of a full-production policy for agriculture. The challenge is to use whatever new opportunities present themselves to eliminate remaining restrictive measures. Most important for the immediate future is not to let the pursuit of farm income support or price stabilization lead us back into past restrictive approaches TAX POLICIES FOR CAPITAL FORMATION In Chapter it was noted that a higher rate of investment is desirable for two reasons : to help sustain the expansion in the short run and to provide the new capacity required in the longer run to ensure rising real incomes productive employment opportunities for a growing labor force greater self-sufficiency in energy and a cleaner environment. Chapter also noted that one of the important causes of the recent productivity slowdown has been the slower growth in the stock of capital per worker over the last decade. The conclusion was therefore reached that an important objective of economic policy in the years ahead should be to ensure adequate levels of new investment. In the near term stable economic growth is essential for a higher rate of capital formation. But policies may also have to be devised to counteract the forces identified in Chapter which may have lowered the effective rates of return to saving and investment and interfered with an efficient allocation of capital resources. For example the President 's proposed reductions in personal and corporate income taxes can be justified in part as an offset to the bias against private investment created by our tax structure under which the real tax burdens for business as well as individuals rise in periods of high inflation. There are a number of other aspects of the tax system which impinge on investment and saving. This section discusses some of these features and suggests some possible changes that may be useful to stimulate additional capital formation and promote a more efficient use of available capital resources INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT The investment tax credit ( ITC ) was first enacted in as part of the Kennedy Administration 's program to stimulate investment by increasing the profitability of new equipment. Since then the ITC has been revised by a series of legislative actions and successively suspended repealed and reenacted. The ITC was permanently reinstated at a maximum percent rate ( percent for utilities ) by the Revenue Act of The Tax Reduction Act of temporarily increased the maximum rate to percent for all businesses including utilities during and The Tax Reform Act of subsequently extended the percent rate through and the President has proposed that it be made permanent At present the law provides for a credit against current tax liabilities of corporate and noncorporate businesses equal to percent of the value of qualified investments. Qualified investments are generally new depreciable assets used in production excluding structures with service lives of years or more. The credit is applied on a sliding scale in such a way that one-third of the full credit is allowed for assets with service lives of or years twothirds for assets with service lives of or years and the full credit for those assets with service lives of years or more. The ITC rates thus range from 3/3 to percent depending on the life of the asset. The credit claimed in any year can not exceed a company 's total tax liability for the year and the maximum credit that generally may be taken is $ plus percent of the tax liability in excess of $ Credits not usable in the current year because of this limitation may be deducted against tax liabilities years back and years forward on a first-in first-out basis that is the oldest credits are used first. Under current law the basis for calculating depreciation allowances on new equipment is not reduced by the amount of the credit. A provision requiring a basis adjustment was contained in the original legislation but it was subsequently repealed by the Revenue Act of The credit was restricted to equipment purchases because of the favorable tax treatment already accorded to structures under the rules for accelerated depreciation and for expensing of interest and taxes incurred during the construction period. It was also felt that the most rapid gains in productivity could be achieved by encouraging investment in new equipment. In addition there was a fear that a credit on structures might become a tax loophole for real estate speculation and the purchase of private residences There is no general consensus about the precise impact of the ITC on investment spending. Nevertheless it does appear that past increases in the credit have led to significantly higher expenditures for new equipment. Moreover compared with the other major investment incentives changes in accelerated depreciation and reductions in the corporate income tax rate the ITC apparently yields larger and more rapid increases in investment per dollar of reduced tax liability. Consequently the issue with respect to the ITC concerns not so much its overall effectiveness as the distortions it may create in choices among different types of capital assets These distortions derive from three specific aspects of the ITG as it now operates First because the amount of credit that may be taken is generally limited by the investor 's total tax liability firms with highly variable profit rates may have difficulty making full use of the ITG in any given year. It is estimated that about $ ^ billion in additional tax credits would have been claimed in if this limitation had not existed and this represents nearly percent of the total amount of investment tax credit claimed in that year The present carry-back and carry-forward provisions do permit eventual recovery of most credits. However since profits and business tax liabilities generally fall during recessions the credits may not be available to firms in cyclically sensitive industries at the very time when the need for additional cash flow is greatest. The same problem may affect rapidly growing firms which have large investment needs relative to their profits and tax liabilities. Making the ITC fully refundable in the year in which assets are purchased would eliminate that constraint. This change would tend to minimize the adverse effects of the business cycle on investment and provide an additional incentive to the most dynamic sectors of the economy Second the ITG discriminates against very short-lived assets as well as assets with service lives of more than years. There may be some justification for denying the ITG to inventory assets because they are not used in production. Moreover administration of the ITG for inventories tends to be complicated by the fact that they are often sold before the end of their service lives thus necessitating recapture of credits received. There are nevertheless many other types of productive short-lived capital assets which on the grounds of efficiency should benefit from the credit. In addition the flat percent rate applied to all assets with useful lives of years or more results in a progressively smaller increase in the rate of return on longer-lived capital assets ( Table ) If the credit is not to impart such a bias against long-term investments the implied rate of return must be increased proportionately for all assets. To achieve this result a variable rate ITC is required with a larger credit applied to longer-lived assets. A restructuring and extension of the present sliding scale would therefore neutralize the effect of the ITC on the choice among assets with different service lives Such a change would particularly benefit many primary processing industries which are critical to the economy 's long-term growth potential and whose capital structure is heavily weighted toward long-lived assets TABLE Change in aUer-tax internal rate of return under present percent investment tax credit all businesses Investment tax credit ( percent ) Life of asset ( years ) _. _ _ _ 3__ Change in after-tax internal rate of return ( percentage points ) i Assumes that the net income stream from the investment is constant that the after-tax internal rate of return before the investment tax credit equals percent and that the credit does not affect future costs or revenues Source : Council of Economic Advisers Finally the current failure to exclude the amount of the tax credit from the depreciable base of an asset means that a write-off is allowed for an expense not incurred. This raises the effective rate of the ITC above the statutory level the increase being larger for shorter-lived assets thus accentuating the bias against longer-term investments. It would be preferable to make the appropriate adjustment to the depreciable tax base and change the size of the credit itself to achieve the desired rate of profitability on assets with different useful lives A redesign of the ITC to eliminate the distortions noted above would make it a more neutral and effective incentive for new investment and should be considered if the need arises in the future for additional fiscal stimulus for investment. Making the ITC permanent would also be desirable to remove the uncertainty about its future level and create a more stable basis for business investment planning. Frequent changes in the ITC should be avoided because they may actually have a destabilizing effect on aggregate demand The primary effect of temporary revisions in the credit may simply be to change the timing of investment spending. For example a 1-year increase in the credit may boost the level of investment in the short run but then lead to a correspondingly lower level in the following year. Furthermore the ITC may have perverse effects on investment if firms begin to anticipate changes in the rate. If increases in the credit are regularly expected as the economy is headed out of recessions the downturn may be prolonged if firms hold back on new investment until the credit is raised. For these reasons then the use of the ITC to stabilize aggregate demand in the short run should be kept to a minimum TAX INTEGRATION Integration of the corporate and personal income taxes to eliminate the double tax on corporate income is another proposal that has been recommended as a means of improving the allocation of capital resources and raising the aggregate rate of investment. Under current law the first $ of corporate income is taxed at a rate of percent the second $ at percent and all income above $ at percent ( percent plus a surtax of percent ) * In addition shareholders must pay individual income taxes on distributed profits ( dividends ) ; and retained earnings are taxed again though at lower effective rates when capital gains are realized from the sale of stock. Thus while income from noncorporate businesses and wages and salaries is taxed only once corporate income is subject to a double tax. This extra tax creates a number of distortions affecting the financial structure of corporations and the overall allocation of capital resources which impair economic stability and reduce total output First because after-tax rates of return on capital tend to be equalized by market forces the higher rate of tax on corporate income implies that an extra dollar invested in the corporate sector must yield a higher before-tax rate of return than an extra dollar invested in the noncorporate sector. The double tax therefore discourages capital resources from flowing into higheryielding projects in the corporate sector the result being a net loss in output Second since retained earnings are generally translated into capital gains in the form of higher stock prices and these gains are taxed at preferential rates the tax burden on distributed profits is relatively larger than that on undistributed profits. Corporations thus have an incentive to reduce dividends and increase retained earnings. This phenomenon may produce a misallocation of capital within the corporate sector as investment is encouraged in older established firms with a high level of retained earnings and discouraged in newer firms which usually rely more heavily on capital markets to raise funds. Moreover certain investment projects may be undertaken with internally generated funds despite the fact that they might not be worthwhile if financed with capital from external sources. Third the combination of high inflation and the tax-deductibility of interest payments has encouraged many corporations to raise debt-equity ratios to levels where the risk of bankruptcy may have risen substantially. Such firms are thereby made more vulnerable to business cycle developments and may experience increasing difficulty in raising funds in capital markets. Finally the increase in the tax burden resulting from the double tax is relatively greater for lower-income stockholders It is also sometimes claimed that the double taxation of corporate income reduces the national rate of saving and that integration would be desirable to increase capital formation. Taken by itself integration would lower taxes * The Tax Reform Act of extended these brackets and rates only through the end of The President has proposed that the first two brackets and rates be made permanent and that the surtax be permanently lowered to percent The latter change would yield a combined rate of percent on corporate income over $ and raise the return to capital income which could be expected to result in higher saving as well as consumption. However if integration were accompanied by an increase in other taxes leaving total revenue unchanged the effect on saving would be ambiguous. Saving would rise only to the extent that a net increase in the rate of return remained after the offsetting tax changes ( and saving responded positively to such an increase ) or income was redistributed to individuals with above-average propensities to save Since the response of saving to changes in the rate of return is uncertain in any case and it is unlikely that the offsetting tax increases would produce a significant change in the after-tax distribution of income it is probable that the effect of revenue-neutral integration on aggregate saving would be minimal. The major benefits of integration thus stem from the improved allocation of capital resources and the more equitable distribution of tax burdens that it would bring about not from its presumed effects on total saving Full integration in its purest form would eliminate the corporate income tax entirely and allocate income to stockholders as if they were general partners in a small business. There may be certain administrative problems however which would make this partnership approach difficult to implement in the case of widely held corporations. Moreover severe cash flow problems could be created for shareholders with high marginal tax rates if their tax liabilities significantly exceeded the dividends paid out A more modest scheme of partially integrating the personal and corporate income taxes would remove only the double tax on dividends either by allowing corporations to deduct their dividend payments in calculating income for tax purposes or by treating the corporate tax on dividends as withholding for the shareholders. Under either of these methods of partial integration the bias toward reliance on retained earnings in corporate financing decsions would be reduced. The Administraton 's integration proposal combines both approaches. A portion of dividends paid would be treated as a cost of doing business and therefore would be deductible from a corporation 's gross income. The remaining amount of dividends would be subject to the ordinary corporate income tax but the tax paid would be imputed to shareholders and treated as withholding in the calculation of their individual income taxes. The shareholders would then be required to raise their dividend income by the amount of tax imputed to them and withheld by the corporation calculate their individual income tax on this adjusted basis and credit the amount withheld against their tax liability. If there were no offsetting increase in taxes this integration procedure could be expected to raise the after-tax incomes of both corporations and their shareholders assuming no change in dividend payout rates Full integration of corporate and personal income taxes would completely eliminate the distortions in resource allocation mentioned earlier. Partial integration affecting dividends only would not be completely neutral because it would not change the present tax treatment of retained corporate income Nevertheless if the difficulties in implementing full integration should prove insurmountable partial integration may be a possible second-best solution Neither plan by itself however should be expected to result in a noticeable change in the saving rate POLICIES TO STIMULATE SAVING To help meet the economy 's need for more capital the most pressing goal of policy should be to strengthen the long-term incentives for investment. However if the share of GNP devoted to investment is to rise over the next several years a comparable flow of savings must also be forthcoming Otherwise there may be a significant rise in the rate of interest which could limit the amount of new capital formation. Although the present supply of savings is sufficient in view of the current level of economic activity it may be necessary to stimulate more saving as we approach full employment toward the end of the decade. If this need does arise the additional saving could come either from the public sector in the form of larger budget surpluses ( or lower deficits ) or from higher personal and business saving. In Chapter it was noted that in order to release the resources necessary for investment it would be desirable in the longer run to move toward a macroeconomic policy mix which generates a higher level of public saving. In the private sector consideration should be given to changing those features of our present tax system that may discourage saving. Recent discussions have suggested that the personal saving rate might be raised by restructuring the social security system or by substituting a consumption tax for the personal income tax. There may of course be other reasons for reforming both taxes but the discussion here will focus only on the impact they may have on personal saving Most individuals finance their retirement with the returns from savings accumulated during their working years intrafamily transfers and social security benefits. Social security has become increasingly important in people 's retirement planning because of liberal increases in benefits and wider coverage. The question therefore arises whether this development may have led to a decline in private saving. If it has the national rate of saving would be correspondingly lower since the social security system is financed on a pay-as-you-go basis ; that is benefit payments are financed by contributions from the current work force rather than through a trust fund reserve accumulated over time The social security system may affect personal saving in several ways some of which tend to raise the level while others tend to lower it. The prospect of retirement benefits financed by younger generations in effect raises the current working population 's future endowment of wealth and encourages a reduction in their saving. To the extent that social security benefits are expected to yield significantly higher returns to individuals than are available in private capital markets the incentive to save is further reduced during the working years. On the other hand by providing retirement in- come social security encourages people to shorten their working lives. Since social security retirement benefits generally become available only at the age of individuals will therefore tend to save more over a shorter working life in order to lengthen the period of retirement. Furthermore because income from assets unlike labor income does not reduce social security benefits the desire to maintain a high rate of consumption after retirement may encourage more saving. Finally to some extent social security may simply replace intergenerational transfers within familes and hence have no net impact on national saving Whether the net effect of these factors influencing personal saving is positive or negative is an empirical question. Some recent econometric studies have suggested that the social security system on balance may have reduced personal saving. The evidence is inconclusive however about the exact magnitude of this effect and further research is clearly necessary before a definitive answer can be reached. Nevertheless it would be useful to begin considering possible ways of altering the social security system to mitigate any adverse effects it may have on saving. Insofar as such a reform would involve more complete funding of current and future social security benefits a large Federal budget surplus might result. Of course it would be necessary to ensure that the implicitly more restrictive fiscal policy would be consistent with the overall objectives of demand management An alternative proposal designed in part to encourage saving would be to replace the personal income tax with a tax on consumption. It is well known that both taxes cause a loss in efficiency by distorting individual choices between market and nonmarket activities. An income tax however generates an additional distortion between consumption and saving by first reducing after-tax income available for all purposes and then lowering the interest earned on savings. An income tax therefore interferes with the choice between present and future consumption by causing a divergence between the before- and after-tax rates of return on capital investments This distortion could be removed either by making capital income deductible under the income tax or by replacing the latter with a tax on consumption A consumption tax by deferring the tax payment until consumption occurs is neutral with respect to the choice regarding consumption in different periods. Such a tax would therefore raise the yield from postponing consumption and remove the existing disincentive to saving. As in the case of tax integration whether a consumption tax would in fact lead to a net increase in aggregate saving depends on the relative magnitudes of its income substitution and asset value effects. The available empirical evidence suggests that there is considerable uncertainty regarding both the magnitude and the direction of the effect of interest rate changes on saving. Therefore if one purpose of a consumption tax is to stimulate saving further examination of how changes in the rate of return affect saving-consumption decisions is clearly necessary. Nevertheless a consumption tax merits study not only as a possible mechanism to raise personal saving but also in connection with basic tax reform as an alternative to a broader-based and simplified income tax Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ALAN GREEN SPAN. Chairman BURTON G O MALKIEL Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was created by the Employment Act of to provide economic analysis and advice to the President and thus assist him in establishing and maintaining conditions under which the objectives of the act can be secured Alan Greenspan served as Council Chairman during his second year in that capacity. Burton G. Malkiel was a Council Member throughout on leave of absence from Princeton University where he is Gordon S Rentschler Memorial Professor of Economics. On November Paul W. MacAvoy Council Member resigned to become Professor of Economics with the School of Organization and Management at Yale University Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Position Edwin G. N o u r s e Leon H. Keyserling Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman. Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member _. Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member.. Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Member John D.Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H J a c o b y Walter W. S t e w a r t Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon. Marina v N Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Paul W. MacAvoy Oath of office date _ August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October June Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February November RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The principal directive of the Employment Act is that the Federal Government " use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations for the purpose of creating and maintaining conditions to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " To this end the basic responsibility of the Council of Economic Advisers is to analyze economic problems and interpret trends and changes in the economy so as to assist the President in the development and evaluation of national economic policies. The Council prepares regular reports on current economic conditions and forecasts of future economic developments as well as submitting recommendations which are considered in the formulation of economic policy. The Council also performs a direct advisory role both within the Executive Office of the President and through participation in interagency groups in which representatives of various departments agencies and offices in the executive branch evaluate economic problems and develop alternative solutions During the Council and its staff contributed to the study of many different economic issues. Analyzing current developments in business activity evaluating alternative macroeconomic policies as well as investigating productivity and the growth of potential output in the United States were an important part of the Council 's work last year. The Council also participated in studies of other topics of current importance in policy decisions : foreign economic conditions and international financial developments ; issues and proposals regarding agriculture and food agricultural exports and commodity trade ; ways of improving the functioning of the labor markets ; measures and programs to support housing construction and stimulate investment ; proposals for dealing with a wide range of energy issues and problems ; transportation problems ; various proposals related to regulatory reform and product liability insurance ; proposals for improving the effectiveness of unemployment compensation health insurance social security and income maintenance ; and procedures that might improve the Government 's economic statistics Early each year the President submits the Economic Report of the President to the Congress as required by the Employment Act. The Council assumes major responsibility for the preparation of the Report which together with the accompanying Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers reviews the progress of the economy during the preceding year and outlines the Administration 's policies and programs The Chairman is a member of the Economic Policy Board and of its Executive Committee. This board was formed in October to direct the formulation coordination and implementation of economic policy. The Executive Committee which serves as the focal point for economic policy making meets daily to address current issues of economic policy. It is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury and consists of the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers the Director of the Office of Management and Budget the Secretary of State the Secretary of Commerce the Secretary of Labor the Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy and the Assistant to the President for Economic Affairs who is the Executive Director of both the Economic Policy Board and its Executive Committee. The Executive Committee often augmented by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System meets regularly with the President to review economic conditions and to discuss and recommend possible changes in economic policy The Chairman of the Council is also a member of the Executive Committee of the President 's Energy Resources Council which was instituted in October to formulate and coordinate energy policy. The Chairman heads the U.S. delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and serves as vice chairman of that committee. Council Members and staff economists meet with various working parties of the committee and attend other meetings of the OECD during the year The review and analysis of the overall performance of the economy is conducted and coordinated through a series of " Troika " working groups comprising representatives of the Council the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget. At regular intervals economists from these agencies evaluate recent economic performance and formulate economic forecasts which are then reviewed by a second group chaired by a Council Member and including a representative of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget. The analysis and projections thus developed are finally reviewed and cleared through the Chairman of the Council for presentation and consideration by the Executive Committee of the Economic Policy Board The Council has initiated a series of periodic meetings at which leading economists are invited to present their views on the economy and economic policy to the Executive Committee of the Economic Policy Board The Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) like the Council was created by the Employment Act of to make a continuing study of matters relating to the economy and to submit its own report and recommendations to the Congress. During the Chairman and Members of the Council appeared three times before the JEC. The Chairman and Council Members also presented testimony before the following : the Senate Committee on Banking Housing and Urban Affairs ; the Subcommittee on Manpower Compensation and Health and Safety of the Committee on Education and Labor ; and the Subcommittee on Financial Markets of the Senate Finance Committee The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers contained in the Economic Report of the President is the main vehicle through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. This publication presents a comprehensive review and analysis of economic conditions with forecasts and projections for the coming year as well as an explanation of the Administration 's economic policy. In recent years about copies of the Economic Report have been distributed. The Council also conveys its views on current economic problems and developments through occasional press briefings testimony before various congressional committees and speeches and papers by the Chairman and the Members of the Council. The Council assumes primary responsibility for the monthly publication Economic Indicators. This compilation of current data prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the direction of Frances M. James and Catherine H. Furlong and issued by the Joint Economic Committee has a distribution of about copies ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed through discussions with the President and through regular reports on economic developments. The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal and informal meetings of Government officials. He exercises ultimate respon- * sibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The Council Members directly supervise the work of the staff and are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council. They generally meet with the Economic Policy Board and prepare analyses for its use and they represent the Council at numerous other meetings where they assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement. Whenever the Chairman is absent from Washington one of the Council Members becomes Acting Chairman In practice the Chairman and the Council Members work as a team For operational reasons however subject matter is divided informally between the Council Members. In Mr. Malkiel 's responsibility covered these areas : analysis of business conditions ; short-term forecasting and matters that relate to monetary and fiscal policy ; international trade and finance ; manpower employment and developments in the labor market ; financial markets ; housing ; taxation ; and social security. Mr. Malkiel was Chairman of the second-level Troika group and also of the Economic Policy Board 's subcommittee on improving economic statistics. Mr. MacAvoy 's responsibility encompassed these fields : energy ; natural resources and commodity trade issues ; food and agriculture ; health education and welfare ; environmental problems ; transportation ; regulated industries ; and antitrust questions. He was Chairman of the Economic Policy Board 's Food Deputies Group and co-Chairman of the Domestic Council Group on Regulatory Reform. The Council Members were involved in a large number of the committees and subcommittees of the Economic Policy Board PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff was made up of the following persons with their special fields of economic analysis : Senior Staff Economists Barry R. Chiswick Peter K. Clark John M. Davis Bruce L. Gardner Helen B. Junz Michael D. McCarthy David C. Munro John J. Siegfried William L. Springer John B. Taylor Philip K. Verleger Jr Labor Human Resources and Income Distribution Productivity Aggregate Supply and Economic Analysis Special Assistant to the Chairman Agriculture and Food International Finance and Trade Business Conditions Econometrics and Forecasting Business Conditions Econometrics and Forecasting Regulated Industries Transportation and Environment Fiscal Policy and Public Finance Monetary Policy Capital Markets Interest Rates and Housing Energy Analysis and Policy Microeconomic Analysis Staff Economist Doral S. Cooper International Finance and Trade Statisticians Frances M. James Catherine H. Furlong Senior Staff Statistician Statistician Junior Staff Economists Arthur E. Blakemore Richard E. Browning Richard A. Koss Timothy H. Quinn Barbara A. Smith Paul C. Westcott Benjamin Zycher Labor Human Resources and Fiscal Policy Business Conditions Labor and International Finance Econometrics and Forecasting Regulated Industries Business Conditions and International Finance Agriculture and Prices Regulated Industries Monetary Policy and Energy Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician is in charge of the Statistical Office and manages the Council 's economic and statistical information system. In addition to supervising the publication of Economic Indicators she directs the fact checking of memoranda testimony and speeches presented by Council Members and staff. Catherine H. Furlong Dorothy Bagovich and Natalie Rentfro assist Miss James in carrying out these tasks and in the preparation of the tables and charts accompanying the Economic Report During the summer James R. Golden ( U.S. Military Academy ) was a member of the senior staff and Robert S. Stillman ( University of California Los Angeles ) served on the junior staff. Rudiger Dornbusch ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) George M. von Furstenberg ( Indiana University ) Stephen M. Goldfeld ( Princeton University ) R. Jeffery Green ( Indiana University ) Allan G. Pulsipher ( Southern Illinois University ) and Milton Russell ( Resources for the Future Washington ) served as consultants to the Council. Students providing assistance were Susan Benedict ( Allegheny College ) and Teri F. Liebowitz ( Boston University ) In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. SteinhofT..Also called on for special assistance in connection with the Report were Dorothy L. Reid a former member of the Council staff Elizabeth A. Kaminski of the Administrative Office and Earnestine Reid of the Statistical Office SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office provides administrative support for the entire Council staff. Its work includes preparing and analyzing the Council 's budget procuring equipment and supplies responding to letters and inquiries from the general public and distributing the Council 's speeches reports and congressional testimony. In the Administrative Office consisted of Nancy F. Skidmore Administrative Officer and Elizabeth A Kaminski. The duplicating mail and messenger department was operated by James W. Gatling and Frank C. Norman Serving on the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Margaret A. Bocek Patricia A. Lee and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were M. Catherine Fibich Dorothy L. Green Bessie M. Lafakis Joyce A. Pilkerton Earnestine Reid Linda A. Reilly Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M. Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff members are drawn primarily from universities and research institutions. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year and their new institutions and affiliations were John D. Darroch ( Department of Commerce ) George M. von Furstenberg ( Indiana University ) R. Jeffery Green ( Indiana University ) David L. McNicol ( California Institute of Technology ) June A. O'Neill ( Congressional Budget Office ) Frederick M. Peterson ( Rinfret Associates New York ) Milton Russell ( Resources for the Future Washington ) and John L. Scadding ( University of Toronto ) Rosemary Quintano staff economist resigned to accept a position with the Brookings Institution Washington Junior economists who resigned in were David W. Brazell ( University of Wisconsin ) David B. Crary ( National Bureau of Economic Research Washington ) James W. Moser ( University of California Los Angeles ) Joan M. Porter ( Rice University ) Valerie Sarris ( Yale University ) and J W. Henry Watson ( University of California Los Angeles ) Others who resigned during the year were Jerry W. Gatling messenger and Anne V Jackson secretary Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT. AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-l2 B-l3 B-14 B-l5 B-l6 B-l B-l8 B-l9 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross domestic product Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Relation of gross national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 B-30 B-31 B-32 B-33 Population by age groups Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Selected unemployment rates Unemployment by duration Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-34. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-35. Productivity and related data private business economy B-36. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-37. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B-38. Industrial production indexes market groupings B-39. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-40. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing B-41. New construction activity B-42. New housing units started and authorized B-43. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-44. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-45. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-46. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Page PRICES : B-47 B-48 B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services Consumer price indexes for commodity groups seasonally adjusted Consumer price indexes for service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-57. Money stock measures B-58. Commercial bank loans and investments B-59. Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors B-60. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-61. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-62. Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits B-63. Bond yields and interest rates B-64. Instalment credit extensions and liquidations B-65. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-66. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder B-67. Net public and private debt GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-68. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-69. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years B-70. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years B-71. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts B-72. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-73. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts B-74. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-75. Interest-bearing public debt by kind of obligation Page B-76. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-77. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt held by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-78. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-79. Corporate profits by industry B-80. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-81. Sales profits and stockholders5 equity all manufacturing corporations B-82. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group B-84. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-85. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-86. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-87. Common stock prices and yields B-88. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-89. Income of farm people and farmers B-90. Farm production indexes B-91. Farm population employment and productivity B-92. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices B-93. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-94. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-95. U.S. international transactions B-96. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-97. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-98. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears B-99. International reserves ? and B-100. U.S. reserve assets B-101. International investment position of the United States at year-end B-102. Price changes in international trade B-103. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : * Preliminary _ _ Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE T A B L E B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Net exports of goods and services Personal Gross con- ) rivate sump- dotion mestic ImExexn vest- Net pend- ment exports ports ports itures Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National defense i Nonet en se State and local Percent hange from preceding >eriod gross national pro- duct v : II III IV : II Ill : II III IV This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Structures Producers * durable equipment Total = : II Ill IV II III IV : II Ill IV * v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment continued Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Fixed investment continued Residential Year or quarter Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories Percent change from Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local preceding period gross national product * P : II.. III. IV.. : II.. III. IV. : II. III. IV v # Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investmentl Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product1 Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment v | | III IV. II Ill IV : II Ill IVP _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment * continued Fixed investment continued Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services i Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Gross domestic prod- Residential Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment uct Gross Gross donational mestic product product deflator deflator Exports Imports Total Federal State and local 1976P : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IVP Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross domestic product Gross national product price measures = Gross domestic product Total Year or quarter Percent change from preceding period l Total FixedFixedFixedImplicit weighted Implicit weighted Implicit weighted price price index price price index price price index deflator ( deflator ( deflator ( weights ) weights ) weights ) Gross domestic product Chain price index FixedImplicit weighted price price index deflator ( weights ) Chain price index i.6 : v : II... III..- IV... : II III... IV... : II III.... I V P i Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexe shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B ~ Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Agriculture Contract construction Transportation Whole- Finance insurDuNon- comsale ance Servrable durable muni- and and ices goods goods cation retail real trade estate indus- indus- and utilitries tries ties Government and All govern- other i ment enterprises Gross national product fores- 1974_ Year ts and fisheries Total Mining rest of world and residual, measured as the sum of gross product by industry ) ucts less GNP in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B ~ Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year Gross or quar- national product Final sales Inventory change ter Durable goods Total Nondurable goods Final InvenFinal InvenFinal InvenTotal sales tory Total sales tory Total sales tory change change change Serv- Struc- Auto ices tures output ^ " ~ ~ i ( 3.C i ! o * ! ) ? S t * : II.. III. IV. 6.C 6.C c e G ^ ? : II ML. IV.. : II III IV * C C 7.S i Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type qj product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year Gross or quar- national ter product Final sales Total nventory hange Final Total sales Durable goods Nondurable goods nvenFinal nvenFinal tory Total sales tory Total sales lange hange = v : if " i i i IV. nventory hange Serv- Struc- Auto ices tures output I2. ~ j * ? ii " III. IV. II. III IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Government Persons Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total i Less : Interest paid and transfers Net receipts Expenditures Surplus or Perdeficit PerEquals : sonal sonal Tax Less : Less : Equals : ( ) Total conTrans- Purand Transnaexclud- sump- saving nonfers Equals : Total fers chases tional or ing in tion interNet extax interof indisterest exrependi- est reest goods come paid pendi- saving and ceipts tures ceipts and and and ( ) and tures subor ac- subservprodtranssidies3 cruals sidies3 ices uct acfers counts v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business Year or quarter Gross retained earnings * International Net Gross Excess transpri- of earn- fers and vate ings or interest doof inmestic vest- paid to forinvest- ment eigners ment Net exports of goods and services Exports Less : Imports Excess of net transfers and Equals : interNet est exor of ports net exports Total income or receipts Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expenditure l-V P. \ l l'.9 -is Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Interest paid by consumers to business and net personal transfer payments to foreigners Government transfer payments to persons and foreigners net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment corporate inventory valuation adjustment undistributed corporate profits with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements s Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing and equipment. See Table B-14 Net transfers to foreigners by persons and government and interest paid by government to foreigners * Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) less net foreign investment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Business Gross Year or quarter national product Total Total Nonfarm x Government StatisFarm tical discrepancy Households and institutions Total Federal State and local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross domestic products 3b6.3 I960 % III IV ? : II III IV : II III IV V v : II Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here See table B-l for percent changes in gross national product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Gross Year or quarter national product Total Total Percent change from Business Governments Rest precedHouseing of the holds world period and gross State Resid- instiNonFed- and domestic farm * Farm ual tutions Total eral local product * ^ ' II Ill IV II III IV : II III IV v Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises The difference between gross product in dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of gross product by industry Compensation of government employees * Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B-2 for percent changes in gross national product in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business CapNet domestic product J4.nl nai Domestic income consumpCorporate profits with inventory valuation and capital tion consumption adjustments allowances ComIndiProfits before tax with penrect Inven- Capicapi- Total busisation tal Net Profits after tax tal ness Total of tory con- intervalu- sump- est conem- Total Profits taxes i ation tion sumpploytax Total liabilUndis- adtion ees adDivi- tribu- just- justadity Total dends ted ment ment justprofits ment L51.4 I960... * __ ? III. : i f " " Ill IV : II III... IV : i f " " Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Output costs and profits of nonjinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Cur1972 rent dollars dollars Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars Total cost and profit2 Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment ComInpendirect sation Net busiinof ness terest emtaxes ployees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Output Compenper sation hour of per all em- hour of ployees all em ( ployees dollars ) ( dollars ) Profits Profits tax after liability tax < __. _ __ v : L II.. ML IV.. : I II.. ML IV.. : l____ I I ML. 1951_ _ Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-13. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Personal consumption expenditures | Year or quarter I f & Services l Nondurable goods Household operation l I is v> " O DO C a> E I ~ : = o o = o I CO S U- o c CO : C I O X S> I | ? ? ? ? ? ? i4 L13.9 L39.8 ? l ? ? L67.1 L76.9 L47.0 L78.7 ? ? G ? L02.7 L12.3 L23.2 C S : II... III.... I V : III... IV p C P * II III... IV... Total includes " other " category not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-14. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Nonresidential Gross private domestic invest- Total ment Structures Residential Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Nonfarm Total Total Nonfarm structures Nonfarm ProFarm ducers ' Total struc- durable tures equipment Nonfarm ? ? I960 " : II III... IV... L.3 : II III..IV L.2 L.4 L.4 : II III... IV * >_._ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ? n i TABLE B-15. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories I Nonfarm Year and quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Total nonfarm Manufac- Wholesale turing trade Final sales2 Retail trade Total Other Nonfarm ' v : II Ill IV l f : II III IV II III IV p End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories Inventory-final sales ratio I Nonfarm Year and quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Total nonfarm Final sales Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade : 211A : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : P II III IV x Nonfarm3 Other End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/- O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-17. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption allowGross national ances with capital product consumption adjustment Plus : Subsidies less Less : Equals : Net national product current surplus of government enterprises Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income 1933_ I960 v _ _ : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV V Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Relation of national income and personal income ' [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Corporate profits with National inventory income valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or q uarter Plus : Net interest Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements Government transfer payments to persons Personal interest income Equals : Dividends Business transfer Personal payincome ments b.2 L.O ? ? _ _ v : II.. III. IV. : l__II.. III. IV. : II... III.. IV * _ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-19. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of ( employees Farm Year or quarter National income i Total SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages and ries salaries Total Total Nonfarm Capital conInsumpcome tion adjustment Total Income * Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adadjustjustment ment Y _ o ? * ) : II ill IV L.6 : II Ill IV : II Ill IV v L.4 L.2 See footnotes at end of table j ? fi T A B L E B-19. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental i ncome of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Capital Net conInven- sump- interest tory tion tion adjustDivi- Undis- adjust- ment dends tributed ment profits Profits before tax Capital Total Rental conTotal income sumpof tion persons adjustment Profits after tax Total Total Profits tax liability Total l.fi ? J ? ? .R * : II.. III.. IV.. : II.. III.. IV.. : II.. Ml.. IV p National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-17 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workmen s compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Government and government enterprises Other labor income i Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm v : I II.. III. IV. : I II ML IV. : I II.. II ! IV * See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income Continued ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with Year or capital Divi- Personal quarter con- dends interest income Total sumption adjustment Transfer payments Old age survivors disability and health insurance benefits Government Vetunem- erans ploybenement in- fits surance benefits Government employee retirement benefits Less : Personal Noncontrifarm Aid to butions perfamilies for sonal with de- Other social inpendent insur- come children ance ( AFDC ) o l ! l \ l I960... P. : II III IV : L II. ill IV : L II. III IV v '.6 ' R 2.n .'4 ! * The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and agricultural net i nterest Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. Disposition of personal income ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Personal income Year or quarter Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPerInterest sonal Equals : Personal paid by transfer sonal conconpaysump- sumers ments saving to tion to forexpend- busi- eigners ness itures ( net ) Personal outlays Total Consumption expenditures Personal saving < v : II... III.. IV.. : II. III.. IV.. lf : II... III.. IV * >_ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Population ( thou- l sands ) dollars I960. 1961_ P. : IIIII IV. : II. IV. " : II IV * Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B-23. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross investment Government surplus or deficit ( ) national Capital income and product grants accounts received by the Total United State States Per- Gross Fed ( net ) and sonal busi- Total eral ness local saving saving * Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total Gross private Net domes- foreign tic in- investvestment3 ment Statistical discrepancy 1976P in " " " " IV.... : I I III.... IV.... -l'.O : II III.... '96. : _ ~ L8 g * .l Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net < In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million ( quarterly rate ) in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capita ! grants paid to foreigners and is included in the first quarter of as $ ( annual rate ) in capital grants received by the United States Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-24. Saving by individuals l [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Net investment in Less : Increase in net debt Securities Year or quarter Total Currency and Total demand deposits InsurNon- Mortance cor- gage SavCorpoNon- Conand debt Conings Gov- rate Corposumer popen- farm rate on sumer Other ernacduand rate sion homes rables busi- non- credit debt * counts ment forness farm secu- eign equi- reassets homes rities ' bonds ties ' serves ( ) ? ? ? ? ? ? ] ? ] : II lit IV : II IN. f ? ? ^ fi,7 l ? ? -2'.1 i. Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B ~ -Number and money income { in dollars ) ojfamilies by race of head Total Total number Year ( milions ) FAMILIES Total num- Median Median Be- Below ber income Be- Below pov- ( milincome low povlow erty lions ) erty $ level $ level $ Ul.l U1.2 U1.0 U2.1 U2.5 U3.9 U5.5 $ 7'296 ( millions ) 8'343 * Total number Percent with incomes Median income $ 3'953 ' Below Bepovlow erty $ level $ individuals Black and other race s Percent with incomes Be- Below povlow erty $ level UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS White Percent with incomes $ and unrelated ? Below poverty level Be- Below povlow erty $ level Below $ $ Revised using population controls based on the Census. Such controls not available by race Based on revised methodology procedures Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflects different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family head and farm-nonfarm residence. The poverty threshold is updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-26. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under x and over _ _ Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Civilian labor force Armed Forces Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Labor force particiUnem- pation rate ploy ( total ment labor rate ( percent force as percent of civilian of noninstitulabor tional force ) population ) Percent " _ Thousands of persons years of age and over ' 113,'811 I960 ; ..._ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued ( Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population i Total labor force ( includ- Armed ig n Forces Armed Forces ) Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years cf age and over : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June Labor force particiUnempation ployrate ment ( total rate labor ( percent force as of percent civilian of nonlabor instituforce ) tional population ) Percent July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Not seasonally adjusted Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of Census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of Census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of Census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on Census in March added to labor force and to employment. Overall categories of the labor force other than those noted were not appreciably affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-27 through B-30 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment Unemployment Females Males Year or month Total Total years years and over Males Total years Total years and over Female j Total years years and over Total years years and over 47E i._ 2,725j ! : Jan.._ Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. July. Aug Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec ^ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr May. June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec l,08C 1.17E 1.19E 07f 98E i,oie 1.34J ( 1.6K ! 2,64< ( ( 2,79/ ! * ? ' ? 2,67< See footnote Table B-27 Note. See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-29. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Males years and over : By selected groups By color emales years White and over Black and other Experienced wage Houseand hold salary heads work- Married Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers * Labor force * time lost * ers : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec U C SA Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified except as noted * Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Aggregate hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part-time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force hours Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-30. Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted i ] Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Year or month Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons year of age and over C S Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue Sept Oct Nov Dec " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ i Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31 Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured unemployment ( weekly average ^ State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ^ * Thousands " * : Jan.. Feb___ Mar.. Apr.. MayJune. July.. " Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan._ Feb.._ Mar.. Apr.. May__ June. July. Aug.. Sept * Ot Dec * nsured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions ' Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) a Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) and SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts * Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July > Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-32. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Government Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local ; 1944_ l,a40 '1948. fl953_ { I960. fl974_ 1976P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-32. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued ( All employees ; thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ! Manufacturing Total wage and salary workers Transportation and public utilities Whrvln Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Total July.. Aug.. Sep.. Oct.. Nov.Dec.. : Jan._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May Jun.__ July. Aug.Sep.. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan._ Feb.. Mar._ Apr.. May.. Jun.__ NOVP Decp.. Year or month : Jan._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. Jun._ July.. Aug.. Sep.. Oct._ Government Fi- oontract construction wnoiesale and retail trade nance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local Note. Data in Tables B-32 through B-34 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-27 through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month ConTotal private Manu- tract nonag- factur- construcriculing tion tural i Total private ManuRetail non- facturtrade agriing cultural Contract construction Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Index = Retail trade Percent change from a year earlier Current dollars dollars * Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * .-Dec * Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-32 Includes eating and drinking places Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index * Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places Note. See Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural4 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural1 Current dollars Manufacturing dollars Contract construction Retail trade Current dollars dollars Current dollars $ $ $ $ $ v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : Jan.._ Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec v _ _ Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-32 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index Includes eating and drinking places * Based on unadjusted data Note. See Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Productivity and related data private business economy [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output i Hours of all persons Output per hour of all persons Compensation per hour * Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private Total Private nonnonnonnonnonnonprivate farm ) rivate farm private farm private farm private farm private farm busibusibusibusibusibusibusibusibusibusibusibusiness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness Year or quarter | I960 : II III IV : II III IV : II III Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output i Year or quarter Implicit price deflator * Private Total Private Total nonnonfarm private farm private busibusibusibusness ness ness ness Unit labor costs Compensation per hour ' Output per hour of all persons Private Total Private Total Total Private Total nonnonprivate non- private farm private farm private farm busibusibusibusibusibusibusiness ness ness ness ness ness ness Hours of all persons2 g : II III IV : II III IV : II III Private nonfarm business Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed < Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B ~ Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturin g Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable ? lib. proportion I960 P. _ Jan Feb.. Mar ADr May June July Aug SeDt Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p _ _ Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods Total Total l Materials Equipment Automotive prod- Home goods Total Busi- Intermediate products Total Durable goods Nondurable goods proportion... : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct., Nov p Decp Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-39. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures 'rimary metals Period Total Iron and steel Fabricated metal products Nonelectrical machinery Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Electrical machinery Total Motor vehicles and parts Lumber and products Apparel products Print- Chemicals ing and and pubprodlishing ucts Foods proportion I960. 89.L : Jan.._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June.. July. Aug.. Sept.Oct. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan. Feb.. Mar.__ Apr.. May. June. 9S.1 July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov p. Dec p Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-40. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Total Primary manu- procfacessing turing Wharton series Commerce series FRB series * Advanced processing Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Primaryprocessed goods Advancedprocessed goods Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods C : I IL.. III.. IV... : L.__ IL.. III.. IV... : I.... IL__ III.. IV.. G : I _ III. " ! IV... : ! ..._ III. " " IV... : I II III * For description of the series see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November Quarterly data ate for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers " The Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization : A Ten Year Perspective " Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section American Statistical Association Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Wharton School of Finance T A B L E B-41. New construction activity { Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction ^ Residential buildings1 Total Total * Public construction New housing units Federal State and local Total Total Commercial Industrial Other * New series " C _ _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-41. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Residential buildings i Total new Year or month construction Total Nonresidential buildings and other construction i New Total J nousing units Public construction cials Total Industrial Commer- Total Federal State and local * Other * July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc * Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) except as noted TABLE B-42. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New housing units started Private and public Private New private housing units authorized2 Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Type of structure Total One unit 1959_ 1960_ 1961_ 1962_ 1963_ 1964_ 1969_ 1972_ 1974_ " to units units or more One unit Total to units units or more Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May. June July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov p Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts but excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; for ; for ; and prior to Not available separately beginning January Note. Only the series on private and public nonfarm housing units started is available prior to See " Economic Report " for this earlier series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-43.- Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 1947-77l ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Mining Railroad Air Other Public Comutili- munities cation Commercial and others * : II... III.. IV... : II... III... : IL.. III... IV : | _ _ Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresjdential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals nonprofit institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-44. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade ( Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month Sales i Inventories Ratio Sales i Inventories Ralio Sales i Inventories Ratio I960. " " \ ! _ _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June " " ; Dec 155i ' " 37,C18 37,36C 45,5C1 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ] ; ! ; July Aug Sept Oct ! July Aug Sept Oct Nov : Sales i InvenRatio tories Dec * Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory /sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-45. Manufacturers9 shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Shipments * Durable goods industries Year or montl Total Dura ble goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies : : ! ! 22,52S ! ! ; ' 9,78S : I960. >2 i3 r ! Jan.... Feb Mar Apr May June B5 July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct N Materials and supplies FinWork in ished process goods : Total ! ! : : ! FinWork in ished process goods Nondurable goods industries [ : '8 il,365 : * Monthly average for year and total for month s Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted MOte. Data are as published by Bureau of the Census but beginning detail for durable goods inventories does not add to totals. Correction will be published later by Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-46. ' Manufacturers1 new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ! New orders ' Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods industries nondefense Unfilled orders Nondurable goods industries Total Unfilled ordersshipments ratio Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May_ June July. Aug._ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June- H July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... NOVP_ Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES T A B L E B-47. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Housing Year or month All items Total Apparel Trans- Food Rent and upkeep Reading Medical Personal and care care recreation Other goods and services portation 11A i 18L6 : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : J a n _ Feb Mar Apr__ May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov _ Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-48. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers ( = Commodities Year or month All items Services Special indexes Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable All Non- services Rent durable Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-49. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Total i New cars Used cars Household durables Total Apparel commodities Services less rent Nondurables less Total food and apparel House- Transhold serv- portation ices servless ices rent Medical care services Other " " 7l7l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov ( i ) " iV.i Also includes the " other durables " group Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commoditity groups seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = seasonally adjusted ] Commodities less food Year and month All commodities Durable commodities Nondurabies less food Food Total Total l Household durables New cars Used cars Total l Apparel Gasocom- line and modmotor ities oil Fuel oil and coal : Jan.__ Feb.. Mar Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan___ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June- July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. July_ Aug_ Sept. Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb_ Mar__ Apr. May. June. July__ Aug Sept Oct.Nov 15J.8 Includes certain groups not shown separately Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-51. Consumer price indexes for service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = seasonally adjusted ] Selected expenditure classes Services Services less rent Year and month All AM services Rent Total i Household services less rent Transportation services Medical care services Fuel and utilities Household furnishings and operation Apparel and upkeep Transportation Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. : IT : : Nov.. Also includes the " other services " group Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-52. Percent changes in consumer price indexes> major groups ' [ Percent change ] Dec to Dec * Commodities less food Food All items Year or month Year to year Year to year Dec to Dec * Dec to Dec * Year to year Services Dec to Dec. i Year to year Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Change from preceding month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept. Oct Nov __ _ _ _ Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics oooo : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June \ l TABLE B-53. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds All commodities Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides Fuels skins and leather related Chemicals and products and allied productsi related and products power1 I960 : Jan Feb... Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... _ Oct Nov.. Dec See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B ~ Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp Metals Rubber Lumber paper and and and and plastic wood metal allied products products products products Year or month Machinery and equipment Furniture and Nonmetallic housemineral hold durables products Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment Miscellaneous products July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec A : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ] i .t E : : C : Jan Feb Mar Apr May__ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Prices for most items in this grouping are lagged and refer to or months earlier than the index month Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-54. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Year or month All commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Materials and components For For Com- for conFor nonstrucfood durable durable ponents tion manu- manu- manufactur- factur- facturing ing ing Materials Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Non food materials except fuel Fuel Total Total : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept_ Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. 2C4.6 : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr. _ May_ June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct_._ Nov. Dec.. See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-54. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupingst Continued [ = Finished goods Special groupings Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Foods Other nondurable goods Total Durable goods Producer finished goods Intermediate mateCrude rials mate- suprials plies and components Manufactured Congoods sumer finished goods exclud- Total Duraing ble foods Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec I960 iIncludes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies > Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-55. Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted ^ [ = seasonally adjusted ] Special groupings Farm products and processed foods md feed : Year and month Consumer finished goods Intermediate mateCrude rials mate- suprials i plies and components Producer finished goods Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Other nondurable goods Durable goods Total Total Foods : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Manufactured goods Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Durable goods TABLE B-56. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups \ ( Percent change ] Year or month All commodities Industrial commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Consumer finished goods Total Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec1 Year to year Dec to Dec Year to year '5 1S67 All except foods Year to year Dec to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year C g " Dec to Dec. ' Foods _ ? Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adadjusted adjusted adjusted justed justed adadjusted justed justed justed justed justed justed ! : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June l'.O July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr... May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec ! oo '.2 K4 2'. Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics -'.4 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE T A B L E B-57. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Components and related items Overall measures M2 Deposits at commercial banks M3 ( M plus ( IV ! plus M ! time Time and savings Currency deposits deposits Curat nonat complus rency l De- bank demand mercial mand thrift deposits ) banks Total Large Other CDs< other than instituarge CDs ) tions ) Year and month Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ) * : Dec.. ' Dec Dec : [ : [ : [ : : [ : : : : * * I960 * Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec * : : : : : : : 1,C25.3 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1.C51.6 1.C86.5 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Dec Dec Dec DecV Dec Dec " '.. " Dec Dec Dec " " ] Dec...I. Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * : Jan Feb_ Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve Banks and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government. Effective June excludes balances accumulated for payment of personalloans ( about $ billion ) Negotiable time certificates of deposit ( CDs ) issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks * Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks savings capital at savings and loan associations and credit union shares Deposits at all commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/- O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-58. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] End of year or month i Total loans and investments : June : June Loans Total J U.S. Government securities Investments Commercial and industrial Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusted * 1973_ p : Jan p Feb v Mar v Apr v May p June * _ _ July p Aug p Sept p Oct p Nov p Dec p >171.4 e Data are for last Wednesday of month or year ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic bank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods < Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes totaling about $ billion are classified as other securities rather than as loans Beginning June commercial and industrial loans were reduced by about $ billion due to loan ^ classifications at one large bank Beginning June the merger of a large mutual savings bank and a nonmember commercial bank increased total loans and investments by $ billion loans by $ billion and other securities by $ billion Beginning November the liquidation of one large bank reduced total loans and investments by $ billion total loans by $ billion commercial and industrial loans by $ billion and other securities by J0.5 billion. In addition commercial and industrial loans were increased by $ billion due to loan ^ classifications at one large bank Beginning August reflects new cefinition of affiliates included and different group of reporting banks. Amount of total loans sold was reduced by $ billion * Loan reclassifications reduced these loans by $ billion as of March Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-59. Private liquid asset holdings nonfinancial investors [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Year and month : Dec : Dec : Dec__ : Dec._ : Dec__ : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec._ : Dec Total liquid assets Total Currency i Demand deposits l Commercial banks i Nonbank thrift institutions U.S. Treasury securities Savings bonds3 Shortterm marketable securities Negotiable certificates of deposit s Other private money market instruments : Dec : Dec_ : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec__ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ Sept Oct. Nov. Dec b : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May. June- ',101.6 July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov p Money stock components ( see Table B-57 ) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors As published in money stock statistics Series E and H savings bonds other savings bonds and savings notes held by individuajs Short-term marketable U.S. Treasury securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings Commercial paper bankers ' acceptances Federal funds security repurchase agre< [ reements and money market mutual fund shares held outside banks and other financial institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-60. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Item U.S. Government Public debt securities Agency issues and mortgages Total funds raised ForeignCorporate equities Debt instruments. _ Private domestic nonfinancial sectorsCorporate equities Debt instruments.. Debt capital instruments. State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments. Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c. Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households. Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate.. Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors ! ! Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency. Time and savings accounts At commercial banks. At savings institutions Credit market instruments n e t U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks. Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other See footnotes at end of table TABLE B- Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item III III Public debt securities Corporate equities Agency issues and mortgages Foreign r U.S. Government Total funds raised ] State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total L9 Debt capital instruments Debt instruments Corporate equities Debt instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors ! g 4'. Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-61. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ) Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec. Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec v Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec p U.S Government securities * Member bank reserves Member bank borrowings Total Seasonal All other mainly float Total '31,353 * Required Excess <262 Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Beginning November includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Beginning allowable deficiencies included are ( beginning with first statement week of quarter ) : first quarter $ million ; second quarter $ ? million ; third quarter $ million ; fourth quarter $ million. Beginning allowable deficiencies included are : first quarter $ million and second quarter $ million. Transition period ended after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E B Aggregate reserves and member bank deposits [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Deposits subject to reserve requirements3 Member bank reserves Year and month Total Nonborrowed Required Total Time and savings Demand Private U.S. Government Total member bank deposits plus nondeposit items * : Dec i960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec.. : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec * _ _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec v _ _ * Except as noted in footnote Member bank reserves series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M Deposits subject to reserve requirements include total time and sayings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks * Total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements plus Eurodollar borrowings loans sold to bank-related institutions ( data relate to Wednesday figures ) and certain other nondeposit items. This series for deposits is referred to as " the adjusted bank credit proxy. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasyear Taxable bonds ury bills i issues Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Average High- rate on Prime grade shortcommunicterm meripal bank cial bonds loans ( Stand- to busi- paper ard & n e s s Poor 's ) selected months cities Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York * Federal funds rate * Newhome mortgage yields ( FHLBB ) ( ) See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-63. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Year or month Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) 3-month Taxable Treasyear bondss ury issues2 bills i Aaa Baa Average Highrate on DisPrime Newgrade shortcount comhome municterm rate merFederal mortipal bank Federal cial gage bonds loans Reserve funds rates yields ( Stand- to busi- paper Bank ( FHLBB ) ard & nessof New Poor 's ) selected months York * cities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug _ Sept Oct Nov Dec 1976-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Nov Dec } % 7l/-&/i ^ 6y ~ ^ iy-iy2 by-by bV-b \ by-bVo im % ly-ly2 by ~ bY Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December Selected note and bond issues s First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; November 1941-March years Average effective rate for the year ; opening and closing rate for the month Based on seven-day averages of daily effective rates for weeks ending Wednesday. Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assumed on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or jess Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-64 Instalment credit extensions and liquidations 1971-76l [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Revolving Year or month Total Automobile Mobile home Home improvement Bank credit card Bank check credit All other Extensions : : Jan. Feb._ Mar. Apr. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec Liquidations : : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec : Jan.. Feb.. MarApr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec Excludes 30-day charge credit held by retailers oil and gas companies and travel and entertainment companies Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Note. Consumer instalment credit consists of short-and intermediate-term credit extended through regular business channels to finance the purchase of goods and services for personal consumption or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid in two or more instalments. Mortgage credit is excluded Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-65. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] r ^ onfarm r. ) ropertie ; Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional2 Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family houses prop- properties erties i to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : II _ Ill IV : II III IV : II III I960. _ i Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter otal Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banks i Other holders Life Federal insurance and comrelated panies agencies ' Individuals and others i1.2 I960. b : I II. III IV : II. III IV : II. Ill i Includesloans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments I ncludes former Federal National Mortgage Association and new Government National Mortgage Association as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-67. Net public and private debt [ Billions of dollars ] Private Public Individual and noncorporate End of year Total Fedoral Government2 Federally sponsored credit agencies ' State and local governments Total Nonfarm Corporate Total Total Mortgage Commercial and financial * Consumer Farm4 _ _ Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating government and corporate debt Net Federal Government debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Debt of agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest. The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with < Farm mortgages andf arm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories s Debt to banks ( other than consumer credit ) security credit policy loans and some single-payments loans Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) based on data from various Federal agencies and other sources GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-68. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds. Trust funds.. OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve SystemOthers BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs General science space and technology Natural resources environment and energy Agriculture Commerce and transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Law enforcement and justice General government Revenue sharing and general purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting re ceipts : Employer share employee retirement. Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-68. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ) Actual Estimate Description ransition quarter BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust f u n d s 16,1C6 4C6 j OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Others.. BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income t a x e s _ Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs d u t i e s Miscellaneous receipts : Deposit of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs General science space and technology Natural resources environment and energy Agriculture Commerce and transportation _ Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security _ Veterans benef ts and services _ Law enforcement and justice General government Revenue sharing and general purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-69. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Transition quarter i._ i ! i Estimate Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays beginning For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-70. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts,fiscalyears [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts and expenditures Transition quarter Estimate RECEIPTS Total budget receipts. Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases._ Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note.-See Note Table B-69 See Special Analysis A " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-71. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Federal Government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures : | | III IV : II Ill IV v : II III IVP ____ State and local government national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE E-72. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal year : Calendar year : * " II III IV : II III IV * ____ Personal Corpotax rate and Total non- profits tax tax acreceipts cruals Expenditures Indirect bus ; ConPurness tribuchases of tax tions and for Total i goods and non- social servtax insurices acance cruals Transfer payments To persons Grantsin-aid to State To and forlocal eign- governers ments Net interest paid Surplus Subsior dies defiless cit cur ( ) rent nasurtionplus al inof come govand ernprodment uct enteracprises counts /i \ fi i ! o ^ ! iWage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These " were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) in each of the quarters of and Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget T A B L E B-73. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollar > ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Subsidies Pur- TransIndirect ContriPerless chases Corbusifer Fedsonal of porate ness butions payNet current tax eral for profits tax Total goods ments interest surplus and govsocial grantsand tax and to paid ofernnontax accruals nontax insur- in-aid servpereceipts ment ance ices accruals sons enterprises national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit i * : II III IV : II Ill IV : II III IVP Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) in each of the quarters of and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-74. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears ( Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total roperty taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function Revenue from ederal lovers ment Corporation net income taxes All other ' Total Education Highways Public welfare All other < ! " : ' ? I960. ! ! : : : ; ! ! " * # _ ! 74,00C : ! 4.09C ! ! 17,25C ' : 19,08E 20,53C ! ; 2,03J : ; ! 13,93r ; ] : ' ( ! ( ! : ; ! ! 11.90C ; : 35,826jl66,87r ! 61L Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues < Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-67 for net debt of State and ocal governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-75. Interest-bearing public debt by kind of obligation ( Millions of dollars ) Marketable End of year or month Fiscal year : Total interestbearing public debt Bills Foreign government series Government account series Treasury Treasury bonds i notes savings bonds U.S Total Non marketable Total : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec 338,94F : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Other [ [ [ L17,486 [ L19,041 [ L19,438 L19,453 L24 [ [ [ Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes and bonds in the Treasury foreign series and foreign-currencyseries issues Includes Treasury deposit funds and some special issues formerly included in " Other " Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-76. Estimated ownership of public debt securities ^ [ Par values ; billions of dollars ) Total public debt securities Held by private investors Held Held by Total Govern- Federal Reserve ment accounts Banks End of year or month Totals Commercial banks * Mutual savings State Miscelbanks and in- Corpo- and local Indi- laneous govern- viduals invessurance rations ments tors companies Fiscal year : : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June July.. Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr... May June July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov p Dec * U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value As of July public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the data in this table For comparability with published data published data for have been adjusted to exclude notes of the International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in each year through These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department of the Treasury Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-58 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain government deposit accounts and goveinment-sponsoied agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-77. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt held by private investors Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Average length Years Months Fiscal year : : Jan.. Feb.. Mar- Apr_ May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-78. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments I960 : II III IV : * III I V : II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-79. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial Year or quarter Total Total Total ._ Other Total Manufacturing * Transportation Wholecomsale municaand tion retail and trade services3 Rest of the world Other Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancia L AA : : IL.__ III IV 9.C ll.C : IL.._ III.. IV... 5.J 6.C 6.E : ll_-_III.. 7J S.I v See footnotes at end of table l.'t T A B L E R-79. Corporate profits by industry Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Domestic industries Financial Nonfinancia ! L Year or quarter Total Total Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing2 TransportaWholetion sale comand municaretail tion trade and services Rest of the world Other ? g p : II... III.. IV... : II... III.. IV... : IL.. III.. Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers ' dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-80 for industry detail Services consists of electric gas and sanitary services Note. The industry classification is en a ccrrpsny basis and is based en the Standard Industrial Classification beginning with and en the Standard Industrial Classification prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B -Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Year or quarter Total ChemFood manuicals and facturand ing Total kindred allied prod- products ucts Durable goods Petroleum and Other Total coal products ElectriMotor Primary Fabri- Machincal ery vehicles metal cated except equipand Other ment indusmetal electriequipand tries products cal ment supplies ? ? .O ? ? v ? II. III IV. II. III IV. : : : II.. III. 17.fi l ? .l See footnotes at end of table ? ? / ? ? ? 6.C ? ? ? .f 5.f 4.E l.i TABLE B-80. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Nondurable goods Year or Durable goods Total manuFood Chem- PetroMotor icals facturleum Primary Fabri- Machin- Electri- vehicles and cal ery ing Total kindred and and cated metal except equipand allied coal Other Total indus- metal electri- ment and equip- Other prod- prod- prodtries products ucts upplies ment cal ucts ucts quarter ? ? P ? ? : II.. III. IV. l ? .l b.4 : II.. ML IV. b : II... III.. b Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B1-81. Sales profits and stockholders ' eqmtv all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Ml manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Profits Stock- Sales Stock- Sales StockBefore After holders ' ( net ) Before After holders ' ( net ) Before After holders ' equity equity equity income income income income income income taxes taxes taxes i taxes taxes taxes Profits Sales ( net ) : IV : II Ill IV : | II Ill IV : II Ill : IV New series : In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes ha/e been dedicted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) See " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations First Quarter " Federal Trade Commission Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting prccedures industry classifications sampling prccedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning ccrr pilaticn cf the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Ccrrrrissicn Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-82. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Year or quarter All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV 5.S New series : * : II Ill _. _ _ _._ I Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only See " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations First Quarter " Federal Trade Commission Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See also Note Table B-81 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Industry III IV II III III IV II III Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical Electrical and electronic equipment- Transportation equipment Motor vehicles and equipment. Aircraft guided missiles and parts Instruments and related products.. Other durable manufacturing prod10.9 ucts All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries.._ Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals Nondurable goods industries Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products Ratios based on equity at end of quarter Source : Federal Trade Commission T A B L E B Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Sources Uses External Period Total Credit market funds nternaP Total Total Long- Shorterm terms Total Other PurInchase crease of in physi- financal cial assets * assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) _ _ _ ._ Seasonally adjusted annual rates II Ill IV II III Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits Stocks bonds and mortgages Bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans * Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-85. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter Cash U.S on Govhand ernTotal and ment in securibanks * ties a : II III IV... : II Ill Current liabilities AdReNet vances Fedceiv- Notes and Other Notes eral Other workand ables ing Inprecurand incuracfrom capipayvenaccounts tories rent Total ments counts come rent U.S tal astax liaGov- receivU.S sets * pay- liabili- biliern- able Govable ties ties ment ernment3 All corporations * > Nonfmancial corporation : Includes time certificates of deposit i Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to the U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations'books or amounts arisingfrom subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * Includes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets s Includes commercial paper outstanding the portion of long-term debt due in less than year and miscellaneous current liabilities not elsewhere classified e Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Excludes banks sayings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Note. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Department of the Treasury ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-86. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Bonds and notes Preferred stock Industry of corporate issuer Manufacturing ! Electric gas and water3 Transportation Communication Other I960... : I II Ill IV : I II III Prior to also includes extractive radiobroadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State rrunicipal. and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ 100,COO and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " T h e Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-87. Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( percent ) Common stock prices * New York Stock Exchange indexes ( December = ) Period Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Standard Dow& Poor 's Jones composite Dividendindustrial index price average = ratio lO ) * Earningsprice ratio ' G9 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard and Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index e Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day of quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow-Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-88. Business formation and business failures Business failures * Index of net business formation ( = ) Year or month rations ( numhnr \ Der> ness failure Liability size class Total Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures New business $ and over 7f Total $ Under $ and $ over Liability size class Under Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar _ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Excluding W. T. Grant current liabilities were $ billion Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-89. Income of farm people and farmers [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Year or quarter Net to farm operators Realized gross ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- IncludFrom From From receipts penses ing net ing net nonall inven- invenfarm Total * from farm sources sources1 sources tory tory marketchange change4 ings Billions of dollars Net income per farm including net inventory change Current dollars dollars * Dollars * : II.. Ill IV. : II. Ill IV : II III Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney and other farm income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) * Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid ty farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-90. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crop : Year Farm output i Total * Feed grains Hay and forage Livestock and products Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs Food Vege- Fruits and grains tables nuts Cotton ToOil bacco crops Total Meat animals 1943_. p. Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production * Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-91. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April l ) i Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Per hour of farm work Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population Total Hired Family workers workers Per unit of total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre Index = I960. P. Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population Far ving on living o farms regardless of occupation 'Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas ncludes * Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms These data published by the D farms data Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-29 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Cc nsus ) TABLE B-92. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices [ = except as notedj Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm Crops products I960 * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June " July Augl5 Sept Octl5 Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Augl5 Sept Oct Nov Dec 1C7 Prices paid by farmers All items Live- nterest Family taxes living stock and items and roducts wage rates Production items Selected resource prices Tractors and selfpropelled machinery Fertilizer Average Average hourly farm wage real rate estate all value hired per farm acre2 workers1 $ .'68 Without room or board ; on or about the first of January April July and October Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through and for February for Monthly data are for first of month Source : Department of Agriculture O TABLI. B-93. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Year Total hours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor Farm real estate MeFeed chaniseed Agrical and Taxes Miscelcultural livepower chemiand laneous and cals stock interest purmachases chinery v * Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts,and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Feed seed and livestock purchases from nonfarm sources Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-94. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector ( Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Financial assets MaHouseReal LiveDehold Total estate stock J chinery equip- posits and Crops2 ment and motor and curvehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal nvest- Total estate Other prietors ' U.S ment debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives 1957_ ? * Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-95. U. S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Merchandise12 Year or quarter Exports Direct Net bal- expend- Sales ance itures Imports I960. Military transactions Net bal- -12,8C3 30,6f.6 42,4fa9 U.S Gov- Net travel and transportation receipts BalOther ance on serv- goods ices and nets services i Remittances pensions and other unilateral transfers ^ Balance on current account 2,35b : IV.. Privates ment Net investment income U 1.C21 : IV. : III p. l. " lT Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from net investment income and included in other services net In concept the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the national income and product accounts although the two may differ because of revisions special handling of certain items etc ( Footnotes continued on following page. ) TABLE B-95. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( -l- ) l U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) | Foreign official assets Year or quarter Total Other U.S U.S official Governreserve ment assets assets U.S private assets Total Total Assets of foreign official reserve agencies Statistical discrepancy U.S official Allocareserve tions of Total Of assets special ( sum of which : net drawing the Sea ( unadOther rights items sonal justed foreign ( SDR ) with adjust- end of assets sign ment perire- discrep- od ) * versed ) ancy I960 " : l.._ II.. III. IV.. : I I III.. IV... : II... Illi'. IV * 7,33C Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Includes increases ( in millions ) as follows : for $ resulting from revaluation of the German mark in October ; for $ in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December ; for $ resulting from change in par value of the dollar on May ; and for $ resulting from change in par value of the dollar on October Beginning July valuation of SDR and reserve position in the IMF based on a weighted average of exchange rates for the currencies of member countries. On a pre-July basis reserve assets for December are $ million ; for December $ million ; and for December $ million Not available separately Data beginning not strictly comparable with earlier data Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Note. Quarterly data for changes in U.S. official reserve assets U.S. private assets abroad and foreign assets in the U.S. are not seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of the Treasury TABLE B-96. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups ( Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise exports1 Year or month Merchandise trade balance Merchandise imports Domestic exports General imports ' Total domestic Food Crude Food Crude Manand bever- mate- Manbever- mate- ufac- Total Foreign ufacci.f. T o t a l " ages rials tured Totals ages rials tured exand to- and goods5 and to- and goods ' value ports bacco fuels bacco fuels * Exports less imports customs value Exports less imports f.a.s Exports less imports ci.f Customs value F.a.s. value | " -3,f " [ [ F.a.s. value C : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June. : | July Aug Sept Oct. Nov ; Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Total excludes Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils s Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Ci.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. por+ of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics coyer all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) TABLE B-97. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by areat [ Millions of dollars ] Jan.-Nov Area Exports ( domestic and foreign and special category shipments ) Developed countries Canada i Western Europe2 Japan Australia New Zealand and Republic of South Africa Developing countries s Petroleum exporting countries Other countries Other Western Hemisphere Near East East and South Asia Developing Africa Socialist areas in Europe and Asia Unidentified countriesi General imports Developed countries Canada Western Europe2 Japan Australia New Zealand and Republic of South Africa Developing countries Petroleum exporting countries Other countries Other Western Hemisphere Near East East and South Asia Developing Africa Socialist areas in Europe and AsiaUnidentified countries4 8G0 Beginning January transshipments of certain grains and oilseeds through Canada are shown as exports to unidentified countries Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Includes developing countries in Oceania < Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country NOte Exports are f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) ; imports are Customs values generally the market value in the foreign country ; and imports are transaction values f.a.s. Petroleum exporting developing countries are as follows : OPEC ( Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ) Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia ! ra,, Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela ; and other petroleum exporting developing countriesAngola Bahamas Bahrain Brunei Egypt Leeward and Windward Islands Netherlands Antilles Oman Trinidad and Tobago and Tunisia Source : Department of Ccmmerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) TABLE B-98. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total Near East and South Asia Latin America East Asia TOTAL ECONOMIC LOANS AND GRANTS ( OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS ) ! average Loans Grants _ Loans Grants _ OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE TO LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES * Obligations and loan authorizations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average Agency for International Development Obligations and loan authorizations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average. Food for Peace Obligations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average Other and interregional Africa Europe Contributions and subscriptions to international financial institutions Obligations : average Other official development assistance including Peace Corps * Obligations : average OTHER ECONOMIC LOANS AND GRANTS TO LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Obligations : average Loan repayments and interest receipts : average TOTAL ECONOMIC LOANS AND GRANTS TO DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Obligations : average Some data are preliminary Official development assistance is defined as concessional aid for development purposes. Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa Canada and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the Inter-American Development Bank the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Development Association and the Asian Development Bank * Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE B-99. International reserves and [ Millions of SDRs * ; end of period ] Area and country November All countries Industrialized countries United States Canada Japan. Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Norway and Sweden ) Switzerland United Kingdom Other Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Oil exporting countries Iran Nigeria Saudi Arabia. Venezuela... Other Other less developed areas Other Western Hemisphere.. 6G5 Other Middle East Other Asia Other Africa i Special drawing rights. For conversion to U.S. dollars use the following U.S. dollars per SDR for end of period : ; ; ; ; ; ; : Nov. 2Includes Cuba a Includes Luxembourg * Algeria Indonesia Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar and United Arab Emirates Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDR ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-100. U.S. reserve assets [ Millions of dollars ] Gold stock i End of year or month Total reserve assets Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec U6,226 M l Treasury Special drawing rights ( SDR ) Convertible foreign currencies * lie s Reserve position in International Monetary Fund * * l ' 2,'212 Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with the right of repurchase and gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas Prior to December excludes gold held by the Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF ) In December the Treasury acquired all the gold held by the ESF Includes initial allocation on January of $ million second allocation on January of $ million and third allocation on January of $ million of special drawing rights ( SDR ) in the Special Drawing Account in the IMF plus or minus transactions in SDR Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System The United States has the right to purchase foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could purchase additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the fund in June for a U.S. quota increase which became effective on February Includes increase ( in millions as follows : for $ resulting from revaluation of German mark in October ( $ in mark holdings ) ; for $ in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December ; for $ in total assets resulting from the change in par value of the U.S. dollar on May ( $ total gold stock $ Treasury gold stock $ SDR and $ reserve position ) ; for $ in total assets resulting from the change in par value of the dollar on October ( $ total gold stock $ Treasury gold stock $ SDR and $ reserve position ) Beginning July the IMF adopted a technique for valuing the SDR based on a weighted average of exchange rates for the currencies of member countries. SDR holdings and reserve position in the IMF are also valued on this basis beginning July At valuation used prior to July SDR1 = $ ) end of month values are ( in millions of dollars ) : Total Reserve reserve SDR position assets in IMF : Dec : Dec : Dec Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Department of the Treasury and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE R-101. International investment position of the United States at year-end J971-75 [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international position of the United States. U.S. official reserve assets2 Gold Special drawing rights ( SDR ) Reserve position in International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Foreign currencies Other U.S. Government assets U.S. loans and other long-term assets U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. short-term assets U.S. private assets Direct investments abroad Foreign securities U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks n.e.c U.S. assets abroad Foreign assets in the United States. Foreign official assets U.S. Government securities Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks n.e.c Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets Direct investments in the United States U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks : Long-term liabilities U.S. Treasury securities and other short-term liabilities Preliminary Reserve assets include increases from changes in the par value of the dollar as officially implemented : on May the increase totaled $ million consisting of $ million gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position in IMF ; on October the increase was $ million consisting of $ million gold stock $ million SDR and $ million reserve position in IMF. Beginning July U.S. holdings of special drawing rights and the reserve position include changes in the SDR based on changes in a weighted average of exchange rates for currencies of member countries of the IMF Includes loans repayable in dollars such as paid-in subscriptions to international financial institutions and other miscellaneous claims and indebtedness that the borrower may repay with its currency with a third-party currency or by delivery of materials or transfer of services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-102. Price changes in international trade [ = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade * _ United States : Exports Terms of trade l Developing areas ? Total : Exports Terms of trade Latin America : Exports Terms of trade Southern and Eastern Asia : Exports Terms of trade l World export price indexes Coffee tea and cocoa Cereals oooo Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Other agricultural commoditiess Fats oils and oilseeds Textile fibers Wool Rubber Minerals Metal ores Fuels Manufactured goods : Total * Nonferrous base metals * Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Data are for second quarter * Includes forest products < Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Note. Data exclude trade of socialist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) TABLE B-103. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries [ = ) Period United States Canada France Japan Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III I960 Oct Nov Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O