ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington,D.C. Stock Number CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER PROGRESS DURING THE THIRD YEAR OF RECOVERY CHAPTER ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND POLICY CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY A HESITANT RECOVERY CHAPTER INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT CHAPTER MAJOR ECONOMIC POLICY ISSUES OF APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page Ill ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : I will be working closely with the Congress in to enact a program addressed to the immediate and the long-term needs of our economy. I am proposing tax reductions and reforms to continue our strong economic recovery to encourage increased investment by American businesses and to create a simpler and fairer tax system. I am seeking legislation to address the special problems of the disadvantaged and the unemployed And I am taking new steps to combat inflation This report to the Congress on the condition of the economy sets forth the overall framework within which my economic proposals were formulated. It outlines for you and for the Nation my economic priorities for the years ahead and my strategies for achieving them I have begun from the premise that our economy is basically healthy but that well-chosen Government policies will assure continued progress toward our economic goals Last year more than four million new jobs were created in our country an all-time record and unemployment was reduced by more than one million persons. Output rose by almost percent and the benefits of this large increase were widely shared. The after-tax income of consumers adjusted for inflation rose substantially during Wages of the typical American worker increased by more than the rise of prices and business profits also advanced The American economy is completing three years of recovery from the severe recession of Recovery in most other nations has lagged far behind our own. In the economies of our six major trading partners seven million persons were unemployed at year 's end more than at the depths of the recession. Our inflation rate is also lower than in most other nations around the world. We have a great many accomplishments. But much progress remains to be made and there are problems to be dealt with along the way The recession of was the worst in years and the substantial increase in output over the past three years still leaves the economy operating below its productive potential. We can not be content when almost 6/ million people actively seeking jobs can not find work when % million workers take part-time jobs because they can not find fulltime employment and when one million people have stopped looking for a job because they have lost hope of finding one. We can not be content when a substantial portion of our industrial plant stands idle as it does today We can not be satisfied with an economic recovery that bypasses significant segments of the American people. Unemployment among minorities is more than twice as high as that among whites and unemployment among minority teenagers is tragically high. Women have fewer satisfying job opportunities than men and older Americans often find their access to the job market blocked. Farm incomes have dropped precipitously We must also address other problems if we are to assure full restoration of prosperity. Inflation is a serious economic concern for all Americans. The inflation rate is too high and must be brought down Moreover a residue of unease and caution about the future still pervades the thinking of some of our people. Businesses are still hesitant in their long-term investment planning and the stock market remains depressed despite the substantial increase in business profits The economic difficulties that we face in the United States also confront most nations around the world. Our mutual problems are the legacy of the trauma suffered by the world economy during the early 1970s The massive escalation of oil prices since continues to impose great burdens on the world economy. Oil imports drain away the purchasing power of oil-importing nations and upset the international balance of payments Many foreign governments have been reluctant to adopt policies needed to stimulate economic growth because they are concerned that inflationary pressures might be renewed or that their balance of international payments might be worsened. Abroad as well as at home concerns about the future have deterred business investment in new plants and equipment. As a consequence economic growth has stagnated in many countries and the rise in the capital stock needed to increase productivity raise standards of living and avoid future inflationary bottlenecks is not occurring The problems we face today are more complex and difficult than those of an earlier era. We can not concentrate just on inflation or just on unemployment or just on deficits in the Federal budget or our international payments. Nor can we act in isolation from other countries. We must deal with all of these problems simultaneously and on a worldwide basis Our problems can not be solved overnight. But we can resolve them if we fix our sights on long-term objectives adopt programs that will help us to realize our goals and remain prepared to make adjustments as basic circumstances change In making my decisions on tax and budget policies for fiscal and in planning more generally for our Nation 's future I have been guided by four objectives for our economy that I believe our Nation should pursue We must continue to move steadily toward a high-employment economy in which the benefits of prosperity are widely shared. Progress in reducing unemployment of our labor and capital resources must be sure and sustainable. Over the next several years I believe we can increase our real output by / to percent per year and reduce unemployment by about one-half of a percentage point each year. An especially high priority is to increase job opportunities for the disadvantaged particularly for black and Spanish-speaking Americans and to deal more effectively with local pockets of unemployment such as those in urban areas We should eliminate unfair advantages through reform of the tax system and restructure our welfare system to assure that the fruits of economic growth are enjoyed by all Americans We should rely principally on the private sector to lead the economic expansion and to create new jobs for a growing labor force. Five out of every six new jobs in the economy are created in the private sector. There are good reasons for continuing to rely mainly on the private sector in the years ahead. By emphasizing the creation of private jobs our resources will be used more efficiently our future capacity to produce will expand more rapidly and the standard of living for our people will rise faster Reliance upon the private sector does not mean neglecting the tasks that government can and must perform. The Federal Government can be an active partner to help achieve progress toward meeting national needs and through competent management still absorb a declining portion of the Nation 's output We must contain and reduce the rate of inflation as we move toward a more fully employed economy. Inflation extracts a heavy toll from all Americans and particularly from the poor and those on fixed incomes Reducing inflation would benefit us all. A more stable price environment would make it easier for business firms and consumers to plan for the future. Thus reduced inflation would substantially enhance our chances to maintain a strong economic expansion and return to a high- employment economy. In the years ahead we must seek to unwind the inflation we have inherited from the past and take the steps necessary to prevent new inflationary pressures as we approach high employment We must act in ways that contribute to the health of the world economy. As the strongest economy in the world the United States has unique responsibilities to improve the international economic climate. The wellbeing of the United States depends on the condition of other nations around the world. Their economic destiny is in turn shaped by ours The United States can retain its stature in the world only by pursuing policies that measure up to its role as a leader in international economic affairs These four economic objectives are sufficiently ambitious to constitute a serious challenge but sufficiently realistic to be within our reach. A well-designed program will permit us to achieve them. The principal elements of my economic strategy are : Adopting promptly an effective national energy program ; Managing Federal budget expenditures carefully and prudently so that we can meet national needs while gradually reducing the share of our national output devoted to Federal spending ; Using tax reductions to ensure steady growth of the private economy and reforming the tax system to make it fairer simpler and more progressive ; Working to reduce the Federal deficit and balance the budget as rapidly as the developing strength of the economy allows ; Improving existing programs and developing new ones to attack the problem of structural unemployment among the disadvantaged ; Promoting greater business capital formation in order to enhance productivity gains increase standards of living and reduce the chances that capacity shortages would inhibit expansion later on ; Adopting more effective programs to reduce the current rate of inflation and prevent a re acceleration of inflation as we approach high employment ; and Pursuing international economic policies that promote economic recovery throughout the world encourage an expansion of world trade and maintain a strong international monetary system Prompt Adoption of the National Energy Plan It has now been over four years since our economy was buffeted by the oil embargo and its aftermath of sharply increased oil prices. The massive oil price increase in contributed to the double-digit inflation of and to the worst recession in years. It is a primary factor today behind the large deficit in our international balance of payments. Yet the United States still has not enacted a comprehensive and effective energy policy Our dependence on imported oil is sapping the strength of the American economy. Last year our imports of oil reached a total of about $ billion compared with $ 8/ billion in The increased expenditures on those imports have been like a sudden and massive tax imposed on the American people. Only part of the revenues have been returned to the United States in the form of higher exports of American goods to oilproducing countries. As a consequence that " tax " has become a major obstacle to economic growth The huge deficit in foreign trade arising from our oil imports has contributed to the fall in the value of the dollar abroad. The dollar 's decline has raised the cost of the goods we import and contributed to inflation Our deficit also has unsettled international monetary markets with adverse consequences for our international trading partners. Our response to the energy crisis is therefore a central element in our international and domestic economic policy. The energy program will not solve our problems at once but it will pave the way for a balanced foreign trade position and a strong and sound dollar Our energy problems will worsen in the years to come unless we curb our appetite for oil and gas. Without decisive action we will put additional pressure on the world oil market aggravate inflationary pressures at home and increase our vulnerability to the threat of oil supply disruptions. Together these forces could severely limit the potential for continued economic progress over the coming decade The United States has no choice but to adjust to the new era of expensive energy. We can only choose when and how. If we act today we have time to make a gradual transition to more efficient energy use by conserving energy increasing domestic energy production and developing alternative sources of energy. If we delay adjustment later will be harsh and painful requiring draconian measures to accomplish what can now be done gradually and with far less anguish The energy problem we face is enormously complex. Finding an acceptable and effective solution has not been easy for me or for the Congress. I look forward to working closely with the Congress early this year to assure a speedy resolution. An acceptable bill must satisfy the following principles : First the program must effectively reduce our consumption of limited energy supplies oil and gas while encouraging energy production and promoting a transition to the use of resources that are more abundant Second the program must be fair. No segment of the population should bear a disproportionate share of the cost or burden of adjustment and no industry should reap unnecessary and undeserved windfall gains Third the program must be consistent with our overall economic strategy. It must neither undermine our efforts to continue the recovery nor obstruct achievement of our long-term budgetary goals Dealing with the energy problem is a difficult test for our Nation. It is a test of our economic and political maturity. Our people would surely react if there were an immediate crisis. But I am asking them to undertake sacrifices to prevent a crisis. If we fail to act today we will bring a crisis upon ourselves and our children in years to come Careful Management of Federal Budget Expenditures My Administration has given high priority to making more effective use of limited Federal resources. In fiscal Federal outlays amounted to 22/ percent of the Nation 's gross national product. This is considerably higher than the share devoted to government spending that prevailed for many years. To some degree the recent higher share reflects the fact that the economy is still performing below its capacity and that Federal programs to support the unemployed and the needy are larger than they would be in a high-employment economy. But it also stems from very rapid growth in a number of Federal programs instituted over the past to years Most of our Federal expenditure programs are designed to achieve important national goals that the private sector of the economy can not accomplish. Only the government can provide for the national defense and government resources are essential to cushion the hardships created by economic recession to preserve our national resources to protect the environment and to meet other critical needs The Federal Government has a particular obligation to provide assistance to those who remain in need even during good times. Last year I presented to the Congress a program to reform the welfare system the Better Jobs and Income Act of that is a concrete example of our commitment to devote resources to the most pressing national needs. My program will cost money. But it also will establish a more easily understood welfare system that is less costly to administer less subject to abuse and more responsive to the true needs of those who receive a helping hand from government. This program will create up to million jobs for those able to work and it will replace the patchwork of Federal State and local programs with a consistent income-support system that will relieve much of the enormous burden now placed on State and local governments In the management of a business enterprise efficiency is enforced by the discipline of the market place. The collective judgments of millions of consumers establish an environment in which waste and efficiency are eventually penalized. The government however is not subject to that discipline. We in government must therefore impose stringent controls on ourselves to ensure greater efficiency and to make better choices among the possible uses of the taxpayers ' money To assist us in this endeavor I have adopted methods of budgetary control that have been tested in the business community. Early last year I asked the Office of Management and Budget to inaugurate a system of zero-based budgeting throughout the Federal Government. Within this budgetary system every Federal program is given careful scrutiny no matter how large or how small it may be no matter how long it has been in existence or how recently established. This new system of budgetary planning helped to hold down less essential outlays in the budget for fiscal and focus our resources on our important national needs. It will produce even greater savings in subsequent years. A process of multiyear budgeting also has been inaugurated within the Federal Government that will require tentative budget plans to be developed and reviewed for three years ahead. With this system we can more effectively control future expenditures by avoiding commitments now to endeavors that would grow in the future beyond the proportions we desire In formulating my recommendations for the budget I have exercised very strict controls over spending. Adjusted for inflation the increase in outlays has been held to less than percent and the share of Federal expenditures in GNP will fall to percent. I intend to continue prudent expenditure controls in the future. With good management we can I believe achieve our Nation 's important social goals and still reduce over time the share of gross national product committed to Federal expenditures to about percent Using Tax Reductions to Promote Steady Economic Expansion I propose to rely principally upon growth in the private sector of the economy to reduce unemployment and raise incomes. Special Federal efforts will of course be necessary to deal with such problems as structural unemployment but tax reductions will be the primary means by which Federal budget policy will promote growth. Careful mange- ment of budget outlays and a growing economy should permit substantial reductions in the years ahead. Tax reductions will be needed to strengthen consumer purchasing power and expand consumer markets. Stable growth in markets together with added tax incentives for business will lead to rising business investment and growing productivity As inflation and real economic growth raise the incomes of most Americans they are pushed into higher income tax brackets. The tax burden on individuals is raised just as if higher rates had been enacted The payroll taxes levied on workers and business firms for social security and unemployment insurance will also increase substantially over the years ahead. These are very large increases but they are needed to keep our social security and unemployment insurance systems soundly financed Between and taxes on businesses and individuals will rise very sharply as a result of these several factors. Even though our economy is basically healthy this increasingly heavy tax burden would exert a mounting drag on economic growth. It must therefore be counteracted by tax reductions. The magnitude and timing of the reductions should be designed to maintain economic growth at a steady pace taking into account the effects both of the growing tax burden and of other factors at work in the economy Consistent with this strategy I am proposing a $ billion program of net tax reductions accompanied by substantial tax reforms Individual income taxes will be reduced primarily through across-theboard reductions in personal tax rates with special emphasis on low- and middle-income taxpayers. Personal taxes also will be simplified by my proposal to replace the existing personal exemption and credit with a tax credit of $ for each person in the taxpayer 's family There also will be important reforms that will improve the individual income tax system and raise substantial revenues enabling me to recommend larger personal tax reductions Overall I am proposing personal tax reductions of $ billion offset by $ billion in tax reforms. These tax cuts which will take effect next October will significantly improve the progressivity of the tax system The typical four-person family with $ in income will receive a tax cut of $ or more than percent. As a result of the changes I am recommending filling out tax returns will be simpler for many people Individuals also will benefit from reductions I have proposed in the Federal excise tax on telephone bills and in the Federal payroll tax for unemployment insurance. These two proposals will add about $ billion to consumers ' purchasing power that will be realized principally through lower prices Business taxes will be reduced by more than $ billion in under my tax program offset partially by more than $ billion in business tax reforms for a net tax reduction of nearly $ billion. I have recommended that the overall corporate tax rate be reduced on October from the current percent to percent and be cut further to percent in I also recommend that the existing 10-percent investment tax credit be made permanent and that the benefits of this credit be extended to investments in industrial and utility structures. My proposal will enable businesses to use the investment tax credit to offset up to percent of their Federal tax liability compared with the 50-percent limit now imposed Important new tax reforms also will affect businesses. I am for example proposing to reduce the deductibility of a large class of business entertainment expenses. I have also proposed changes in the tax status of international business transactions that are of significant cost to taxpayers but that benefit the public insufficiently Because tax reform measures will raise $ billion in revenue it has been possible for me to recommend $ billion in overall tax reductions while keeping the net loss in revenues to $ billion the level I believe is appropriate given the state of our economy and the size of the budget deficit These proposals do not include any adjustment to take account of congressional action on my energy proposals. I proposed last April that the Congress pass a wellhead tax and rebate the proceeds of that tax directly to the American people. This is the best course to follow because it protects the real incomes of consumers and avoids a new source of fiscal drag. If the final energy bill includes a full rebate of the net proceeds of the wellhead tax no further action on my part will be necessary. However if the final bill allows for a rebate only for as provided in the House version I will send a supplemental message to the Congress recommending that the individual tax reduction I am now proposing be increased by the amount of the net proceeds of the wellhead tax These tax reductions are essential to healthy economic recovery during and Prospects for continuation of that recovery in the near term are favorable. Consumers have been spending freely and many other economic indicators recently have been moving up strongly. Without the tax reductions I have proposed however the longer-term prospects for economic growth would become increasingly poor. Because of the fiscal drag imposed by rising payroll taxes and inflation economic growth would slow substantially in late and fall to about ? >l/2 percent in The unemployment rate would stop declining and might begin to rise again and the growth of investment outlays for new plant and equipment would slow significantly With the reductions in taxes I have proposed on the other hand the economy should grow by / to percent in both and Nearly one million new jobs would be created. Unemployment would .therefore continue to fall and by late should be down to around / to percent. Capacity utilization and after-tax business profits would both improve and thus the rate of investment in new plants and equipment should increase significantly Success in keeping a firm rein on spending will permit further tax reductions in years to come. Our ability to foresee the future course of the economy is not good enough however to enable us to know when additional reductions will be needed or how large they should be. It would therefore be imprudent to plan specific policy measures now for more than the current and the next fiscal year. But I will make recommendations for budget and tax policies for and beyond that are in keeping with our objectives of steady growth in the economy more stable prices and principal reliance on the private sector to achieve economic expansion Working to Reduce the Federal Deficit and Balance the Budget as Soon as the Strength of the Economy Allows Federal budgetary policy can play a constructive role in maintaining the health of the economy. There are times when large deficits in the Federal budget must be tolerated because they are needed to bolster the purchasing power of consumers and businesses. A budget deficit that persisted during a period of high employment and strong further growth of private demand however would put upward pressures on prices and would aggravate our inflationary problem. Under those circumstances a budget deficit would also absorb savings that would be better used by the private sector to build new factories and offices and to purchase new machines. In order to assure that our economic progress remains on a solid footing and is not undermined by inflation we must reduce the Federal budget deficit and achieve a balanced budget as soon as the developing strength in the economy allows The first requisite is careful management and control of Federal spending. The second is a prudent weighing of the need for tax reductions against the goal of budget balance This year I have proposed budgets that call for a deficit of $ billion in and one only slightly smaller in Had I decided not to recommend a tax cut to put additional purchasing power in the hands of consumers and businesses the deficit in could have been $ to $ billion smaller. But I believe that tax reduction is essential to continued progress in an economy still characterized by substantial unemployment and idle plant capacity How rapidly we can restore budget balance depends on the strength of the private economy. Over the next few years two factors will be of particular importance The first is the financial condition of State and local governments. In the past the aggregate budget of these governments tended to be approximately in balance. Today the State and local sector as a whole is in surplus. In for example aggregate State and local receipts from all sources exceeded expenditures by nearly $ billion. This overall surplus does not mean that every State and local government is in good financial condition. Many are hard pressed. Moreover a large part of the aggregate surplus represents accumulations of pension funds for the million employees of State and local governments Substantial surpluses in the State and local sector are likely to continue in the future. They absorb the incomes of consumers and business and so act as a drag on the economy The second factor affecting the pace at which we can expect to move toward budget balance is the large deficit in America 's foreign trade in goods and services. Imports into the United States have been swollen by the enormous quantity of oil we buy abroad to drive our cars heat our homes and fuel our industry. Our exports have grown only slowly in large measure because economic growth abroad has been much slower than in the United States. As a result the United States last year recorded a deficit of close to $ billion in our current international accounts. This deficit has the same general effect on economic activity as a multibillion dollar increase in taxes Enactment of an effective energy program ultimately will reverse our growing dependence on oil imports. Moreover economic growth in other countries should be improving over the next few years. But we may expect a current account deficit of some size to continue in the near future If strong economic expansion is to be maintained in the face of these major drains on the economy additional tax reductions may be necessary beyond those I have proposed for But we will be better able to judge this question in a year or two and we should not prejudge it now In formulating my budgetary decisions thus far I have been careful to avoid commitments that would make it impossible for us to balance the budget by With unusually strong growth in the private economy we would need a balanced Federal budget. In an economy growing less strongly however balancing the budget by would be possible O only by forgoing tax reductions needed to reach our goal of high employment. In those circumstances the date for reaching the goal of budget balance would have to be deferred What is important is that the planning and execution of Federal fiscal policies proceed in a prudent manner. Every decision on spending and taxes during my Administration has been and will continue to be made in the context of long-run budgetary planning that avoids the creation of excess demand during periods of high employment. That is an essential ingredient of responsible budgetary policy Programs to Attack the Problem of Structural Unemployment Meaningful job opportunities ought to be available for all Americans who wish to work. But overall fiscal and monetary policy alone will not provide employment to many in our Nation. If we are to reduce unemployment satisfactorily we must do more Eleven percent of adult American workers from minority groups are now jobless close to the rate a year ago and over twice as high as the unemployment rate for white adults. About percent of our teenagers are unemployed today ; among black teenagers the unemployment rate is nearly percent. These intolerably high rates of unemployment must be brought down. This is an important goal but achieving it will be a difficult task A generally healthy and growing economy is a prerequisite for dealing effectively with structural unemployment but it is not enough. Even in good times some groups suffer from very high unemployment which adds to the difficulty of achieving low unemployment and low inflation simultaneously. As the economy moves toward high employment employers try to fill job vacancies from those groups of workers with substantial training and experience. Wage rates are bid up and prices follow while large numbers from other groups are still looking unsuccessfully for work. Efforts to reduce unemployment among the unskilled and otherwise disadvantaged can be frustrated by inflationary pressures set off in those sectors of the labor market already fully employed To reach high levels of employment while maintaining reasonable price stability we must take effective and adequate measures now to increase the employment opportunities of the disadvantaged. This principle is a key element of the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act. I support this legislation and hope the Congress will enact it We have already taken several significant steps in this direction. Last year I proposed and the Congress appropriated $ billion to expand the Public Service Employment Program to jobs. These jobs are more sharply targeted on the long-term unemployed and the poor than previous programs under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act. Direct opportunities for youth also have been expanded. The Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of which is providing job experience and training in skills to unemployed youths also was proposed by my Administration and enacted in providing work and training positions for unemployed youths Several further measures are proposed in my budget. I have recommended that Public Service Employment be continued at the job level throughout and that the number of jobs be phased down gradually in subsequent years as progress is made in reducing the overall level of unemployment. I have also recommended an expansion to $ billion of the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act to provide work opportunities and skill training for the unemployed youth who most need help. The Better Jobs and Income Program that I sent to the Congress in mid-1977 will create up to million jobs supplemented by cash allowances for poor people who are able to work. An initial demonstration project for this program that will create jobs is proposed in my budget and more jobs will be phased in gradually once the welfare reform program is enacted Government programs can provide valuable assistance to the unemployed. In the end however we must turn to the private sector for the bulk of permanent job opportunities for the disadvantaged. It is in private industry that most productive jobs with opportunity for advancement are found. For this reason I am requesting $ million in my budget to begin a major new initiative for private sector hiring of the disadvantaged. Details of this proposal will be submitted to the Congress shortly. I am requesting the fullest cooperation of the business community in this initiative and have been assured by business leaders that it will be forthcoming Greater Emphasis on Promoting Business Capital Formation Over a broad expanse of years improvement of the standard of living in this Nation depends primarily on growth in the productivity of the American work force. During the first two decades of the postwar period the productivity of American labor increased at an average annual rate of about percent. Over the past ten years however productivity growth has slowed markedly to about percent or less a year The reasons for this break with past trends are complex but one factor that clearly stands out is the relatively slow growth in the stock of business plant and equipment. Historically improvements in productivity have been linked closely to investment in plant and equipment. In- vestment in new facilities has embodied new and more productive technology and has provided our work force with more and better tools Business investment has lagged during the recovery for several reasons Some of the fears engendered by the steep recession and severe inflation of have remained and have reduced the incentive for businesses to invest. Uncertainties about energy supplies and energy prices have also been a deterrent to investment and so have concerns about governmental regulations in a variety of areas. Finally high costs of capital goods and a depressed stock market have diminished the incentives and raised the costs to businesses of investment in new plant and equipment Industrial capacity is ample now. But without a substantial increase in investment over the next few years problems would build for the future Rapid growth of capacity is needed to assure that shortages of particular products do not emerge before we regain high employment. If capacity is not sufficient bottlenecks may develop in some sectors forcing up prices of industrial commodities. Inadequate rates of capital formation will also hold back the gains in productivity needed to improve standards of living and to avoid further aggravation of our inflation problem My tax and other economic proposals will encourage a greater rate of business investment in several ways. By promoting a sustainable rate of economic recovery they will assure businesses of an expanding market for the output from new factories and equipment. The specific tax reductions for business I have proposed will increase after-tax profits and so directly provide additional incentives for investment We must also have conditions in financial markets that permit businesses to raise the funds they need for investment. Prudent Federal budgetary policies will contribute significantly to that end as will policies that deal effectively with inflation. Both will ease the Federal Reserve 's task of pursuing monetary policies that support full recovery More Effective Programs to Reduce the Rate of Inflation We can not achieve full prosperity unless we deal effectively with inflation. We must take steps to reduce the high rate of inflation inherited from the past and to guard against a renewed outbreak of inflation as we regain a high-employment economy Our economy is not suffering at present from excess demand. Monetary growth in recent years has not been excessive and Federal budget deficits have occurred in an economy with high unemployment and excess capacity. Yet prices continue to rise as a result of an inflationary process that has been under way for a decade Our present inflation began back in the late 1960s and accelerated sharply in the early years of the 1970s. Since the rate of consumer price inflation has declined substantially from percent to between and 6/ percent at present. But that improvement is due largely to the termination of special influences affecting prices during the sharp rise of food and fuel prices and the bulge in prices following the removal of wage and price controls Recent experience has demonstrated that the inflation we have inherited from the past can not be cured by policies that slow growth and keep unemployment high. Since inflation has persisted stubbornly at a to 6l/2 percent rate even though unemployment went as high as percent and still stands above percent and even though a substantial proportion of our industrial capacity has been idle. The human tragedy and waste of resources associated with policies of slow growth are intolerable and the impact of such policies on the current inflation is very small. Moreover by discouraging investment in new capacity slow growth sows the seeds of future inflationary problems when the economy does return to high employment. Economic stagnation is not the answer to inflation Our first task in combating inflation is to guard against a renewed outbreak of higher price increases in the future. Firm discipline over the Federal budget and a prudent monetary policy are the most important steps that can be taken. Programs to attack structural pockets of unemployment among our people will make it possible to achieve higher levels of employment without exerting pressures on prices. Greater investment also will make a major contribution toward assuring that the capacity of our industry will be adequate to meet the needs of a highemployment economy Enactment of an energy program will eventually reduce the demand for oil imports contributing to market conditions that discourage substantial oil price increases and combating the inflation that results from a decline in the exchange value of the dollar. The programs I have inaugurated to build a to 5-million metric ton grain reserve will provide a. buffer against sudden upward movements in food prices in the event of bad weather Our second task reducing the current rate of inflation will be harder. Yet we must tackle the problem. Unless the inflation rate is brought down the rate of price increase may well rise as unemployment falls to lower levels in later years with consequences that would thwart our efforts to bring about full recovery The government has an obligation to set an example for the private sector and we can play an important role in moderating inflation by reducing the effects of our own actions on prices. By adopting tax incentives and other policies to improve the growth of investment and productivity we will help reduce the rise in costs and hence in prices The excise tax reductions I have proposed in my budget also will contribute moderately to lower costs and prices Government regulations also add to costs and raise prices. To some extent this is the inevitable cost of much needed improvements in the environment and in the health and safety of workers and consumers. But there is no question that the scope of regulation has become excessive and that too little attention is given to its economic costs. We should not and will not give up our efforts to achieve cleaner air and water and a safer workplace. But wherever possible the extent of regulation should be reduced. We have eliminated hundreds of unneeded regulations already and will continue to pare down the remainder I also intend to put a high priority on minimizing the adverse effects of governmental regulations on the economy. To this end I have established a high-level interagency committee that together with the relevant regulatory agency will review the economic effects of major regulations. This committee will seek to assure that the costs of each regulation have been fully considered and that all alternatives have been explored so that we may find and apply the least costly means of achieving our regulatory objectives. I have also directed my advisers to explore ways in which we can undertake an assessment of the impact of regulation on the economy as a whole and within each major sector. We need to find a way to set priorities among regulatory objectives and understand more fully the combined effects of our regulatory actions on the private economy Where regulation of economic activity has become outmoded and substantial overhaul is called for I will pursue effective legislation. For example I have supported actively congressional efforts to reform regulation of the airline industry and I am considering proposals to reform the regulation of other industries I have given special attention to reducing the runaway cost of health care. The cost of a day in the hospital has more than doubled since Continuing escalation in the charges for hospital care can no longer be tolerated. I have submitted legislation the Hospital Cost Containment Act of that would limit sharply the rate of growth in hospital spending and I urge the Congress to enact this legislation in The States can also play a role in moderating the current inflation. In State governments collected $ billion in sales taxes. For the most part these taxes enter directly into the cost of goods we buy and thus increase the price level. Today State governments with significant sur- pluses are considering tax reductions. I urge those in a position to do so to consider the advantages to the national economy of reducing sales taxes thereby helping to slow inflation Government alone can not unwind the current inflation however Today 's inflationary process is largely the consequence of self-fulfilling expectations. Businessmen expecting inflation to continue are less resistant to cost increases than they might be since they have come to believe that with all prices rising their own increased costs can be passed on to consumers through higher prices. Wage increases are based on the expectation that prices will continue to rise. Wage gains in one sector spur similar demands in others There are gainers and losers in this process since some groups in the economy are more successful than others at defending themselves against inflation. On the whole however the main result is continued inflation No one group neither business nor labor nor government can stop this spiral on its own. What is needed is a joint efTort Since the current inflation has developed strong momentum it can not be brought to a sudden halt. But we can achieve a gradual but sustained deceleration having each succeeding year 's inflation lower than the previous one. The benefits of slower growth of prices and wages would be broadly shared. Everyone would be better off. A conscious efTort should be made by those who make wage and price decisions to take the individual actions necessary to bring about an economy-wide deceleration of inflation I am therefore asking the business community and American workers to participate in a voluntary program to decelerate the rate of price and wage increase. This program is based on the initial presumption that prices and wages in each industry should rise significantly less in than they did on average during the past two years I recognize that not all wages and prices can be expected to decelerate at the same pace. For example where profit margins have been particularly squeezed or where wages are lagging seriously deceleration in would be less than for other firms or groups of workers. In exceptional cases deceleration may not be possible at all. Conversely firms or groups that have done exceptionally well in the recent past may be expected to do more To enhance the prospects for success of this deceleration program I have asked that major firms and unions respond to requests from members of my Administration to discuss with them on an informal basis steps that can be taken during the coming year to achieve deceleration in their industries. In reviewing the economic situation prior to making my recommendations to the Congress on the size of the pay raise for Federal workers due to take effect next October I will keep this objective of deceleration in mind This program does not establish a uniform set of numerical standards against which each price or wage action is to be measured. The past inflation has introduced too many distortions into the economy to make that possible or desirable. But it does establish a standard of behavior for each industry for the coming year : every effort should be made to reduce the rate of wage and price increase in to below the average rate of the past two years I have chosen this approach after reviewing extensively all of the available options. There is no guarantee that establishing a voluntary deceleration standard will unwind the current inflation. I believe however that with the cooperation of business and labor this proposal will work Deceleration is a feasible standard of behavior for it seeks restraint in wage and price actions in exchange for a general reduction in inflation It is also a fair standard. Industries and workers with far different histories and current situations will not be asked to fit within the constraint of a single numerical guideline The inflation problem will not be easy to overcome. It will take time and patience. But the importance of these efforts can not be overestimated Unless we gain better control over the inflation rate the prospects for regaining a fully employed economy will be seriously reduced. My Administration can not and will not pursue policies in the future that threaten to trigger a new and more virulent round of inflation in this country. To do so would be the surest way of destroying the hopes of our citizens for a long-lasting prosperity International Economic Policies that Promote Economic Recovery Throughout the World Outside the United States the world economy has seen a hesitant recovery from the deep recession of The rapid pace of economic growth that was widespread over most of the postwar years has all but disappeared. Unemployment is high and in most industrial countries except the United States it is rising. Inflation is at high levels and declining only very slowly The imbalances in the international economic system continue to strain the world economy. Because of the surpluses of oil-exporting countries many countries have sizable deficits including the United States Some industrial nations are also running large and persistent surpluses thus increasing the pressures on countries in deficit. These imbalances have been a major factor contributing to disorder in exchange markets in recent months The condition of the world economy requires above all that nations work together to develop mutually beneficial solutions to global problems. If we fail to work together we will lose the gains in living standards arising from the expansion of world commerce over the past three decades. If the world economy becomes a collection of isolated and weak nations we will all lose The first priority in our international economic policy is continued economic recovery throughout the industrial world. Growth of the U.S. economy the largest and strongest in the world is of vital importance. The economic program that I have proposed will ensure that America remains a leader and a source of strength in the world economy. It is important that other strong nations join with us to take direct actions to spur demand within their own economies. World recovery can not proceed if nations rely upon exports as the principal source of economic expansion At the same time all countries must continue the battle against inflation. This will require prudent fiscal and monetary policies. Such policies must be supplemented by steps to reduce structural unemployment measures to avoid bottlenecks by encouraging investment and cooperation in the accumulation of commodity reserves to insulate the world from unforeseen shocks Reducing the widespread imbalances in international payments will require several parallel steps. To begin with each individual country must ensure that its own policies help relieve the strains. The United States will do its part. In we had a current account deficit of about $ billion While not a cause for alarm this is a matter of concern. We can take a most constructive step toward correcting this deficit by moving quickly to enact the National Energy Plan Countries in surplus should also do their part. Balance of payments surpluses in some countries have contributed to the economic stagnation among their trading partners. Where their own economies have slack it is appropriate for nations in surplus to stimulate the growth of domestic demand thereby increasing their imports and improving the prospects for growth in deficit countries. In some countries lifting restraints on imports from abroad and reducing excessive government efforts to promote exports would be useful. After consultations with the United States the Japanese have indicated they will take a series of steps toward reducing their large surplus The system of flexible exchange rates for currencies also can be helpful in correcting unsustainable imbalances in payments among countries Since its inception in this system has operated well under unprecedented strains During the U.S. dollar has fallen in value against several key currencies. The decline in the dollar 's value has occurred primarily against the currencies of those nations that.have large trade and payments surpluses and was not surprising in view of our large payments deficit and their surpluses. Late in however movements in our exchange rate became both disorderly and excessively rapid. The United States reaffirmed its intention to step in when conditions in exchange markets become disorderly and to work in close cooperation with our friends abroad in this effort Under the flexible exchange rate system basic economic forces must continue to be the fundamental determinant of the value of currencies However we will not permit speculative activities in currency markets to disrupt our economy or those of our trading partners. We recognize fully our obligation in this regard and we have taken steps to fulfill it Although substantial progress can be made toward a balanced world economy some imbalances will persist for a substantial period of time Financing requirements will remain large while adustments occur. The private markets can and will continue to channel the bulk of the financing from surplus to deficit countries. But it is essential that adequate official financing also be available in case of need to encourage countries with severe payments problems to adopt orderly and responsible corrective measures. To meet this critical need the United States has strongly supported a proposal to strengthen the International Monetary Fund by the establishment of a new Supplementary Financing Facility The United States also will continue to contribute resources to promote growth in the economies of the developing nations. International assistance efforts through bilateral aid and multilateral institutions must continue to expand. We must also keep our doors open to imports from developing countries so that their economies can grow and prosper through expanded trade A keystone of our international economic policy is to work with our trading partners to protect a free and open trading system. The American economy benefits by exporting those products that we make efficiently and by importing those that we produce least efficiently. An open trading system increases our real incomes strengthens competition in our markets and contributes to combating inflation The United States will firmly resist the demands for protection that inevitably develop when the world economy suffers from high unemployment. The ensuing decline in world trade would worsen our problem of inflation create inefficiencies in American enterprise and lead to fewer jobs for American workers. But international competition must be fair We have already taken and we will when necessary continue to take steps to ensure that our businesses and workers do not suffer from unfair trade practices I place great importance on the Multilateral Trade Negotiations now under way in Geneva. I believe our negotiators will bring home agreements that are fair and balanced and that will benefit our economy immensely over the years to come. The importance of these discussions can hardly be overemphasized. The trading system that emerges from the negotiations will set the tone for international commerce well into the 1980s. Our commitment to a successful conclusion to these talks underscores our long-term emphasis on the retention and expansion of open and fair trade among nations The Challenge Before Us In this message I have outlined my fundamental economic goals and the strategy for attaining them. It is an ambitious but I believe a realistic agenda for the future. It calls for a broad range of actions to improve the health and fairness of the American economy. And it calls upon the American people to participate actively in many of these efforts I ask the Congress and the American people to join with me in a sustained effort to achieve a lasting prosperity. We all share the same fundamental goals. We can work together to reach them January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of Cordially ( < ? ^ &ea * <ut. ^ \ CHARLES L. SCHULTZE Chairman f LYLE E. GRAMLEY USU4 * * * WILLIAM NORDHAUS CONTENTS CHAPTER PROGRESS DURING THE THIRD YEAR OF RECOVERY age Developments During the Year The Roles of the Major Sectors of Demand Personal Consumption Housing Inventories Net Exports Business Fixed Investment Government Spending Employment and Unemployment Prices and Wages in Wages Productivity and Unit Labor Costs Food Prices in Other Price Developments The Federal Budget and Fiscal Policy The President 's Stimulus Package The Stimulus Program Actually Enacted Federal Expenditures in Federal Receipts and the Deficit in The High-Employment Budget Monetary Policy Interest Rates and Security Yields Savings Flows Credit Availability and Uses of F u n d s The State of the Economy at Year-End Special Issues Money Growth and Velocity Federal Spending Shortfalls Business Fixed Investment CHAPTER ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND POLICY Economic Policy in the Near Term The Need for Tax Reduction The Administration 's Tax Proposals Monetary Policy O p : CHAPTER ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND POLICY Continued The Outlook for Business Fixed Investment Government Demand Personal Consumption Housing Inventories Net Exports Labor Force and Employment Inflation Income and Saving Flows The Outlook for Policy Requirements for the Longer Term Achieving the U.S. Economy 's Potential Long-Run Budgetary Strategy The Budget and the Economy Over the Longer Run The Role of Money and Credit in Reaching High Employment Economic Goals Beyond CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY A HESITANT RECOVERY Origins of the Current World Economic Disorders Inflation Current Account Imbalances Recession The World Economy in Aggregate Real Growth Inflation in Current Account Positions in Foreign Exchange Markets Unfinished Business To Restore Health to the International Economy To Deal With External Imbalances To Achieve Greater Stability cf Commodity Prices To Maintain the Growth of World Trade CHAPTER INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT A Review of the Past Years Episode I : Excess Demand in the Late 1960s Episode II : The Acceleration of Inflation in The Current Situation The Momentum of Inflation Other Factors Affecting the Current Inflation page Ill Ill INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT Continued Growth and Inflation Using the Tax System to Reduce the Momentum of Inflation A Deceleration Strategy Capacity Utilization Past Trends in the Utilization of Capital Capacity Utilization Through The Labor Market The Structure of Unemployment Unemployment and Inflation Policies to Reduce Structural Unemployment CHAPTER CHAPTER MAJOR ECONOMIC POLICY ISSUES OF Energy Developments and Policy Energy Before The Price Shock Developments After the Price Shock The National Energy Plan Other Energy Policies Food and Agricultural Policy The Policy Problem Incomes in Agriculture Instability of Prices and Incomes Price and Income Measures Policy Developments in Regulatory Reform Economic Regulation Social Regulation Tax Reduction and Reform Major Individual Income Tax Changes Major Business Tax Changes Tax Treatment of Municipal Bonds Distributional Aspects of Income and Social Security Tax Changes Income Maintenance The Federal Welfare System Problems With the Present Welfare System Changes in the Food Stamp Program The Program for Better Jobs and Income The Social Security System page APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Growth of Real GNP and Final Sales in Changes in Retail Food Prices Budgetary Impact of the Economic Stimulus Program National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years : Actual and High-Employment Federal Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Mortgage and Consumer Debt Outstanding as Percent of Disposable Personal Income Comparison of Projected and Actual Federal Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Fiscal Years Determinants of Business Fixed Investment Key Economic Measures Potential Gross National Product and Benchmark Unemployment Rate Projected Effects on Federal Receipts of Selected Tax Changes National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Projected High-Employment Federal Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Net Saving by Sector National Income and Product Accounts Selected Calendar Years World Current Account Patterns Real GNP Growth in Major Industrial Countries National Forecasts and Realized Real GNP Growth for Inflation in Major Industrial Countries OECD Current Account Estimates for Changes in Consumer Prices All Items and Selected Components Wage and Price Changes and Unemployment Rates Over the Business Cycle .T Annual Rate of Change in Selected Components of the Consumer Price Index and Employment Costs Capacity Utilization in Manufacturing and Materials Industries Selected Periods Unemployment Rates by Race Sex and Age Selected Periods iT Unemployment Rates by Reasons for Unemployment Unemployment Rates of Black and White Men by Age Alternative Unemployment Rates Selected Years Page List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Estimated Federal Outlays and Participation in Training and Employment Programs During Fiscal Year Federal Minimum Wage and Average Hourly Earnings in Manufacturing Selected Years Trends in Energy Consumption and Deflated Energy Prices. Growth of GNP Energy Consumption and Oil Imports in Major Industrial Countries Real Income and Returns to Agriculture Real Income Per Farm and Per Capita Disposable Personal Income of Farm Population as Percent of Nonfarm Trends and Variability in Real National Income Components Income Tax Liability for One-Earner Four-Person Families. Estimated Tax Changes Resulting From Tax Reform Proposals and Social Security Amendments Government Income Maintenance Programs Families Below the Poverty Level Before and After the Effects of Income Maintenance Programs and Taxes Fiscal Year Compaiiscn of Public Assistance Benefit Levels With Alternative Income Standards Family of Four Social Security Benefit Payments and Beneficiaries Tax Rates for Social Security Trust Funds Old and New Laws Calendar Years Social Security Contribution and Benefit Base Old and New Laws Calendar Years Charts Velocity and Interest Rates Over the Business Cycle Investment and Capacity Utilization Over the Business Cycle. Actual and Potential Gross National Product High-Employment Federal Surplus as Percent of HighEmployment GNP Rates of Interest or Return and the Rate of Inflation Consumer Prices and Hourly Earnings in Major Industrial Countries : Unemployment Rates in Major Industrial Countries Relative Wholesale Prices Unadjusted and Adjusted for Exchange Rates Price and Wage Trends Productivity in the Private Nonfarm Business Economy Relationship Between Capital and Labor Utilization New Crude Oil Prices and Drilling Activity page List of Tables and Charts Continued Charts Oil Consumption and Imports Relative to Real GNP Cross-Country Comparison of Motor Gasoline Demand in World Wheat and Coarse Grains : Export Prices and Ratio of Stocks to Consumption Page CHAPTER Progress During The Third Year of Recovery S THE NEW ADMINISTRATION took office at the beginning of L the economy was turning up strongly from a period of very slow real growth during the latter part of With the unemployment rate hovering near percent and with inflation still a serious problem however the Nation was far from the goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power " established in the Employment Act of Progress toward these goals was essential to the achievement of rising living standards and greater equality of income and of opportunity. Strong and steady growth in the U.S. economy was also needed to help sustain the pace of economic expansion among the nations of the Western world. An economic stimulus program was therefore designed by the new Administration to keep the economy on a path of recovery at a pace sufficient to reduce the unemployment of labor and capital resources significantly In the course of the year continuing progress was made in closing the substantial gap between actual and potential real output that existed at the beginning of Real gross national product ( GNP ) expanded in each quarter at a pace above its long-term potential growth and the gain in as a whole amounted to percent. By the fourth quarter real GNP was percent higher than it had been a year earlier This increase in real output made possible a 4.1-million increase in employment between the end of and the end of A temporary slackening in the rate of expansion around midyear limited the midyear reduction in unemployment but unemployment fell significantly early in the year and again in the later months. The unemployment rate fell to percent for as a whole and reached percent at year-end The expansion in total output was large enough to permit a substantial improvement in living standards. Real per capita disposable income rose by percent during the year. At the same time the increase in industrial production of percent lifted capacity utilization in manufacturing from percent at the end of to percent at the end of This increase played an important role in the 9.5-percent advance of corporate profits for the year as a whole A DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR The pace of economic expansion was exceptionally strong during the early part of As the year opened businesses were increasing their production schedules in an effort to rebuild stocks depleted by the unexpectedly sharp rise of consumer spending in the latter months of The rate of nonfarm inventory investment rose from near zero in the fourth quarter of to percent of real GNP by the second quarter of accounting for almost percent of the expansion in real output during the first half of the year. The rise in consumer spending that began in late continued in the opening months of With final sales and inventory accumulation both moving up briskly real GNP in the first quarter increased at an annual rate of l/i percent ( Table ) The pace of advance in economic activity early in the year was so rapid that an abnormally cold winter had only a mild transitory effect on overall economic performance. January temperatures were as much as percent below normal in some parts of the country causing shortages of natural gas and numerous plant shutdowns. Plant closings typically lasted only one to a few days however and most of the loss in output was made up before the end of the first quarter Construction activity was significantly depressed by the winter weather but rebounded in the second quarter. Government spending also rose sharply. The strength of these two sectors offset a developing weakness in consumer spending and growth of real GNP in the second quarter remained at a relatively rapid 6-percent annual rate During these quarters of large gains in real output substantial progress was made in reducing unemployment. From December to April total civilian employment rose by almost l/z million and the unemployment rate fell by percentage point. Job gains were widespread among manufacturing TABLE Growth of real GNP and final sales in [ Percent change seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Component II _ Change in inventory accumulation ( billions of dollars ) IV to IV i Preliminary GNP other than inventory accumulation GNP other than inventory accumulation and net exports * Personal consumption expenditures business fixed investment and residential construction Note. Percent changes based on data in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Year * GNP. Final sales : Total Domestic3 Private domestic4 IV i III construction retail trade services and other industries. The length of the workweek in manufacturing also increased The rapid pace of expansion in the first half could not have been expected to continue since it was based in part on a rebuilding of stocks and a restoration of inventory investment to a more normal relationship with GNP The slowdown in the rate of expansion during the middle of the year was more widespread and prolonged however than could be accounted for solely by patterns of inventory accumulation The rise of consumer spending slowed abruptly in the second quarter when the personal saving rate rose substantially. During the first years of the recovery consumers ' purchases of goods and services had risen much faster than their after-tax incomes so that by early the fraction of disposable income devoted to saving had fallen to the lowest level in years. Restoration of a more normal allocation of consumer incomes between consumption and saving was inevitable and the major part of the adjustment took place in the second quarter As retail sales faltered manufacturers adjusted their production schedules promptly to avoid an undesired buildup of inventories as they had in when consumer spending also slowed temporarily. As a consequence demands for labor moderated and the unemployment rate stopped declining. Total hours worked in nonfarm establishments which had been rising strongly in the first months of the year topped out and remained essentially unchanged from May through September ; the rise of industrial output during this period slowed to about half the pace recorded in the first months of the year The caution exhibited by businesses in their inventory policies was even more evident in their willingness to make longer-term investment commitments. Plans for business capital outlays normally gain increasing strength as rates of capacity utilization and profits rise during the course of an economic recovery. For a time in late and early it appeared that the usual cyclical processes were occurring : the real value of contracts and orders for plant and equipment was improving vigorously. Around the middle of the year however the rise of this indicator of business fixed investment slowed and production of business equipment though continuing to advance increased at a more moderate pace than earlier in the year The hesitancy of business capital spending ( which is examined later in this chapter ) was singularly disappointing. These outlays in real terms have yet to recover their peak levels reached in late and early Industrial capacity has therefore been expanding at a very sluggish pace and at a time when the labor force is increasing rapidly. Over the long run continuing growth of real output and a stronger rise of productivity will depend heavily on restoring a more vigorous rate of expansion in business outlays for new plant and equipment Developments in the foreign sector also restrained the rate of economic expansion. Imports of oil rose substantially early in the year partly as a consequence of the effects of the cold winter on fuel consumption ; and other imports increased more than would have been anticipated on the basis of historical relationships between growth of real output and these imports U.S. exports meanwhile increased scarcely at all in real terms because of the very slow rate of economic expansion among most of our major trading partners The midyear slowdown of economic expansion would have been more serious had it not been for the effects of the Administration 's stimulus programs. These programs began to increase government spending and disposable personal incomes by midyear and their stimulative effects continued to build over the remainder of Fiscal policy was thus instrumental in the quickening tempo of activity late in Signs of an emergence from the pause of first became evident late in the fall when new retail sales figures indicated that consumers had begun to increase their purchases of goods in the third quarter. A combination of factors led to a further strengthening of consumer spending during the fourth quarter. Growth in personal income was sustained by rising output and employment in other sectors and was further bolstered by the Federal pay raise in October and by the growing effects of the stimulus programs. With consumer prices increasing at a relatively moderate rate during this period gains in nominal income were translated into greater purchasing power and rising consumer spending. In the fourth quarter consumer outlays for durable and nondurable goods adjusted for inflation rose at an annual rate of over percent This surge of consumer buying coupled as it was with some improvement in the pace of fixed investment was not fully anticipated by businesses whose production schedules were still geared to the slower pace of retail sales that had prevailed earlier. The rate of inventory accumulation therefore declined steeply in the fourth quarter holding down overall GNP growth to an annual rate of percent. It is clear however that activity was strengthening as the year came to a close. Employment in the final months rose rapidly and the unemployment rate fell to percent in December Failure to make any significant progress on the inflation front in was a disappointment. ( A more detailed analysis of this difficult problem is presented in Chapter ) Consumer prices of goods and services other than food and energy a measure of the underlying rate of inflation increased by percent in the months ending in December about the same rate as in An underlying inflation rate of to 6/ percent has persisted since mid1975 and is deeply embedded in the wage-cost-price structure. In the nonfarm business sector compensation per hour- which includes both wages and fringes in the fourth quarter of was about 8/ percent more than a year earlier. This increase in labor cost exceeded productivity gains by about percent and therefore put strong upward pressures on prices. These price increases in turn wiped out most of the rise in workers ' nominal earnings Changes in food and fuel prices during caused substantial variation in the overall rate of price change from the underlying rate of inflation In the first half both food and energy prices were rising rapidly reflecting the cold winter and the increasing prices of imported foods ( particularly coffee tea and cocoa ) Overall consumer prices increased during this period at an annual rate of percent. As food supplies improved the rise of consumer prices slowed materially to an annual rate of around 4/2 percent in the second half of THE ROLES OF THE MAJOR SECTORS OF DEMAND The sources of economic expansion shifted somewhat during During the first years of the current economic recovery household spending for personal consumption and new housing were the principal dynamic elements In turn the increase in final demand stemming from these sources prompted a pronounced swing from decumulation to rebuilding of inventories during the first year of the upturn. As the rise of consumer spending moderated last year growth in business fixed investment and particularly accelerated government spending assumed more important roles in determining the pace of expansion PERSONAL CONSUMPTION The saving rate during rose considerably marking a reversal of the pattern of the preceding years. This reversal and the pronounced midyear weakness of consumer spending were due to a number of causes. Some of them have their roots in the forces that had disturbed the economy generally and the household sector in particular earlier in the 1970s. High inflation rates eroded the real value of household wealth held in savings at depository institutions and in other nominally denominated forms. Employment growth in the early 1970s was also less steady than during most of the 1960s. These two developments may well have prompted somewhat more cautious consumer behavior and caused higher saving rates. The saving rate reached an exceptionally high level in the cyclical peak year which was marked by accelerating inflation and a sharp and largely unanticipated rise in farm income. In the following year of recession households held the real value of consumption of nondurables and services level while the real value of both durable purchases and saving declined in the face of falling real incomes By late the economy was moving up again the pace of inflation had abated somewhat from double-digit rates and household income had been bolstered by tax cuts. As confidence was renewed consumers were apparently attempting to regain previously planned consumption levels and to rebuild their stocks of durable goods. Although spending for durable goods rose somewhat erratically during the overall gain was strong and the saving rate dropped sharply further from its recession level reaching a 25-year low in the first quarter of By then real per capita consumption was almost percent higher than its cyclical peak in the third quarter of Once consumption levels had been brought more closely into balance with individuals ' plans and anticipated earnings it became natural for households to resume a historically more normal balance between current consumption and saving for future needs A number of nonrecurring factors contributed to the final phase of decline in the saving rate in the first quarter of last year : deferred automobile purchases because of the strike at the Ford Motor Company late in unusually large estate and gift tax payments and exceptionally large home heating expenses. The extent of the decline during and in the first quarter of was underestimated however in preliminary data. More complete data becoming available later in the year made it more apparent that the slowing in consumption growth which began in the spring was an inevitable result of the restoration of more customary spending and saving patterns The saving rate rose abruptly in the second quarter and more gradually in the following quarters. Surveys of consumers ' attitudes showed only a small reduction in consumer confidence in this period. The pattern of consumer expenditures last year also implies sustained confidence. Households continued to invest in durable goods and houses committing future income to repayments of consumer and mortgage credit. Automobile sales increased to an 11.7-million unit annual rate in the second quarter just percent short of the rate at the all-time quarterly peak in New private home sales through the middle quarters of the year were virtually unchanged from the very strong annual rate of late and early and sales of existing houses also rose substantially during the year. The strength of home purchases and increases in mortgage credit undoubtedly contributed to increased outlays for household durables The slower rise in the saving rate in the fourth quarter was coupled with resumption of strong growth in disposable income. These forces led to a vigorous increase in consumption HOUSING The pace of single-family homebuilding was at a record level last year although the rate of increase of aggregate residential construction expenditures slowed to percent from percent in Housing starts for the year came to almost million units. Single-family starts totaled a record V/2 million more than in any previous year and the rate was higher at year-end. The demographic determinants of housing demand are increasingly favoring a high rate of single-family home construction as the post-World War II baby boom population is reaching the childbearing age Furthermore the demand for single-family homes which are predominantly owner-occupied appears to reflect the belief that homeownership is valuable as an investment. The rate of increase of new home prices exclusive of changes due to quality or size differences is currently about percent annually or about percentage points greater than the average increase of other prices. Although part of this price pattern is a temporary response of the prices of new construction materials to strong demand land prices have also been rising substantially In California particularly and to a lesser extent elsewhere in the country there was an element of speculation in the housing markets in the early part of the year. An increasing number of homes were being bought by individuals who could not indefinitely carry the mortgages but who anticipated a speculative profit from a near-term resale. In some areas of Southern California the inflation in new home prices reached a 25-percent annual rate. At first lenders ' willingness to grant mortgages in such cases fueled the speculative surge of construction that was evident early in The Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco however took effective steps to dampen the expansion of mortgage credit and lenders were encouraged to require a commitment from home purchasers to occupy the homes they bought. By midyear both price increases for new homes and new housing starts had slowed in the West New starts of multifamily units last year came to up percent from but still well below the peak of million units. The lower level of unsubsidized multiunit building in recent years results in part from the overbuilding that occurred in some regions of the country from to Since multifamily construction has turned up in most of the country as vacancy rates have declined. The Northeast was an exception as outmigration and the prevalence of rent controls have curbed expansion INVENTORIES Inventory accumulation contributed substantially to growth of real GNP in the first quarter of The rate of accumulation in nonfarm inventories in dollars rose from near zero in the last quarter of to about $ billion. Thereafter the rate of nonfarm inventory accumulation rose only moderately further in the second and third quarters and then declined sharply at year-end Businesses continued in to follow the very cautious inventory policies that have typified this expansion. Book values of inventories of nondurable goods rose slightly more rapidly than sales in the second quarter as consumption of nondurable goods slackened. In the summer months new orders and the growth of production slowed sharply preventing substantial undesired accumulation of stocks during a period of sluggish sales. The book value of business stocks therefore rose only two-thirds as much in the third quarter as in the second. Part of this slowdown however was due to a reduced rate of increase in prices particularly for farm products and foods NET EXPORTS The foreign sector has acted as a drag on the speed of expansion in the U.S. economy throughout the past years. In constant dollar terms U.S imports in the GNP accounts rose percent last year while exports rose less than 2/2 percent. The rise in U.S. real income was of course an important factor. Automobile imports rose especially rapidly reflecting near-record total car sales in the United States. The slow pace of recovery in other countries led foreign producers to compete more aggressively in external markets given their weak demand at home. This also contributed to the strength of U.S. imports and to the weakness of U.S. exports. Hesitant investment abroad lowered demand for capital goods particularly affecting U.S. export volume which is heavily dependent on sales of capital goods In nominal terms the deterioration of net exports last year was even more dramatic than it was in real terms because of the very high growth of imported oil whose price has moved up more since the base date than the average price of other imports or exports. The combination of cold winter weather petroleum inventory building during much of the year flat domestic energy output and rising demand generated a 20-percent increase in oil imports. The cost to the United States for imported oil rose about $ billion from to This increase accounted for approximately percent of the deterioration in the nominal net export position which swung $ billion into deficit last year. In addition price increases in late and early raised the cost of commodity imports particularly coffee tea and cocoa BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Business investment in plant and equipment played an important role in the pattern of expansion. It moved up strongly in the first quarter rebounding from the effects of strikes at automotive and equipment firms in the fourth quarter of In the third quarter the pace slackened contributing to the midyear pause but it quickened again in the final quarter of the year. Abstracting from erratic quarter-to-quarter movements business fixed investment rose in real terms by close to percent during the year as a whole about the same as in This component of demand did not begin to recover from the recession until the final quarter of one-half year after the upturn in total output. Although investment continued to grow more rapidly than total output during it had regained by the end of the year only about threefourths of the ground lost during the recession. This is a weaker performance than in the typical postwar cyclical upswing. The shortfall is discussed in a separate section later in this chapter GOVERNMENT SPENDING Spending by both the Federal and State and local governments was a particularly important source of economic expansion in mid-1977 when the contribution of other sectors to continued growth of output was moderating. The real value of Federal Government purchases had been essentially unchanged during and in the fourth quarter of that year was only percent above its level at the cyclical trough quarters earlier. In contrast the real value of Federal purchases rose by percent in ; the most significant increases occurred in the second and third quarters Both the defense and nondefense components of Federal purchases accelerated sharply. The upswing in real defense purchases marked the end of the decline that began in While defense procurement rose strongly however the number of military personnel remained about constant The increase of nondefense Federal purchases at midyear was significantly affected by Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) transactions. Steep declines of farm crop prices led to a large increase from a year earlier in CCC purchases for crops under loan agreements. CCC purchases added about $ 4j/2 billion at an annual rate to the value of Federal purchases by the third quarter ; the pace leveled off in the fourth quarter. These acquisitions represent a transfer from private inventory accumulation to government purchases and do not contribute directly to expanded output. Other Federal nondefense purchases from the private sector however also rose in real terms during State and local government purchases grew at an annual rate of only percent in real terms from the recession trough through the end of ; but these purchases increased by percent during Earlier in the current cyclical upswing. States and localities were recovering from substantial operating account deficits that had accumulated during the previous downturn. Fiscal positions improved as the recovery proceeded reflecting increased revenues generated by rising incomes and adjustments in both tax rates and spending patterns. These lagged adjustments moved budgets into substantial surplus by mid-1976 Beginning in real purchases by State and local governments rose more notably as a result of their stronger fiscal positions. Their fiscal situations were further improved during the year by significant increases in Federal grants as part of the Administration 's stimulus package. This package included an expansion of public service jobs from about in the spring to positions at the end of the year. About percent of these jobs were with State and local government units. At the same time there were indications that State and local capital formation which dropped off sharply in and was reviving. Construction of educational facilities continued to decline as children born in the late stages of the baby boom reached adulthood and left school but housing and redevelopment building and sewer and water supply construction rose vigorously during the second half of last year. Many of these projects were assisted by an increase in Federal grants for local public works EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT Growth in economic activity over the quarters of was sufficient to generate over million new jobs. Employment increased rapidly in the first half of the year as a result of the strong growth in total output ; but as the pace of expansion moderated in the third quarter employment growth slackened. The midyear slowdown wras also evident in total hours of work at nonagricultural establishments in the private goods-producing business sector which declined during the third quarter when manufacturing production and employment flattened out temporarily. Strong expansion of employment resumed again late in the year Gains in employment in the first half of the year lowered the unemployment rate from percent in the last quarter of to percent in the second quarter of Only moderate further progress was made until the fourth quarter when unemployment began declining again reaching a 3-year low of percent in December A major disappointment with respect to our economic performance in was the unemployment situation of black Americans. Total black employment increased by percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of exceeding the 4.4-percent increase in white employment but the black unemployment rate remained unchanged at percent as the labor force grew rapidly. The unemployment rate for black teenagers rose however from percent to percent. Although labor force growth explains the failure of these unemployment rates to fall it does not dispel the problem of high unemployment among minorities. Furthermore the problem for teenagers in particular is unlikely to be corrected merely by expansion of the total economy. Effective structural measures are needed as the recovery continues. This problem is discussed more extensively in Chapter The distribution of employment gains among sectors was in many respects typical for periods of fairly balanced cyclical recovery. During the year employment in manufacturing establishments grew percent an increase of jobs. Contract construction employment grew at a rapid 10.0-percent pace providing an increase of jobs as expansion in that sector remained strong throughout the year. The 3.6-percent rise in employment in the private service-producing industries was slightly slower than the growth in manufacturing but secular growth in this sector provided an increase of million jobs Employment in the government sector grew percent during considerably less rapidly than in the private sector. Federal employment has accounted for a dwindling share of total employment in the past decade and was virtually unchanged during the year. State and local employment on the other hand has been the fastest growing major sector of the economy for the past two decades. From to the average annual rate of growth was percent. This growth rate declined to percent from to when the expansion of State and local expenditures was relatively slow. State and local employment grew by percent or jobs in ; much of the increase was in the second half of the year. Over of the additional jobs on State and local payrolls were financed under the expansion of Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ( CETA ) jobs that was part of the Administration 's stimulus package An unusual aspect of employment growth in the past year was a sudden spurt in the number of self-employed workers. After growing at a fairly steady percent per year from to the number of self-employed workers in the nonagricultural sector increased by percent in accounting for over percent of the net employment growth for the year Improvement in the employment situation is also apparent in indicators other than the overall unemployment rate. As jobs became more available the number of workers who had been unemployed for weeks or more fell from million or percent of the civilian labor force in the final quarter of to or percent of the labor force at the end of The average duration of unemployment fell gradually from to weeks Similarly improvement in labor market conditions resulted in a decline in the fraction of the labor force that were unemployed because they lost their jobs rather than being unemployed because they were entering or reentering the labor force or had left their jobs voluntarily. The unemployment rate attributable to job loss fell from percent at the end of to percent in the fourth quarter of The labor force grew very rapidly during rising by percent or million persons between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of The number of adult men in the labor force increased percent closely in line with the long-term trend. Unemployment for this group fell from percent to percent. Employment developments for adult women were sharply different. As their number in the labor force increased by percent the unemployment rate of adult women fell by only percentage point to percent in the fourth quarter. The teenage labor force grew by percent ; the unemployment rate of teenagers fell during but remained a distressingly high percent in the fourth quarter The role of high labor force participation in rapid labor force growth and slower decline in aggregate unemployment is shown by the rising ratio of employment to the total civilian noninstitutional population of working age up percentage points during to percent in December. This is a post-World War II record. At the cyclical peak in the fourth quarter of this ratio was percent when unemployment was percent. In when the unemployment rate was percent the employment to population ratio was considerably lower than in either or Hence O given the income and career aspirations of broad segments of the population the economy is confronted with a challenge not only to create jobs but to match workers to employment opportunities PRICES AND WAGES IN The pace of inflation last year was essentially unchanged from excluding the effects of a few especially volatile factors. The rise in the consumer price index accelerated to percent in the first half of the year from a 4.8-percent rate during in response to short supplies of food and strong demands for energy caused by the harsh winter weather. In the second half however these forces were absent. Indeed as the new springcrops came in wholesale prices of food and farm products declined sharply As the benefits were passed on to consumers the rise in consumer prices slowed to an annual rate of / percent in the second half Farm supplies are subject to disturbances from weather and these show up in volatile price movements because of relatively inelastic demand for food products. Other prices may also be subjected to shocks that have little to do with the overall balance of supply and demand in the economy Energy prices are a current example of this phenomenon. For this reason it is important to look at the movements of price indexes after these special factors have been removed that is to look at the " underlying rate " of inflation. This underlying rate measured by the consumer price index exclusive of food and energy prices has remained relatively steady in the range of to 6/ percent during almost the entire years of expansion The stability of the underlying inflation rate reflects on the one hand the continued high levels of unemployment and excess capacity which have forestalled the acceleration of inflation that has often occurred in the course of extended cyclical expansion. On the other hand inflationary expectations and institutional characteristics of modern economies have kept the inflation rate from declining. These characteristics are discussed more extensively in Chapter WAGES PRODUCTIVITY AND UNIT LABOR COSTS During the first year of the recovery productivity rose faster than its long-run trend as it typically does in such periods. Since businesses tend to calculate costs on the basis of secular trends in productivity and set their prices accordingly the rise in prices exceeded that of unit labor costs and profits per unit of output improved markedly. Since then the growth of productivity has slowed and the movements of prices and unit labor costs have been more nearly parallel On a year-over-year basis the rate of change in hourly compensation was essentially the same last year as in Compensation per hour in the private nonfarm sector showed an percent increase about percent less than in The rate of growth of private nonfarm productivity however slowed substantially to percent. The rise in labor cost per unit of output therefore increased to about 6/2 percent Hourly compensation increased about percentage point faster than the index of average hourly earnings during the year. The latter measure shows the change in wages exclusive of the effects of shifts of employment among industries and changes in manufacturing overtime ; it is often used as a measure of the basic rate of wage increases though it is only an approximation. About one-half of the difference in between hourly compensation and average hourly earnings was accounted for by the shift of employment toward high-wage industries. The remaining difference was primarily due to the increase of fringe benefits included in compensation but not counted in the earnings index. Fringe benefits per hour have risen more rapidly than wages but rose at about the same rate last year as in Data on collective bargaining agreements show about percent greater effective wage-rate adjustments than the data for all nonfarm hourly earnings but also show a rate of increase that was approximately stable between and ( Effective wage-rate adjustments include wage changes resulting from current settlements prior settlements and cost-of-living clauses. ) In the months ending in September of last year the latest span for which data are available the average effective wage increase for workers included in major agreements covering or more employees was percent compared with percent in all of New collective bargaining agreements concluded last year generally provided for wage increases greater than the rate of increase of average hourly earnings. Those that were concluded in the first months of last year and included cost-of-living adjustment clauses provided an average annual basic wage increase of percent plus the augmentation from the escalators. If inflation continues at a 6-percent rate the total annual wage increase would be about percent. Wage increases in contracts without escalator clauses averaged percent annually over the life of the contract These data however omit increases in fringe benefits. The data on combined changes in wages and fringe benefits which are limited to agreements covering or more workers suggest that total labor compensation under collective bargaining agreements probably continued to rise more rapidly than compensation for all nonfarm employees. First-year negotiated adjustments of wages and benefits averaged percent last year The productivity increase of percent in the private nonfarm economy in on a year-over-year basis is approximately in line with the long-run trend. This rate is down from percent in and during the first stage of recovery in The growth of productivity is typically greatest in the early quarters of expansion when overhead labor becomes more fully utilized and the cyclically sensitive and high-productivity industries recover faster than the rest of the economy. The progressive decline in recent produc- tivity growth was therefore consistent with the usual cyclical pattern. An analysis of long-term trends in productivity growth is presented in Chapter FOOD PRICES IN Movements of food prices exerted a major effect on the overall rate of price change during the past year. Between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of the consumer price index for food increased percent The severe freeze in July that reduced the Brazilian coffee crop by percent was reflected in U.S. food prices in early Reduced supplies from Brazil normally the world 's largest coffee producer caused wrorld supplies to decline percent and average retail coffee prices in the United States to increase percent during the first months of last year During the middle of last January temperatures in Florida were below freezing for several days reducing the fruit crop and heavily damaging the vegetable crop. Prices of these commodities escalated rapidly until supplies became available from other areas. Fruit and vegetable prices increased at an annual rate of percent in the first quarter but declined in the third quarter ( Table ) Abundant supplies of all other food products helped to restrain price changes over the year. Food grain prices declined throughout the year as U.S. farmers harvested a third consecutive large crop. The lower food grain prices wrere reflected in the modest 4-percent increase from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of in the cereal and bakery component of the consumer price index Declining feed grain prices prompted significantly increased cattle feeding in the latter months of the year. Total beef and veal production nonetheless declined percent in The decline would have been larger if the drought conditions in the West and Southwest had not encouraged more rapid slaughtering. Last year marked the third consecutive year of a cyclical reduction in the U.S. cattle herd that has been the deepest in history TABLE Changes in retail food prices [ Percent change seasonally adjusted annual rate ) Consumer price component All food Food away from home Food at home Meats Cereals and bakery products Fruits and vegetables Beverages ( nonalcoholic ) IV II Not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics III IV IV to IV Total meat production however was unchanged from as production of competing meat and poultry products rose to offset declines in beef output. Consumers substituted more abundant pork and poultry for beef products during ; as a result there were only modest increases in prices for meat products in general. From the fourth quarter of to the final quarter of beef prices rose only percent pork prices rose percent and poultry prices increased by percent. Retail prices of dairy products increased percent largely reflecting the March increase in the support price of milk Consumer expenditures on food exclusive of alcoholic beverages totaled $ billion in of which $ billion was for domestically produced food products. The value at the farm of the domestically produced foods was $ billion unchanged from The marketing bill the cost of processing transporting wholesaling and retailing was $ billion more than double the farm value The largest expense component of food marketing firms is labor ; hourly compensation in this sector increased percent in Total labor costs ( $ billion ) exceeded the farm value of domestically produced foods for the first time last year. Costs for packaging materials transportation energy and all other inputs increased over the levels of a year earlier OTHER PRICE DEVELOPMENTS Prices in for most goods and services other than food and agricultural products moved in a fairly homogeneous fashion. A few exceptions should be mentioned At the retail level energy prices again posed a special problem early in the year as noted above although the pace of increase in energy prices slowed slightly later in the year. Prices of houses both new and old rose sharply On the other hand prices of apparel and household appliances lagged behind the aggregate indexes Medical costs led by physicians ' fees and hospital charges continued to rise at rates substantially above those of other items and insurance costs have also risen rapidly. This Administration has proposed to try to reduce inflation in hospital costs by negotiation between representatives of hospitals and physicians insurers and the government which now pays more than half of all hospital charges. The initial goal is to reduce cost increases per admission to percent in fiscal At the wholesale level costs of construction materials rose rapidly during most of the year as prices of lumber and other building materials especially insulation moved up sharply. These of course contributed to the rise in the price of houses. The rise in lumber prices seem clearly associated with the strength in single-family construction activity which is particularly lumber intensive. Wholesale and retail fuel prices rose significantly early in the year. Paralleling the moderate rise in retail prices of apparel textile prices rose less rapidly than the overall average possibly as a consequence of weak consumer demand and strong worldwide competition as w7ell as of good cotton crops. The pace of inflation has also been relatively moderate for nonpetroleum chemicals rubber scrap metals and most internationally traded commodities. Although many raw industrial commodity prices rose early in the year possibly as a result of speculation occasioned by fears that inflation would accelerate increases tapered off and some prices fell in the latter half of Excess world capacity undoubtedly helped to keep these prices in check THE FEDERAL BUDGET AND FISCAL POLICY Soon after the new Administration came into office it proposed a series of measures intended to raise the rate of growth in real output in and to a pace that would lead to significant reductions in the unemployment rate. The package of stimulative measures that was proposed would have had a 2-year budgetary impact of $ billion Given the lags inherent in the implementation of fiscal policy however the new measures did not have an effect until early summer. Indeed in the first quarter of fiscal policy was actually contractionary by almost any measure because of the unusually slow growth in Federal spending in combination with a sharp upturn in receipts. For the rest of however fiscal policy was more expansive as expenditures resumed their normal growth and the initiatives in the stimulus package began to take effect THE PRESIDENT 'S STIMULUS PACKAGE The Administration 's stimulus program had seven components : A one-time $ rebate on taxes and $ payments to social security supplemental security income and railroad retirement beneficiaries. The proposed rebates and payments totaled $ billion and were to be payable in the spring of * * A simplification and a permanent increase in the personal standard deduction. The existing percentage standard deduction was to be converted to a flat deduction of $ for couples filing jointly and $ for single individuals. This change would have reduced personal taxes by $ billion a year once it was fully in effect A choice for business firms between a 2-percentage point increase in the investment tax credit and a new 4-percent credit against employerpaid social security taxes. The business tax cut would have been worth $ 2J/2 billion annually when fully implemented An increase in the number of public service jobs funded under Titles II and VI of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act from the existing to by mid-1978 An additional positions to be added to the various specialized employment training and youth programs under other titles of CETA A $ 4-billion increase in the authorization for emergency public works spending beyond the $ billion already authorized in by the Local Public Works Capital Development and Investment Act An increase in the amount of Federal grants made available to States and localities in periods of high employment under the countercyclical revenue sharing program These various components of the President 's proposal were designed to provide stimulus in both and A 2-year program wras needed for a continuing improvement in sales and income. Yet it was necessary to preserve sufficient policy flexibility so that the program could be adjusted up or down as circumstances required. The rebate would add immediately to consumer income and therefore allow the stimulus to take effect quickly The other tax cuts together with the expansion of CETA jobs State and local fiscal assistance and public works would take effect more gradually spreading across the last half of and into The increases in spending were designed to phase down as unemployment declined ; and permanent tax reductions were held to a minimum to allow more time to consider longer-run budget priorities and the desirability of additional tax cuts in conjunction with tax reform THE STIMULUS PROGRAM ACTUALLY ENACTED Review of the economic situation and the stimulus measures by both the Congress and the Administration in the late winter and early spring led to some revisions in the original proposal. In view of the substantial improvement in the rate of expansion of total output and consumer spending in the early part of the year it was felt that the one-time rebate which had been designed to give a quick boost to spending was no longer necessary. The Administration withdrew the proposal in April. In the absence of the rebate for individuals it was felt that the optional business tax credits were no longer appropriate. The removal of these two items reduced the total size of the Administration 's proposed stimulus package by $ billion The tax reduction components of the stimulus program that was enacted were incorporated in the Tax Reduction and Simplification Act of This bill which became law in late May included the following items : A permanent increase in the personal standard deduction to a flat $ for single individuals and heads of households and a flat $ for married couples filing jointly A nonrefundable employment tax credit for and equal to the lesser of one-half the wage or $ for each new employee hired after growth in the firm 's wage bill as specified in the act exceeds percent. ( The wage bill is total wages paid up to $ per employee. ) The total credit available for any one year can not exceed either $ or percent of the firm 's Federal unemployment tax base. Unused credits are subject to carry-back and carry-forward rules in effect for the investment tax credit. The employer 's normal tax deduction for wage costs is reduced by the amount of the employment credit Extension through the end of of several tax reduction measures enacted in and : the general personal income tax credit the 10-percent earned income tax credit for low-income families with dependents and the reduction in the corporate tax rate from to percent on the first $ of corporate income and from to percent on the second $ ( the rate remains at percent for earnings above $ ) An increase in funds for countercyclical revenue sharing in and and an adjustment of the formula under which the funds are distributed to State and local governments to emphasize local unemployment rates Several miscellaneous changes in the tax code and modifications of provisions in the Tax Reform Act of The remaining parts of the stimulus program the expansion of public works public service employment and other employment and training programs were generally approved as requested in authorizing legislation enacted during the spring of and funded by the Economic Stimulus Appropriations Act. Table shows the budgetary impact of the program passed by the Congress on a basis consistent with the Federal budget document submitted in January TABLE Budgetary impact of the economic stimulus program national income and product accounts calendar years [ Billions of dollars ) Program Tax programs : Change in standard deduction and other Business tax incentives Expenditure programs : Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Training and youth programs Public service employment Countercyclical assistance Local public works 7.<f TotaL Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget FEDERAL EXPENDITURES IN Total Federal Government expenditures rose by 9J/2 percent in ( Table ) up slightly from the growth in * As noted earlier beginning in the second quarter growth in real Federal defense and nondefense purchases was the most rapid since the mid-1960s and was an important factor in sustaining real growth in the economy during the year ^ Unless otherwise noted reference is to calendar years and to the Federal sector in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Grants to State and local governments grew somewhat less rapidly than purchases. Most of the growth in grants occurred in the second half of the year in part as a result of the expenditure components of the President 's stimulus program. The growth in Federal transfer payments in was slowed by declining outlays for unemployment insurance ; other social insurance expenditures rose enough for benefits to keep pace with the increase in the general price level TABLE Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure category Federal Government receipts National defense Nondefense Purchases of goods and services- Federal Government expenditures Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate tax accruals _ Indirect business tax and nontax accruals. Contributions for social insurance. Transfer payments. To persons To foreigners. Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Surplus or deficit ( ) Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) FEDERAL RECEIPTS AND THE DEFICIT IN Federal receipts rose by $ billion in a somewhat smaller increase than occurred in The growth was unevenly distributed over the year with a very large increase in the first quarter and much smaller ones in subsequent quarters. The abnormally large $ 20.4-billion ( annual rate ) increase in the first quarter was due to an extra $ billion in payroll tax increases and a nonrecurring $ 5.5-billion increase in estate and gift taxes The additional payroll taxes were the result of the temporary percentage point increase in the Federal unemployment insurance ( UI ) tax rate mandated by the Unemployment Compensation Amendments of increases in State unemployment insurance taxes which are counted in the Federal sector to meet the higher costs of unemployment benefits paid during the recession and an automatic rise in the taxable wage base for social security. The increase in estate and gift tax collections occurred in response to the revisions made in the Tax Reform Act of Since gifts were treated more liberally under the old law there was an incentive to cluster gifts at the very end of before the new law came into effect. The receipts were collected in early The reduction in the rate of increase in receipts during the remainder of the year reflected the personal and corporate tax cuts enacted as part of the stimulus package. For the year as a whole personal taxes and contributions for social insurance grew the most rapidly. Together they now account for percent of total Federal receipts compared with percent in Most of this increase results from legislated increases in social insurance taxes. Periodic tax reductions have maintained the share of personal taxes in total Federal receipts at a fairly constant percent over the past years offsetting the rise that would have resulted otherwise because of the progressivity of this tax. The total Federal tax share of GNP rose from percent in to percent in The Federal deficit on a national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis declined in for the second year in a row falling to $ billion for the year. This was $ billion smaller than the deficit projected in February even after adjusting for withdrawal of portions of the stimulus package Several tax changes became effective on January as a result of previously enacted legislation. The wage base subject to unemployment insurance taxes increased from $ to $ per worker. This change is necessary to keep receipts rising in line with the higher unemployment insurance expenditures. The maximum amount of wages subject to social security taxes was also raised from $ to $ and the total tax rate increased from to percent. The Social Security Amendments of provide for major increases in social security taxes but they are not to take effect until and subsequent years. Finally the Federal excise tax on telephone service was reduced from to percent THE HIGH-EMPLOYMENT BUDGET Table shows the high-employment Federal budget for recent years. This budget shows the difference between total receipts and expenditures under the assumption that the economy is operating at a constant high-employment level. The use of high-employment GNP as the level of activity underlying this hypothetical budget is a convenient but arbitrary convention. The purpose is to adjust the budget for cyclical changes in the economy and this could as well be accomplished using any other trend path of GNP. The high-employment budget eliminates changes in receipts that occur automatically in response to the cyclical behavior of output and employment leaving only those changes due to discretionary fiscal policy and to the secular growth of output and prices. Automatic changes in unemployment compensation payments are excluded from high-employment expenditures ; expenditures resulting from new programs including those explicitly for countercyclical purposes are included TABLE Actual and high-employment Federal receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Actual Calendar year Receipts Expenditures High-employment Surplus or deficit ( ) Amount Percent ofGNP Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Amount Percent of GNP2 : II III Preliminary High-employment surplus or deficit as percent of high-employment GNP Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers The restrictive shift of fiscal policy in the first quarter of and the subsequent expansionary swing are reflected in the high-employment budget Even excluding the nonrecurring increase in gift taxes the high-employment deficit fell by $ billion to $ billion in the first quarter. Thereafter it rose to $ billion in the third quarter. From the end of to the third quarter of the high-employment deficit rose by $ billion while the actual deficit rose by only $ billion. The difference is a measure of the extra increase in receipts and reduction in expenditures generated by the cyclical increase in GNP toward its high-employment path The change in the high-employment surplus is a convenient measure of whether fiscal policy is moving in a contractionary or expansionary direction A shift in fiscal policy may result either explicitly from discretionary changes in taxes or expenditures or implicitly from normal growth in real output and prices which automatically lifts revenues by more than expenditures Hence if fiscal policy is to remain unchanged in its effects on the private economy regular discretionary reductions in taxes or increases in expenditures are necessary to neutralize this fiscal drag The level of the high-employment surplus or deficit consistent with maintaining high-employment output depends on the balance between nonFederal saving and investment that would occur at that level of economic activity. An imbalance must be accommodated by the Federal surplus or deficit or be corrected by the effects of monetary policy or other measures There is no given level of the high-employment surplus that is suitable in all situations. In particular just as a balanced actual budget is often not a desirable objective of fiscal policy a balanced high-employment budget will only on occasion be appropriate. As discussed in more detail in Chapter the appropriate level of the high-employment surplus or deficit in the Federal budget depends on the spending decisions of the private sector and of State and local governments and on the factors affecting the foreign trade balance The appropriate path of the high-employment surplus must take into account the movements of actual output relative to the high-employment trend. When the economy is recovering from recession investment tends to be restrained by both current and past levels of excess capacity and a more stimulative fiscal policy is necessary to raise capacity utilization. As private demand gains momentum and the economy approaches high employment the high-employment Federal budget should move closer toward or into balance to make room for accelerating private investment. The desirable level and rate of change of the high-employment budget also depend of course on the stance of monetary policy and other circumstances specific to any given period The high-employment budget should not be interpreted as a precise measure of the Federal sector 's impact on the economy. In the first place different types of taxes and expenditures have widely differing impacts on income and output. For example an increase in Federal purchases yields larger gains in output than an increase in transfer payments or a reduction in taxes. Similarly some kinds of tax reductions tend to have a larger stimulative effect than others. Secondly the effects on aggregate demand of a given tax change will depend on the stage of the business cycle because of the cyclical variability of income shares. Nevertheless the high-employment budget is a useful simple indicator of the direction of fiscal thrust MONETARY POLICY Short-term interest rates rose fairly sharply from April through October of last year following an unusual period of downward drift during the first years of the current expansion. Nonetheless financial markets showed few signs of stress during Deposit flows to thrift institutions remained fairly high although some slowing was apparent late in the year. Mortgage credit rose rapidly and there were few signs of tightening of mortgage terms The volume of new corporate bond issues was down slightly from the preceding year as businesses shifted somewhat toward mortgages and shorterterm borrowing. The yields on new corporate bonds and on long-term Treasury issues rose in the first quarter but then remained stable until late in the year when a further increase occurred. State and local bond yields drifted slightly lower in despite a considerable increase in offerings. On balance the strong liquidity positions and ample cash flow of major lending institutions early in the year limited the upward movement of long-term rates and accommodated substantial credit flows though at rising costs to many borrowers The sharp increase of almost percentage points in the Federal funds rate between April and October was unsettling however both because of its speed and because of uncertainties about its implications for the future of interest rates. From March through October the narrowly defined money supply ( M b the sum of demand deposits and currency ) grew erratically but rapidly averaging a 10-percent annual rate. This was substantially faster than the l/i -percent upper limit of the target growth range announced by the Federal Reserve at the end of for the year ahead. Consequently the Federal Reserve moved to tighten the availability of bank reserves which led to increases in the Federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates The unusually rapid growth of Mi in was sharply at variance with the pattern of growth during the first years of the current expansion During that earlier period money growth had been unusually slow relative to nominal GNP. The resulting rapid rise in velocity ( the ratio of GNP to Mi ) was accompanied by stable or slightly declining interest rates indicating that the private sector was developing new means for economizing on cash balances ( see discussion later in this chapter ) Questions arose during the year concerning the possibility that the unusual velocity pattern would not continue. If velocity growth were returning to a historically more normal pattern further increases in interest rates would be required to hold growth of the monetary aggregates within the Federal Reserve 's target ranges INTEREST RATES AND SECURITY YIELDS Movements of virtually all short-term interest rates tended to follow the Federal funds rate during the year rising from late spring through early fall and then leveling out through December. During the year as a whole the rate on 3-month Treasury bills rose from to percent. The prime rate charged by banks on short-term business loans followed rising from * percent to % percent. There were however reports of shading of the prime rate as banks sought to expand their business loans Long-term interest rates were relatively stable during the year after declining rapidly in the preceding years. The yield on newly issued Aaarated utility bonds averaged percent compared with an average percent during The yield for 20-year Treasury securities rose unevenly from a January low of to percent in December but averaged percent for the year compared with percent in Corporations had no apparent difficulties in marketing new debt issues for there was ample demand from both financial institutions and individuals wary of common stocks. Although the yield curve became substantially flatter as short rates rose relative to long the curve remained positively sloped particularly within the 1-year range. This resulted in part from the fact that bond market participants expected some further rise in short rates Interest rates on municipal bonds were an exception to the general pattern of interest rates : yields on lower-rated tax exempt bonds continued to fall Yields on Baa-rated municipal bonds fell from percent in December to percent in December as investors ' fears of municipal bankruptcies abated. Inflation also pushed more incomes into the range where the tax exemption is valuable and the growth of tax exempt mutual funds offered individuals greater access to the municipal bond market. This downward movement of yields was not shared by the more highly rated municipals : the yield on Aaa bonds fluctuated in a narrow band of to percent Despite relatively stable long-term interest rates and rising profits many stock prices fell in The widely quoted Dow-Jones average of selected industrial stock prices fell from at the end of to a low of in early November. The broader New York Stock Exchange composite index fell by percent over the same period. Stocks with low price-earnings ratios and high dividend yields generally did better than others. The securities dealers ' index ( NASDAQ ) rose during by over percent. There have been a number of reasons for the decline in many stock prices in the face of rising corporate earnings. Fears of unfavorable changes in tax laws particularly with respect to capital gains taxes and uncertainties about the final form of other policy measures such as the energy bill undoubtedly played a part. The dominant factors affecting stock prices however were probably rising interest rates and fears of an economic slowdown The condition of the stock market is both a symptom of economic uncertainties and a source of economic problems. A lower value of corporate shares makes it expensive for corporations to raise new equity to finance new plant. It also creates an incentive to use internal funds to buy debt or equity investments rather than make new investment in real assets. The reduction in wealth may also reduce other components of aggregate demand and this in turn further reduces the incentive for investing in new plant SAVINGS FLOWS CREDIT AVAILABILITY AND USES OF FUNDS Business credit availability remained ample at commercial banks insurance companies and pension funds. The latter two classes of institutions have been active lenders in the new issues markets as the funds available to them rose during Although new corporate long-term bond issues were down slightly from the rise in new commercial mortgages offset this decline. Short-term corporate borrowing from commercial banks and finance companies rose more rapidly in than earlier in the recovery. Nevertheless total business borrowing needs remained moderate While M1 growth rates rose during the course of the growth rate of time and savings deposits at commercial banks ( other than negotiable certificates of deposit at large commercial banks ) fell. For the months ending in March the growth rate of these deposits was percent at an annual rate. For the months ending in December the growth rate slowed to percent. There was some outflow from State and local savings accounts and growth in personal savings accounts slowed. The rate of sav- ings flows at thrift institutions slowed late in the year falling from a percent anual rate through October to about percent in the final months of the year. It might have slowed earlier but for the success of the thrift institutions in capturing funds previously held at banks in the " wild card " certificates that were issued in and matured last summer. As a consequence of continued inflows during the major part of the year mortgage credit remained readily available The continuation of strong savings flows at thrift institutions during most of the year was attributable to several causes. Short-term rates remained below the levels of the previous business cycle peak in November and were generally below the regulatory ceilings on deposits until late in the year. The response of the public to changes in relative interest rates is likely to be gradual at first and then to gain momentum when interest rates approach or surpass previous peaks It is also important that the deposit and liability structure of financial intermediaries has changed substantially since the last period of credit market tightness. On the deposit side the institutions rely less on passbook accounts and more on long-term certificates of deposit. At savings and loan associations for example passbook accounts fell from over percent of deposits in late to under percent in At the other end of the maturity range long-term certificates have become more important This movement to longer maturities has created a more stable deposit structure. Most obviously certificate deposits are virtually locked in until the certificate matures since the penalties for early withdrawal are severe In addition the yield curve embodied in the interest rate ceilings imposed by the Federal Reserve ( Regulation Q ) the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board is somewhat steeper than the current yield curve on market securities. As a result although market rates were above effective ceilings at the shorter end of the maturity range late in the year ceilings on the long maturity certificates were still above market yields on comparable-maturity government securities In previous periods of credit stringency thrift institutions were also in a poor position to pay rates high enough to attract funds. The average mortgage held by savings and loan associations yielded only percent at the end of By mid-1977 this had risen to over percent. As a result thrift institutions are better positioned to attract high-cost funds than they were previously Reflecting the ready availability of mortgage credit mortgage borrowings rose sharply in The substantial excess of mortgage borrowings over the value of new residential construction may indicate that some funds were pulled out of the housing market and used to support consumption expenditures or buy financial assets. By mid-1977 mortgages outstanding had reached percent of personal income above the historic peak of percent reached in ( Table ) Consumer credit outstanding reached TABLE Mortgage and consumer debt outstanding as percent of disposable personal income [ PercentJ Debt Period Total Mortgage Consumer : First quarters Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System I8J/2 percent of disposable income in mid-1977 up substantially from but still below the peak Although the total Federal deficit of $ billion in fiscal on a unified budget basis was down from the $ billion of fiscal the Federal Government remained a large borrowing sector. This large Federal deficit was substantially offset however by the $ 27-billion surplus of State and local governments ( including both operating and social insurance funds ) during the same quarters. The total government deficit ( on a NIPA basis ) was $ billion for fiscal In addition about $ billion of Federal debt was purchased for foreign official accounts State and local government issues continued to grow as marketing became easier. These governments however bought more financial assets primarily Treasury securities than they sold. Some of the securities purchased were special issues as State and local governments utilized the limited legal opportunities to issue new tax exempt securities of their own in advance of maturing issues investing the proceeds in special taxable Treasury issues THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY AT YEAR-END Prospects for continued expansion were favorable as came to a close The sectors of the economy were in good balance inventories were relatively lean and the balance sheets of businesses and financial institutions were strong. Nevertheless much remains to be accomplished to achieve the Nation 's economic goals. The great resources of the U.S. economy are still incompletely utilized. Since the cyclical peak in the fourth quarter of growth in real output has averaged percent per year. This is an abnormally slow rate of growth for a 4-year period. Capacity utilization in manufacturing still hovers to percentage points below levels that in the past have been consistent with high employment and its low level is contributing significantly to lagging profit growth and a rate of investment that is too low to meet long-run needs The unemployment problem remains one of the most critical facing the Nation. Not only is the aggregate rate too high but the composition of unemployment implies that recovery is bypassing some segments of society Young people and minorities in particular continue to account for a disproportionate share of the unemployed and continued rapid growth of demand may make only small inroads into this problem. It is important to identify and correct the imperfections in labor markets that limit the employment opportunities of these groups if prosperity is to be equitably shared Progress in curbing inflation has also been painfully slow because it has proved difficult to reverse the momentum that develops when past inflation comes to be expected. Stabilizing the rate of inflation is an important first step. Reducing the rate further remains a challenging goal Continued and accelerated growth in productivity is also required both as a major contributor to the reduction of inflation and in order to sustain or enhance the U.S. position in international trade. Stronger growth of investment will be required to achieve this objective as well as to avoid capacity bottlenecks at future levels of high employment to accommodate needs for environmental control equipment and to adapt to changing technological and cost conditions affecting particular areas and industries A critical challenge remaining at the end of is a successful shift toward greater energy self-sufficiency. This must entail both conservation of existing resources of oil and gas and conversion to more abundant alternative energy sources. Passage of the Administration 's National Energy Plan and the help of all sectors of our economy in its implementation are the first steps in laying the foundation for secure economic growth over the coming decades SPECIAL ISSUES A number of special issues occupied the attention of economic policy makers and observers during the past year. These issues require separate consideration not only because of their importance for interpreting the events of but also because of their significance for the entire recovery and for its continuation. These issues include developments in financial markets that affect the uses of money balances and their implications for monetary policy the ability accurately to control and forecast Federal Government expenditures and the underlying strength of investment propensities in the U.S. economy MONEY GROWTH AND VELOCITY Velocity the ratio of GNP to Mi rose by percent in the first year of recovery and by percent in the second year which ended with the first quarter of These are exceptional increases for a period when interest rates were not increasing. Customarily the increases in velocity during cyclical expansions are in part the result of rising interest rates that lead O to economizing of money balances. Velocity increases during the first years of the current expansion occurred despite declines in short-term interest rates. Thus the behavior of velocity in the current recovery stands in sharp contrast to previous cyclical patterns. This contrast is shown in Chart Shifts in velocity or the relation of money demand to income and interest rates complicate the implementation of monetary policy. For example a decline in interest rates could indicate a reduction in the public 's preferences for money holdings or a weakening in the pace of economic activity. The appropriate response to the former shift might be slower growth in the money supply while the response to the latter might be more stimulative monetary policy. Developments influencing the relation of money balances to the usual determinants of money demand consequently have significant policy implications Chart Velocity and Interest Rates Over the Business Cycle CYCLICAL PEAK = AVERAGE OF PRECEDING CYCLES ^ / J PEAK L l I I J I L CHANGE FROM CYCLICAL PEAK ( PERCENTAGE POINTS ) TREASURY BILL RATE ^ CURRENT CYCLE AVERAGE OF PRECEDING CYCLES-2 ^ I PEAK l I J_ I QUARTERS AFTER PEAK U RATIO OF GNP TO Mi ( DEMAND DEPOSITS PLUS CURRENCY ) ; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED U SINCE THE SHORTEST PEAK-TO-PEAK PERIOD IS FROM III TO II THE AVERAGE OF THE PRECEDING CYCLES IS CUT OFF ELEVEN QUARTERS AFTER THE PEAK 1/ MARKET YIELD ON 3-MONTH BILLS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM The behavior of velocity in the current recovery can not be completely explained by the behavior of the factors that usually determine money demand. Most statistical analyses that served to explain money demand in the 1950s and 1960s overpredict money demand for the period from late through early Many reasons have been suggested for the apparent downward shift in money demand relative to GNP. The principal cause appears to be changes in cash management techniques of businesses and individuals. Some of the more frequently suggested factors are summarized below : The high interest rates of encouraged the public to institute programs to conserve on money balances. When rates fell these programs were not dismantled. As a result the amount of money demanded did not return to its earlier relation to GNP The growth of cash management services offered by banks has reduced corporations ' demand for cash. These services allow corporations to keep demand deposits at minimal levels. For example some banks automatically invest any excess funds in overnight repurchase agreements for some large corporate customers The growth of negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts money market mutual funds and credit union share drafts has absorbed funds that would otherwise have gone into demand deposits The growth of corporate and State and local government savings accounts may have absorbed funds from demand deposits The growing availability and use of overdraft accounts and credit cards have reduced individuals ' needs to keep large demand deposit balances. Growing use of telephonic transfers of funds from savings accounts to demand balances and third-party transfer arrangements have worked in the same direction The size of these influences is difficult to determine. The volume of new deposit instruments ( NOW accounts money market funds credit union share drafts and corporate and State and local government savings accounts ) is between and percent of M1 ? but some portion of these funds was certainly drawn from sources other than demand deposits. The size of the impact of the other potential causes is largely conjectural The broader definitions of the money supply M> and M3 have shown L much less evidence of a shift in money demand. M2 includes in addition to Mi time and savings deposits at commercial banks other than large negotiable certificates of deposit at large banks. M includes in addition to M ^ deposits at thrift institutions ( mutual savings banks savings and loan associations and credit unions ) The growth rates of the more broadly defined money stocks have generally been closer than Mi to the target ranges set by the Federal Reserve for From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of M grew by percent at the high end of the target range of to percent and M by percent slightly above its range of ^ to l/i percent Since April the behavior of velocity of Mi has been more generally in line with the trend from the early post-World War II years to Following the sharp growth of Mi in the second and third quarters money growth in the fourth quarter slowed to a 7-percent annual rate. Given the increase of about three-fourths percentage point in short-term interest rates and the 10.7-percent rate of growth of nominal GNP this growth in M3 appears consistent with the relationship between money demand and GNP that prevailed prior to The pattern of velocity in the last quarters of may indicate that the effects of structural changes in financial markets are no longer growing though it is too early to be certain FEDERAL SPENDING SHORTFALLS Federal spending in fell short of the levels projected in the new Administration 's budget. This is consistent with a tendency for the Federal budget in January of each year to overestimate the level of expenditures for the current year. In of the last years actual spending as measured in the NIPA accounts has fallen below the level projected in the January budget by amounts ranging from $ billion to $ billion ( Table ) In fiscal the shortfall was $ billion measured from the new Administration 's projections sent to the Congress in February. This was percent of actual spending Although it is desirable to increase efficiency and minimize costs in the provision of Federal Government services unanticipated shortfalls in expenditures can undermine effective implementation of fiscal policy. Shortfalls may have adverse effects on real economic activity because fiscal policy becomes less expansionary or more restrictive than was intended when the budget was planned. A number of steps are involved in the formulation and implementation of fiscal policy. Projections are made of the likely course of private demand and nondiscretionary government spending. These are balanced against the economy 's supply capabilities. The discretionary changes TABLE Comparison of projected and actual Federal expenditures national income and product accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Actual less projection Fiscal year Projection * Actual Amount Percent of actual l Projections made in the Budget of the United States Government published in January of the current fiscal year ( February Budget used for ) adjusted for revisions by applying projected percent changes to revised data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers in taxes or spending required to achieve the desired fiscal stance must be determined in light of these projections. Adjustments are of course made in the fiscal program by both the Congress and the Administration between presentation of the budget in January and the period to which it applies which begins months later and ends months later. Nevertheless the process of changing taxes and expenditures is not sufficiently flexible to allow rapid adjustments to unanticipated fluctuations in Federal outlays for basic activities. Reliable expenditure projections are necessary if fiscal measures are to be controllable and effective policy tools The magnitude of the effects of shortfalls on the real economy depends on which categories of spending are affected. A shortfall in purchases will have the strongest negative impact because they directly affect economic activity Underspending in transfers and grants will have a smaller effect since they are received by individuals and State and local governments who spend only a part of their receipts. Shortfalls in financial transactions and other asset transfers which are included in the unified budget but not in the Federal sector in the national income and product accounts shown in Table have only an indirect effect on aggregate demand. Nevertheless shortfalls in financial transactions do directly affect the size of the total Federal deficit that must be financed by the Treasury. Uncertainties about borrowing requirements resulting from inaccurate estimates of the Federal deficit may be unsettling to financial markets The existence of periodic shortfalls may be explained partly by difficulties in forecasting with precision certain key economic and demographic variables that determine spending levels for example the rate of inflation and the numbers eligible for various transfer programs. In addition the timing of legislation necessary to implement parts of the budget may be hard to forecast. In principle however there should be no reason why these problems should cause a systematic bias in expenditure estimates Nonetheless there is an apparent upward bias in Federal spending projections. There are several possible explanations for this phenomenon. First agencies naturally tend to be overly optimistic about their current-year spending estimates because authorizations for the following year often depend on actual outlays for the current year. Second there is also a tendency to overestimate the spend-out rates for new program initiatives both because of the lack of experience with the new programs and because of optimism about their likely success. For example it was originally estimated that $ billion would be spent on public works in under the increased authorization contained in the stimulus package. In fact spending was negligible although commitments by the Federal Government for specific local projects were completed on schedule. Finally there are no formal penalties in the Federal budget system for errors in estimating outlays. The spending ceilings in the Congressional Budget Resolutions are a constraint on legislative appropriations but they do not constrain Administration estimates of outlays Since these institutional forces are largely beyond effective control it is likely that administrative agencies will always tend to overestimate outlays Nevertheless steps are being taken to mitigate this problem. First there must be regular monitoring and scrutiny of agency budgets by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) to ensure that their outlay projections reflect the best information available. Revised outlay estimates for fiscal published last November identified $ billion in reductions from estimates made the previous July. Second to the extent that a regular pattern remains in the difference between actual and predicted levels of Federal spending adjustments can be made to reflect this in fiscal policy decisions. Continuing efforts by OMB in cooperation with Federal agencies can result in more reliable estimates and will improve fiscal management BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Real business fixed investment has grown very slowly over the past years in comparison with its performance in earlier business cycles in the post-World War II period. In the final quarter of last year real investment outlays were percent below their level at the business cycle peak in the final quarter of At the comparable stage in four previous cyclical recoveries ( excluding the cycle which is too short for comparison ) real business fixed investment averaged percent above its level at the previous cyclical peak In large measure the lag of business capital outlays results from the depth of the last recession the most severe in the post-World War II period and its effects on many of the determinants of investment. Investment in structures however has been significantly below expectations and has pulled down the investment total. Furthermore surveys of plans for investment in do not at the present time suggest the strength that would normally have developed after a sustained period of increases in capacity utilization and in profits The investment performance in the current expansion is disturbing for two reasons. First strong investment is needed to sustain economic expansion and keep the economy moving toward high employment. Higher levels of investment spending during the expansion to date would have made a welcome contribution to total demand. Second sluggish investment implies slow growth of capacity. Although measurement of capacity is necessarily imprecise estimates of the growth of capacity in manufacturing industries indicate that growth has slowed in recent years. This growth averaged percent from to and has fallen to percent from to In view of the large growth of employment needed in the years ahead to reach unemployment targets in the face of rapid labor force growth a faster expansion of capacity than the pace will be required to avoid capacity bottlenecks at high employment. Investment must rise as a share of total GNP in coming years in order to achieve adequate growth of capacity Chart compares the ratio of real business fixed investment to real GNP with its average over four previous recoveries. There has been a sharp decline in this ratio from the unusually high peak. This peak occurred when capacity shortages were providing a strong incentive for investment spending. Investment spending declined more slowly relative to real GNP in the recession than in previous downturns but its ultimate decline was greater. The recovery of investment relative to GNP was also slower than normal through the end of quarters after the cyclical peak. The ratio at the end of however was percent or percentage point above the average of this ratio at a comparable stage of four previous cycles. This comparison overstates the amount of investChart Investment and Capacity Utilization Over the Business Cycle PERCENT REAL BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF REAL GNP S AVERAGE OF PREVIOUS CYCLES I I PEAK PERCENT i i i I I I I I I I I i MANUFACTURING CAPACITY UTILIZATION CURRENT CYCLE AVERAGE OF PREVIOUS CYCLES I PEAK I I I I I I QUARTERS AFTER PEAK J I I I I i NOTE : SEASONALLY ADJUSTED. AVERAGE OF PREVIOUS CYCLES INCLUDES THOSE EXTENDING FROM PEAKS OF IV II II AND IV SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM merit that added to capacity however because purchases of mandated pollution abatement equipment comprise a larger share of investment than in the past. The ratio of real busines fixed investment excluding pollution control equipment to real GNP was about percent in The bottom panel of Chart suggests that the effect of the recession on capacity utilization is important in explaining the sluggishness in investment. Capacity utilization fell dramatically in to the lowest level for any recession in the postwar period and it remained at depressed levels longer than in previous cycles. An improvement began in and the upturn in investment was clearly associated with the further rise in capacity utilization although the utilization rate remained slightly below its average ( Table ) Many other determinants of investment also remain below their averages although they have improved considerably during the expansion Corporate cash flow fell markedly in but recovered quite quickly and strongly. Its ratio to GNP in and was very close to the pre-1970s TABLE Determinants of businessfixedinvestment [ Percent ] Nonfinancial corporations Ratio of real investment to real GNP Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing i average Year Cash flow as percent of GNP2 Net rate of return on depreciable assets Rate of return on stockholders ' equity * Ratio of market value to replacement cost of net a s s e t s ' Federal Reserve Board index Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost * After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth ( physical capital component valued at current replacement cost ) Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers average. This enlarged cash flow was not devoted to increased investment early in the expansion however but was used instead to reduce debt that had risen because of heavy external financing in and the drop in earnings in By short-term corporate debt was much lower and liquidity was much improved Despite the strong rise in cash flow the rate of return on depreciable assets shown in the fourth column of the table did not rise correspondingly. An important factor in the early growth of cash flow was a strong increase in depreciation allowances which contribute to internal funds but are not part of net return. The rate of return on depreciable assets is also lower relative to cash flow in because depreciation allowable for tax purposes falls below replacement cost in periods of inflation. There is a gap of about * /<2 percentage points between current levels of the net rate of return on nonfinancial corporate capital and the average of percent. Much of the gap exists however because recovery is still incomplete Cyclical adjustments can only approximate the effect of differing capacity utilization rates on the rate of return. They suggest however that if the rate of capacity utilization in had been at a high-employment level the rate of return would also have been improved though still below highemployment levels prior to The rate of return has fallen from the high level attained during the mid-1960s but it appears to be recovering from the depressed periods of the early 1970s when profits may have been affected not only by slack capacity but also by price controls. Thus stronger overall performance of the economy holds the promise of raising the return to capital Corporation taxes and interest payments are subtracted from the rate of return on depreciable assets to obtain profits earned on stockholders ' equity shown in Table This measure of profits differs from " book value " profits reported by corporations by excluding inventory profits and measuring depreciation on a replacement-cost basis. In periods of rising prices profits must also be adjusted to reflect the reduction in the real value of corporate debt that is induced by inflation. This reduction in the real value offsets the part of nominal interest costs that is a premium to compensate lenders for anticipated continuation of inflation. Although these adjustments involve a number of statistical problems reasonable approximations can be made As shown in the table the after-tax return on corporate equity in approximately matched the average. On a cyclically adjusted basis this profit rate appears to be slightly above the average The ratio of the market valuation of the assets of nonfinancial corporations to their replacement cost is a way of formulating the joint roles of financial and nonfinancial influences on investment decisions. The recurrent weakness of stock market values during the recovery despite rising corporate profits has strongly influenced this ratio and may indicate unfavorable expectations shared by business managers and investors in equities. A great variety of factors influence the stock market including of course anticipations of economic growth and profitability and the prospects for all the policies that will influence them. Monetary policy may have an additional more direct effect through its influence on the rate of return on alternatives to equity investment The ratio of market values to replacement cost has remained considerably below throughout this recovery. This may be an indication that it is more profitable on average to buy existing financial assets than to invest in new plant and equipment. At the margin of course the ratio of market value to replacement cost may be greater than the average in particular industries or for particular types of equipment. For example this is likely to be true now for energy-intensive production processes. Old capital may have lost considerable value as energy prices rose but new energy-conserving equipment could have a much higher value. Thus enactment by the Congress of a national energy policy that clarifies the long-range relation between fuel prices and the prices of other inputs to production could lead to substantially greater investment than the current average ratio of market value to replacement cost would indicate. Other economic policy measures being proposed tax measures in particular may also create more favorable attitudes toward investment in both real and equity assets Interest rates on short- and long-term corporate debt and the earnings-toprice ratio on equities both influence the cost of funds to business and both are likely to influence investment decisions. In the case of interest rates however it is the real rate exclusive of inflation premiums that is relevant On an annual average basis the interest rate on long-term bonds less the rate of inflation ( an approximation of the real rate of interest ) and the earnings-to-price ratio on equities were both higher in than in ( See Chart in Chapter ) They moved in divergent directions between and the real interest rate declined slightly while the earningsto-price ratio rose but parallel upward movements occurred in the course ot Studies of investment behavior conducted by the Council in the past year have explored the relation of investment to a number of its measurable determinants growth of output capacity utilization cash flow the rental price of capital services and the ratio of the market value of assets to their replacement cost. In order to test whether the relationship of investment to these determinants has changed in the recent period statistical relationships were estimated by econometric methods for the period. Projections for the period from through were generated from many of these earlier relationships. ( Not all could be extended through because of lags in data availability. ) These projections produce a wide range of estimates and all the alternative formulations involve a substantial margin of error Conclusions about the performance of investment therefore remain uncertain It appears however that total investment outlays during the expansion have fallen somewhat short of those implied by historical relationships of investment to its determinants. Investment expenditures fell much more sharply in than would have been expected and remained depressed for a longer time. Once the upturn occurred late in the rate of growth of investment was for a time approximately in line with econometric projections. An unusually rapid acceleration would have been required however to make up for the shortfall and this did not occur. Indeed the rate of growth appears to have drifted below the projections in the latter part of last year and surveys taken late last year of the investment planned for suggest a widening gap The components of business fixed investment have differed widely in their behavior during the expansion The level of investment in equipment was largely consistent with the econometric projections through early Excluding the effects of strikes in the fourth quarter of the divergence between actual and projected growth rates was probably well within the margin of error for these projections. Later in however the increase in equipment investment appeared to be a bit slower than most of the econometric projections would suggest The investment level for structures during the past few years however has fallen consistently and substantially below what would have been expected on the basis of all of the econometric projections. Not only was the decline extraordinarily sharp in but the subsequent recovery was slower than might have been expected. The result has been a widening gap between the actual level of investment in structures and the level that would have been projected on the basis of historical patterns. Since investment in structures accounts for approximately one-third of business fixed investment its slow growth has had an important impact on the total. In the fourth quarter of last year real outlays for private nonresidential construction were percent below their level at the end of while outlays for producers ' durable equipment were about / percent higher than at the end of A number of possible reasons exist for the lagging investment performance. The perceived risk of investment may have increased in the 1970s as a result of higher inflation rates and larger cyclical fluctuations in output Although a steady and fully anticipated inflation rate of percent is not inherently riskier than price stability high inflation rates have historically been associated with larger variations in the rate of price increase both here and abroad. For this reason measures to control inflation are important Uncertainties about future rates of change of specific output prices and costs are even more likely to affect investment behavior adversely. Changes in energy costs are an obvious example. At least during a period of adjustment flexibility of foreign exchange rates may also have caused increased uncertainties. Apart from these examples it is unlikely that other relative prices and costs have become substantially more volatile in recent years Uncertainties about future expansion of sales were undoubtedly increased by the depth of the last recession but they should be abating as the expan- sion in the United States continues. Excess capacity and slow growth in other industrial countries together with deep import penetration into a few key industries may however be continuing to restrain business optimism Environmental and safety regulations have also been assuming a larger role in decisions regarding investment. The effect is hard to quantify but there is direct evidence that environmental regulations are more stringent for new installations and may have a particularly inhibiting effect on investment in structures. On the other hand mandated antipollution investments may actually have raised investment levels from what they would otherwise have been in some industries ; this increases aggregate demand but does not enlarge productive capacity Finally it should be noted that during a substantial part of the 1950s and 1960s heavy investments were made in fuel and power facilities that are long lived. Demand for electricity was growing extremely rapidly stimulating continuous expansion in generating capacity and the network of natural gas pipelines was also considerably extended. Investment in structures from to included outlays for the Alaska pipeline that have now ended. Increased investment by energy-producing industries can be expected in the future ; but the timing is uncertain and in the case of electricity higher energy prices may limit the growth in demand and capacity expansion At a time when strong growth in the capital stock is needed to meet future goals investment appears to be drifting below normal trends. This drift must be reversed. A stable financial environment and tax measures specifically directed to enhancing investment incentives are particularly important. The situation should also be especially helped by progress in the fields of energy and regulation. These measures will be most effective in the context of a steady continuation of overall expansion CHAPTER Economic Outlook and Policy HP HE ECONOMY is entering its fourth consecutive year of sustained * growth and the prospects for continuation of the recovery in the near term are quite favorable. Final sales were up strongly at the end of and the effects of last year 's stimulus package continue to build setting the stage for a resumption of healthy production gains in the early part of Over the longer term however without additional fiscal measures economic growth would slow below the rate necessary to maintain satisfactory progress toward our goal of returning to high employment. The non-Federal sectors of the economy do not appear to possess sufficient strength on their own to support a sustained high rate of real output growth throughout In addition Federal fiscal policy would itself gradually become more restrictive as the spending increases contained in the stimulus package gradually diminish and as Federal receipts show rapid gains because of income growth and payroll tax increases. While it is difficult to determine precisely when economic growth would slow the underlying trends in the economy together with the effects of fiscal policy point clearly to a reduction in the pace of expansion later this year or early in Therefore to ensure that the economy continues to grow at a satisfactory rate in and beyond the Administration is proposing a $ 25-billion tax cut for individuals and businesses to take effect in the fourth quarter of ECONOMIC POLICY IN THE NEAR TERM THE NEED FOR TAX REDUCTION Personal consumption and housing have been the key sectors leading the economic recovery since In and early the personal saving rate fell well below its average over the past years and housing starts rose to more than million units at an annual rate by the middle of last year However the saving rate has now returned to just under percent and is expected to remain in this vicinity during and The boom in residential construction may also be reaching a peak as interest rates are likely to be somewhat higher in than in Hence these sectors can not be counted on to sustain above-trend growth in total demand Both the foreign and the State and local sectors are currently withdrawing much more from the spending stream than they are returning to it. Our international current account balance is likely to remain in substantial deficit in the near term. Oil imports will continue at high levels over the next several years and the economies of our major trading partners are expected to show only moderate improvement. In the State and local sector budgetary surpluses have been rising as receipts have grown more rapidly than expenditures particularly during the last years. These surpluses are expected to decline gradually but they will remain high partly because a significant proportion is the result of secular growth in State and local employee pension funds The Federal sector would also have a restraining influence on the economy if there were no further adjustments in fiscal policy. Federal outlays are rising strongly in fiscal but the increase in fiscal will be small less than percent in real terms. Moreover the combination of higher payroll taxes and rising effective personal tax rates due to inflation and real growth will increase Federal receipts substantially in and Hence significant tax reductions are needed just to neutralize the fiscal restraint built into the Federal budget Finally a major uncertainty in the near-term outlook concerns the behavior of business fixed investment. Strong and steady growth of capital spending is essential to continuation of satisfactory growth in aggregate demand and new productive capacity. But the performance of investment has been disappointing thus far in the recovery and plans for increased spending remain modest. In the absence of tax reductions the usual strengthening of investment plans that takes place during an economic upswing might not occur THE ADMINISTRATION 'S TAX PROPOSALS There are three main components of the Administration 's proposed tax reduction A $ 17-billion net reduction in individual income taxes effective October Tax reduction is achieved by substituting a $ per capita credit for the existing $ personal exemption and the general tax credit and by reducing personal tax rates A $ 6-billion net tax reduction for businesses in the form of permanent rate cuts on corporate profits and a liberalization of the investment tax credit. The corporate tax rate would be lowered from percent to percent on the first $ of profits from percent to percent on the next $ and from percent to percent on profits above $ These changes would take effect on October There would be a further 1-percentage point reduction in the tax rate on corporate profits above $ on January thereby lowering this rate to percent. In addition the 10-percent investment tax credit on investment in equipment would be made perma- nent and extended to industrial and utility structures ; the full 10-percent credit would be available for investment in specified pollution abatement facilities that also qualify for accelerated depreciation ; and the investment credit could be used to offset percent of tax liability in any one year. Except for the last proposal these changes in the investment credit would become effective January A $ 2-billion cut in payroll and excise taxes. The 4-percent telephone excise tax already being phased out would be repealed on October In addition the Federal unemployment insurance tax rate would be lowered from percent to percent on January The $ billion in tax reductions proposed by the Administration is net of $ billion in revenue-increasing reforms of the tax structure. The reform elements of the program are discussed in detail in Chapter of this Report The proposed tax reductions together with the projected increases in Federal expenditures and the effects of the tax cut will result in a $ 5-billion net increase in the high-employment Federal budget deficit between calendar years and The personal tax reduction will augment after-tax incomes of individuals and increase the demand for consumer goods. The strengthening of these markets will in turn improve the prospects for business investment spending. Moreover the cut in corporate tax rates will increase cash flow of business enterprises and the changes in the investment credit will directly lower the cost of new capital investment. The reduction in excise and payroll taxes will lead to a modest lowering of price levels as well as providing fiscal stimulus MONETARY POLICY Under current economic conditions monetary and fiscal policy can reinforce each other in fostering stable economic growth and the increased rate of investment needed to avoid the emergence of capacity limitations in the future. Interest rates moved up early in ; a level of short-term interest rates moderately higher than in would be consistent with a normal cyclical expansion of demands for money and credit relative to supplies. If the rise in short-term interest rates is limited long-term interest rates may change very little. The prospects for relatively stable long-term rates are greatly enhanced by the fact that supplies of both labor and capital are sufficiently ample to permit rising aggregate demand to be translated into real growth in output rather than a higher rate of inflation. The growth in monetary aggregates that will be consistent with this favorable interest rate environment will depend significantly on factors affecting velocity which were discussed in Chapter THE OUTLOOK FOR Growth of real output during is expected to be in the 4x/2- to 5percent range if the proposed tax cut is approved by the Congress ( Table ) Expansion in the first half of the year will be sustained by higher spend- ing for public service employment and public works programs and by larger than normal tax refunds. By midyear the effects of the jobs programs will have reached their peak but consumer spending and business investment are expected to accelerate in the second half in response to the tax reduction. * TABLE Key economic measures [ Seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Measure Unit RealGNP Billions of dollars Real personal consumption _do IV i Forecast range IV to Percent change 4H to to Real business fixed investment- .do. to to Real residential construction. _ .do to to \ H do to ZH to4H Real government purchases Unemployment rate Percent to 6M Consumer price index4 = to ( ) 53/4 to VA Preliminary Annual rates Not applicable Not seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers The rate of inflation is expected to be close to percent in Food and fuel prices which rose sharply in the first half of last year because of the severe winter weather will contribute much less to the increase in prices this year. Continued slack in labor markets and the absence of a large number of significant collective bargaining settlements will help moderate the rate of increase in workers ' average hourly earnings On the other hand federally mandated increases in labor costs will add about one-half percentage point to the price level during the year. Widespread cooperation with the President 's program of deceleration would make it possible to reduce inflation to the lower end of the range shown in Table The projected growth of output this year should expand the number of jobs by about $ million. The extent to which this increase in employment is translated into a reduction in the unemployment rate will of course depend on how rapidly the labor force " grows. It is expected that labor force growth will remain relatively high at a rate between and 2/2 percent in The unemployment rate should decline by about one-half percentage point over the year BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Business fixed investment is expected to become a stronger force in the expansion of output during the course of as a consequence of the * Unless otherwise noted growth rates in this chapter are measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter stimulative effects of the proposed liberalization of the investment tax credit and the reductions in personal and corporate income taxes. An increase of to percent in real terms is anticipated over the course of the year. The most recent Department of Commerce survey of plans for new plant and equipment expenditures indicates that investment spending in nominal terms will rise only percent in year over year. However if allowances are made for increases in capital goods prices of about bl/i percent and for underestimates in the last two surveys this survey would imply a real increase in spending for plant and equipment of to percent. The recent behavior of some important leading indicators of investment activity suggests a stronger investment performance than the plant and equipment survey does. Data on the value of new orders for nondefense capital goods new plant and equipment projects started by manufacturers and their new capital appropriations all show increases of percent or more ( annual rate ) over the last half year As the dimensions of the energy program become more certain and the new tax proposals increasingly influence business expectations it is anticipated that plans for plant and equipment outlays will be raised above their current levels GOVERNMENT DEMAND Government purchases will be an important source of support to the expansion this year. In real terms they are expected to rise about percent Though defense purchases in real terms were up last year and may rise further the principal sources of strength this year will be in the Federal nondefense and State and local government areas. Nondefense Federal purchases ( excluding Strategic Petroleum Reserve and Commodity Credit Corporation expenditures ) are projected to rise percent in current dollars. The real increase in these expenditures should also be large though it may fall short of the level implied by the nominal projection State and local purchases will continue to rise rapidly in the first half of as Federal grants for local public works and employment programs in the stimulus package increase to their peak levels. Some slowing in the rate of expenditure growth may occur in the second half of ; but State and local operating surpluses are large and these governmental units are therefore likely either to increase purchases or reduce taxes PERSONAL CONSUMPTION Real disposable income will rise more than percent during after allowing for the impact in the last quarter of the proposed reductions in personal taxes. However since personal consumption does not fully reflect the impact of tax reductions for several quarters the saving rate is likely to increase considerably in the fourth quarter. Consumption during the year should therefore grow somewhat more slowly than disposable income increasing about * /2 percent in real terms ; but a strong upswing at year-end O will continue into the first half of Real growth of demand for durable goods in will slow somewhat from the % -percent rate of last year and then strengthen again after the tax cuts Smaller projected food price increases in this year together with generous worldwide supplies of natural and manmade fibers suggest that price increases for nondurable goods will be modest in These developments will help stimulate an increase in demand for nondurable goods above the 3J/2 percent of last year. The demand for heating services is expected to return to more normal levels this winter a change that could also contribute to the growth of sales of both durable and nondurable goods HOUSING Residential investment is expected to be relatively flat during the year at a level about percent higher in real terms than the average of New housing units are currently being started at an annual rate of 2/4 million including a record million single-family units. Housing starts should remain at relatively high levels early in the year but some reduction in single-family starts is expected by year-end. However favorable demographic factors and relatively moderate changes in the availability of mortgage credit should limit the extent of any decline. Multifamily starts are expected to continue growing throughout the year as the problems that have recently plagued this sector low profitability caused in part by rent controls in some areas of the Northeast and the legacy of overbuilding in other areas particularly the South are gradually overcome Two other components of residential investment are likely to rise significantly this year : additions and alterations to existing structures and sales of mobile homes. Additions and alterations represent percent of total residential investment and are responsive to sales of new and existing homes which have risen about percent since Mobile home shipments which peaked at in and declined to in have recently been growing more strongly reaching a rate of over per year at the end of Further increases above this level are expected in INVENTORIES Production has responded promptly to changes in final sales in this expansion. Hence except for moderate unintended increases in nondurable goods inventories in each of the past two summers the ratio of stocks to final sales in and was maintained at a fairly constant level just under the historical average. Improved inventory monitoring techniques and short delivery lags due to excess capacity will be conducive to stable rates of inventory investment this year. However accelerated final sales and a downturn in the rate of stockbuilding in the last quarter of will lead to an upswing of inventory investment in the first half of the year This will be temporary and the resulting stimulus is unlikely to be as large as that attributable to the restocking that occurred early in The rate of accumulation for all of is anticipated to average about percent of real gross national product or just sufficient to expand stocks in line with the growth of sales NET EXPORTS The foreign sector is not expected to contribute significantly to the growth of output in but neither should it detract from the expansion as it has done in the past years. Since approximately one-third of U.S. exports are capital goods the generally weak performance of investment in other industrial economies has restrained the demand for U.S. exports Though real growth in the economies of our major trading partners was disappointing in it should pick up somewhat this year and improve the prospects for U.S. exports. Growth outside the OECD area is also expected to show some acceleration this year which should have a beneficial effect on our exports. In addition there should be a resumption of growth in demand from countries such as Brazil and Mexico where restrictive actions were taken in the last years to reduce large trade deficits caused by the recession and oil price increases. Given these modest improvements in the world economy U.S. merchandise exports after adjustment for inflation are expected to rise to percent in Growth of imports should slow in Imports other than fuel rose more in than would have been forecast on the basis of historical relationships between imports and GNP but this phenomenon is not expected to continue in The volume of U.S. oil imports should be unchanged this year compared with a rise of percent last year. Cold weather in the early months of and a buildup of petroleum inventories last summer contributed to the sharp rise of fuel imports in but these developments are unlikely to recur this year. Production of North Slope oil averaging about million barrels a day four times the output available last year will also restrain the growth of petroleum imports in The decision of the oil-exporting countries to freeze prices will mean that the value of oil imports will show little change this year. The high level of oil imports will nevertheless continue to be an important factor in the United States ' persistent foreign trade deficit LABOR FORCE AND EMPLOYMENT The ^ to 5-percent expansion of output should increase employment during the year by nearly percent. Given the projected increase in the labor force of ^ to 2/2 percent the unemployment rate should fall to a range of to 65/4 percent by year-end. The projections for labor force participation rates of women and teenagers assume continued increases that are above previous historical trends but somewhat below the unusually large increases of the past years It should be noted that projections of labor force growth have not been very reliable in recent years. For example the 3.1-percent increase in the labor force in was substantially larger than most estimates of a year ago. Consequently unemployment rate forecasts can prove inaccurate even when projections for the growth of output and employment are correct INFLATION Before allowing for the Administration 's program for the deceleration of inflation ^ prices would be expected to rise this year at a rate of percent or somewhat above the underlying rate for the past 2/ years. The underlying rate is measured by consumer prices excluding food and energy and it parallels the difference between the rates of increase of productivity and compensation per hour worked. Average hourly earnings and productivity would rise this year by about 7J/4 and percent respectively. However total unit labor costs would rise by more than the 5T/4 percent that these figures suggest partly because privately negotiated fringe benefits are increasing more rapidly than basic wages and partly because of government-mandated additions to payroll costs. The 15-percent step-up of the minimum wage to $ an hour and the $ billion in higher payroll taxes for employers in will add about percent to labor costs of the private sector. Total compensation per hour including fringes and employer payroll taxes would therefore rise about ^ percent in and unit labor costs by to 6l/ ^ percent A number of special factors will also influence the actual rise of prices in Implementation of the first stage of the crude oil equalization tax will add percent to the aggregate price level at year-end. The recent decline in the value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets will also add to pressures on prices. On the other hand highly competitive markets for many goods caused by the weakness of economic recovery abroad and by generally low capacity utilization rates at home will work against any acceleration of inflation. The food price outlook should also lead to moderation in the rate of inflation this year. Retail food prices rose by % percent last year but are expected to increase in by less than the rise in prices of nonfood commodities and services. This deceleration will help to moderate the increase in the general price level offsetting the effects of the mandated cost and price increases Ample grain stocks and depressed crop prices are currently stimulating pork and poultry production and hence will restrain retail price increases for these items. Large harvests of fruits and vegetables in the second half of last year should assure abundant supplies of these commodities through mid-1978. On the other hand because cattle herds have been cut drastically and the cost of feed grains is extremely low increased cattle feeding is likely. This should be reflected in reduced marketing of cattle and more rapid increases in retail prices for red meat in the second half of The action of the oil-producing countries in not increasing the price of crude oil will provide modest additional restraint on inflation this year Repeal of the Federal excise tax on telephone service in the last quarter of and the 0.2-percentage point reduction in the Federal unemployment insurance tax in January will also ease the pressure on prices next year The President 's request to business and labor to cooperate in a voluntary program to decelerate wage and price increases discussed in Chapter is expected to help moderate the rate of inflation in With success of the program the rate of price increase in could fall below the level of percent or more that would otherwise occur INCOME AND SAVING FLOWS The combination of 4J4- to 5-percent real growth and about percent inflation will cause nominal GNP to grow approximately percent in Both personal income and corporate profits are expected to rise at about the same rate as GNP In the year ahead the household sector will contribute an increased volume of saving to credit markets while the growth of household credit demands should moderate. Personal saving will expand by approximately one-third as a result of the projected increase in after-tax income and an increase in the saving rate. Though part of this increased saving will be absorbed by home mortgage and consumer credit growth in these uses of funds will be less than in Business credit needs will expand in but an adequate growth of profits should sustain the flow of internal funds In the past years gross internal funds have amounted to more than percent of capital expenditures of nonfinancial corporate businesses Apart from the usual seasonal fluctuations the Federal Government 's net new issues of securities are likely to change very little between the latter half of and the first half of this year. Toward the end of however new funds raised by the Federal Government will increase since the decline in receipts resulting from the proposed tax reduction will be only partially offset by the growth of revenues that normally occurs in an expanding economy A greater volume of funds will flow through credit markets this year primarily because the higher net household saving must be channeled to the debtor sectors to meet growing financial needs. As noted earlier these increased credit flows are likely to be accompanied by a somewhat higher level of interest rates than in particularly on short-term securities Given current economic prospects however there need not be large or unsettling changes in interest rates during THE OUTLOOK FOR Forecasting more than a year ahead is a hazardous exercise since uncertainties about probable economic developments grow with the passage of time. Nevertheless some general comments can be made about the likely state of the economy in and its response to the Administration 's tax proposal The $ 25-billion tax cut effective in October will provide the necessary impetus to extend the recovery into its fifth successive year Business investment should be particularly strong in since capacity utilization rates will have risen further and the effects of the tax cuts will have been incorporated into plans for plant and equipment expenditures. Consumer spending will be supported by the $ 17-billion reduction in personal taxes. And there is likely to be a further reduction of State and local surpluses If the recovery proceeds along these lines and there are no severe unexpected shocks real output in should increase at about the same rate as in that is by 4l/2 to percent. Moreover the unemployment rate should continue to decline to a range of 5/2 to percent by year-end as a result of another % -million increase in the number of jobs Price forecasting beyond a year is even more difficult than projecting output. Before taking into account any effects of the Administration 's deceleration program the underlying rate of inflation would be close to percent or slightly above in Government-mandated cost and price increases will be smaller than in The proposed repeal of the telephone excise tax and the reduction in the Federal unemployment insurance tax would also help restrain price increases On the negative side there are other factors that could lead to stronger pressures on wages and prices in First labor markets may tighten somewhat as a result of continued economic expansion and this could increase the upward momentum of wages. Moreover will also be a heavier year of collective bargaining : agreements covering 5/2 million workers will expire or will be open to negotiation in compared with agreements covering % million workers in Second healthy domestic demand could push the manufacturing capacity utilization rate to higher levels by late and encourage firms to increase their profit margins by raising prices. The stronger growth of investment projected for late and should moderate the rise in utilization rates however and the availability of ample capacity abroad for production of most major materials should also act as a restraint on price increases above general cost trends Most important to the long-run improvement of inflation will be the cooperation of business and labor in the program of gradual deceleration of prices and wages. There must be a well-coordinated good-faith effort on the part of both sides if progress is to be made in unwinding the inflationary pressures inherited from the past. Next year will pose a critical test for the new program because of the heavy calendar of collective bargaining and the fact that utilization rates for both labor and capital will have risen substantially POLICY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE LONGER TERM Upon taking office in early this Administration set out specific objectives for economic growth and the reduction of unemployment. Putting these goals explicitly on the record serves the important purposes of informing the Congress and the public of the Administration 's policy objectives and identifying the means by which they will be pursued. Setting explicit goals also disciplines the formulation and execution of policies and creates a system of early warning signals for midcourse policy adjustments The Administration 's longer-term goals for the domestic economy can be simply stated : steady progress toward the achievement of a high-employment economy with the benefits shared widely by all major groups in society ; principal reliance on growth in the private sector to promote economic expansion ; and a gradual reduction in the rate of inflation. The President 's budget for fiscal sets out annual projections for real gross national product the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation through For and these numbers represent the Administration 's " best-guess " forecast and are consistent with the tax and spending policies proposed in the budget. Beyond they are not a forecast but projections of the path of real output necessary to achieve steady reductions in the unemployment rate of about one-half percentage point per year Projections in the budget show real GNP reaching its potential by late and the unemployment rate dropping below percent. If the economy is to achieve high employment by a sustained expansion of real output of nearly percent a year will be required ACHIEVING THE U.S. ECONOMY 'S POTENTIAL Potential output is an estimate of what the economy could produce at high rates of utilization of the factors of production labor capital and natural resources. The historical series for potential GNP was completely revised in the Economic Report by the previous Council of Economic Advisers and the level in was lowered by percent. There were two principal reasons for this downward revision. First the rate of secular productivity growth implicit in the earlier estimates was substantially reduced This change reflects the deceleration of productivity since the late 1960s. Second the high-employment unemployment rate was adjusted for changes in the age-sex composition of the labor force. This benchmark unemployment rate is calculated to be percent in compared with percent in ( Table ) The present Council has reviewed the new estimates and concluded that they are a major improvement. Through additional research the quality of our potential GNP estimates should continue to improve in the future For the next years real potential GNP is projected to grow at a rate between percent and percent per year and to rise to between $ 1561O billion and $ billion in ( Chart ) The benchmark unemploy- TABLE Potential gross national product and benchmark unemployment rate [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Potential GNP Year U.4 _ _ __ Benchmark unemployment rate ( percent ) _. _ oooo GNP gap ( potential less actual ) ooo Actual GNP Shift in benchmark unemployment rate from to because of change in sampling procedure in the Current Population Survey Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers ment rate associated with this range of potential GNP estimates would fall slightly from its current level to about percent In addition to the usual uncertainties about the future forecasts of potential GNP under current conditions are subject to a wide margin of error The principal source of uncertainty in projecting potential output lies in estimates of productivity. The abrupt decline in the level of productivity in which is much larger than can be explained by cyclical factors has not been reversed. Improvements in productivity since the recovery began early in have followed normal cyclical patterns : gains have exceeded long-term trend rates of growth but have not been large enough to close the gap opened up by the recession. Future productivity growth will be strongly influenced by additions to the capital stock. Unless investment shows a marked acceleration in the next few years the trend rate of productivity growth is unlikely to regain the pace of the 1950s and 1960s. If the recent modest increases in output per hour persist over the next years potential GNP growth will probably be nearer the low end of the projected range. On the other hand if labor force participation should continue to rise at unusually rapid rates as it did in or if productivity growth should resume its earlier pace the rate of potential GNP growth would be closer to the upper end of the range Chart Actual and Potential Gross National Product BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( RATIO SCALE ) PROJECTED POTENTIAL GNP RANGE- ' f " / ' / POTENTIAL GNP \ V PROJECTED ACTUAL GNP T \ ACTUAL GNP I I I I I I I I I i i I I i I I I I i I i i I I i i i I i i i I l I ! I ! ! ! ! SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LONG-RUN BUDGETARY STRATEGY The Administration has frequently indicated its determination to maintain control over the growth of Federal expenditures and to rely principally upon growth in the private sector as the major source of economic expansion in the years ahead. The share of Federal outlays in GNP during the past years has been between and percent well above the to 21-percent share that characterized the previous two decades. In part the higher share in recent years reflects the fact that GNP is still well below its potential level. But the increase is also a result of rapid growth in Federal transfer payments and grants to State and local governments during the last years Decisions about the level and composition of Federal expenditures are particularly difficult. Many essential national goals such as national defense equal opportunities a fair distribution of income support for basic research and preservation of natural resources can only be reached through Federal programs. Government expenditures however are not subject to the discipline of the market place. Private markets are imperfect but they do tend to encourage efficiency in the use of resources by rewarding firms that are most efficient and eventually weeding out those that can not perform effectively. These market functions must be accomplished in government by budgetary planning that stresses careful choice of priorities and efficiency in the use of our Nation 's scarce resources. Placing limits on the overall growth of Federal expenditures is an effective tool for maintaining such control This Administration after careful review of national priorities has concluded that the Federal Government can respond effectively and compassionately to the needs of the country within a carefully managed and closely controlled budget. The path of expenditures projected in the fiscal budget reflects this judgment. Budget outlays are projected to increase by less than percent in real terms between fiscal and This restraint on expenditures is also carried into the future ; over time outlays will be steadily reduced to about percent of GNP Managing the Federal budget to meet national needs while gradually reducing the share of Federal outlays in GNP has important implications for economic policy. If the course of Federal spending is determined by these principles tax reductions then become an important device for maintaining a stable rate of growth in the private sector. Tax reductions work quickly to stimulate spending and the effects tend to spread quite broadly over the various sectors of the economy. Moreover they can be designed to emphasize either stimulus to consumer spending or growth of business investment depending on the particular circumstances that prevail. Tax reductions are thus a powerful and flexible instrument of economic stabilization policy Over the course of the next several years the amount of reduction in income taxes needed to keep the economy moving ahead steadily will depend on a variety of factors including the course of monetary policy the degree of drag from the foreign and State and local sectors and the willingness of consumers and business to spend. It will also depend on other aspects of the Federal budget. Higher payroll taxes for social security and unemployment insurance are scheduled to take effect in and as shown in Table In addition inflation and economic growth will push individual taxpayers into higher tax brackets raising the effective tax rate on personal income. The Administration 's proposed reduction in personal income taxes would approximately offset the effects of these increases on individual tax payments. In the share of personal income absorbed by Federal personal taxes and the contributions of employees and the self-employed to the social security system was percent. This share will show a small decline by if the Administration 's tax proposals are enacted. Total Federal revenues as a percentage of GNP on the other hand will rise slightly over this period. The size of the new tax package however was not T A B L E Projected effects on Federal receipts of selected tax changes national income and product accounts calendar years l [ Billions of dollars ] Tax increases or reductions2 Individuals * Business Unemployment insuranceTelephone excise Proposed U.x reductions Social security and unemployment insurance Social Security Amendments of Payroll tax increases All projections based on the path of GNP incomes and unemployment assumed in the Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year Entries are cumulative differences in tax levels above those that would prevail under tax rates Social security rate increases of percent in and percent in Increases due to automatic socicl security base changes are not included. Changes in unemployment insurance ( Ul ) taxes are due to increase in the Federal taxable wage base expanded coverage of the Ul system and estimated adjustments in effective State Ul tax rates The amount of tax reduction for individuals shown here differs from the amount estimated by the Treasury on a liability basis. The principal reason for this is that the tax reduction provisions of the proposal would take effect on October while the reform provisions would not take effect until January Since withholding schedules would be adjusted in October to reflect the amount of net tax reduction refunds would be required in to compensate for overwithholding in Refunds are treated in the national income and product accounts on a collections rather than a liability basis ncludes tax reductions for individuals due to changes in the investment tax credit Sources : Department of Health Education and Welfare Department of Labor Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers designed to achieve a particular ratio of tax revenue to income but to ensure satisfactory progress toward our economic goals. This requires taking into account a number of factors including developments on the expenditure side of the Federal budget As noted in Chapter the simplest measure of the total fiscal impact of the Federal sector on the economy is the change in the high-employment budget. As shown by the $ 9-billion increase in the high-employment deficit in calendar ( Table ) the Administration 's enacted and proposed tax TABLE Projected high-employment Federal receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Item Receipts Expenditures. __ Surplus or deficit ( ) Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers reductions together with the expenditure path projected in the budget result in a substantial net increase in fiscal stimulus. In the high-employment deficit declines slightly indicating a moderately less expansive fiscal stance as the economy improves. Over the 2-year period the Federal budget provides $ billion of net fiscal stimulus. Beyond total tax revenues would rise more rapidly than expenditures ; and in the absence of additional tax reductions or changes in expenditure programs a highemployment surplus of $ billion would exist by ( Table and Chart ) The actual path of the high-employment budget after will of course depend on fiscal policy decisions yet to be made THE BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY OVER THE LONGER RUN Whether the economy can actually achieve high employment in with a balanced Federal budget depends upon the strength of the nonFederal sectors of the economy. Our ability to forecast economic developments over a period of years is however extremely limited. One alternative to developing an explicit economic forecast for is to examine the distribution of saving and investment by sector in past periods of high employment. For the economy as a whole the net saving ( excess of receipts over expenditures ) in one or more sectors must be offset by net investment ( excess of expenditures over receipts ) in the remaining sectors What one economic unit saves another unit must invest. An analysis of how saving and investment might be distributed at high employment provides some insights about the prospects for balancing the budget over the next several years Chart High-Employment Federal Surplus as Percent of High-Employment GNP PERCENT SURPLUS PROJECTED DEFICIT i I l i i I 1I I i I I I i I i I I I 1l I i I 1l i I I i i I l I l I NOTE : HALF-YEARLY DATA ON NATIONAL INCOME AND PRODUCT ACCOUNTS BASIS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET. AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Table shows net saving by major sectors of the economy in three past periods of relatively high employment and in Some interesting patterns emerge from these data First net private saving in a high-employment economy has typically been rather small. Investment in plant equipment and inventories by businesses together with investment in new residences is generally about equal to total saving by individuals and business enterprises TABLE Net saving by sector national income and product accounts selected calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Sector average average average i Non-Federal sectors Private sector.. Personal.. Business Other sectors State and local governmentForeign Federal sector. Preliminary Corporate and noncorporate business saving plus the statistical discrepancy less gross private domestic investment Net capital grants received by the United States less net foreign investment Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Second in and again in the total net saving attributable to State and local governments and the foreign sector wras also near zero. As a result in these periods a Federal budget that was approximately in balance was consistent with a high-employment economy. Indeed was a period in which real GNP was above its potential level and pressures on prices were mounting. In this situation a surplus in the Federal budget would have been appropriate Third in recent years the aggregate net saving by State and local governments and the foreign sector has become very large. In net private saving was again near zero but a Federal deficit of nearly $ billion was required to counterbalance the aggregate surpluses of State and local governments and the excess of receipts over expenditures stemming from our international trade and payments. Since economic activity in was well below its potential an even larger Federal deficit would have existed in a high-employment economy last year given the substantial volume of net saving in the non-Federal sectors The trend toward significant positive net saving by State and local governments developed in the early 1970s when the secularly rising surpluses in their employee retirement accounts began to dominate their aggregate budget positions. In addition surpluses in their operating accounts ( exclusive of the social insurance trust funds ) have risen sharply in the last years as a result of rapid increases in Federal grants growth in tax receipts from economic recovery and slow growth in expenditures. Economic and demographic factors are such that continued growth of the trust fund surpluses in the foreseeable future may be expected. Moreover a sudden reversal of the conservative budgetary policies in evidence since the last recession is unlikely so that operating surpluses of State and local governments will decline slowly. Hence the restraint on the economy resulting from net saving in this sector will persist though it will probably diminish somewhat over the next few years The excess of receipts over expenditures in the foreign sector stems principally from two sources : the continuing heavy dependence of the United States on foreign sources of energy and differences in the pace of economic expansion at home and abroad that have resulted in a much more rapid increase in nonfuel imports than exports. The National Energy Plan discussed in Chapter is designed in part to reduce the outflow of dollars but the reduction will require a period of years. The growth rate differentials between the United States and its major trading partners have persisted since the last recession and they became especially pronounced last year These differentials are expected to narrow in as recovery abroad improves. Recent alignments of exchange rates and the steps announced by Japan to reduce its current account surplus should also help reduce our deficit. However while some improvement in our external balance may be forthcoming the foreign sector is very likely to continue to act as a net drain on U.S. income for some years Whether we can reduce the Federal deficit to zero by and still achieve a high-employment economy will depend on how sectoral savinginvestment balances change over the next few years something that can not be known with certainty at present. Developments in a variety of areas including monetary policy fiscal behavior of State and local governments oil prices growth rates of the economies of our major trading partners and foreign trade policies of other countries will influence the outcome. As the figures in Table indicate rather marked shifts in net saving by the nonFederal sectors would be required to reach high employment with a balanced budget in Recognizing that fact means that we must stand ready to provide additional tax reductions if they are needed to keep the pace of economic activity advancing strongly. Should further cuts of significant size prove necessary the return to a balanced budget would have to be postponed until after These fiscal policy decisions for the longer term should not be made at this time. If developments are favorable if business capital spending grows fast enough to generate significant net investment in the private sector if State and local surpluses diminish substantially if the foreign sector deficit improves materially the need for further tax reductions to sustain continued economic expansion would be greatly reduced. Developments in these areas would be difficult to predict. Responsible budgetary policy must retain the flexibility to cope with a range of outcomes THE ROLE OF MONEY AND CREDIT IN REACHING HIGH EMPLOYMENT As noted above the amount of fiscal stimulus required over the next few years will be significantly influenced by the pace of investment in business plant and equipment and in housing Investment in business plant and equipment will only be undertaken if rates of return on these assets are favorable in relation to the cost of financing and the returns from alternative financial investments. Among the determinants of business fixed investment discussed in Chapter the rental price of capital services and the ratio of market valuation to the replacement cost of capital assets are the most directly affected by monetary policy and they are a principal channel through which monetary developments are linked to the real sector of the economy. Monetary policy directly affects the interest rates on short-term and highly liquid obligations such as Federal funds Treasury bills and commercial paper. The rates of return on longer-term debt instruments and equities vary in relation to each other and to short-term interest rates depending on cyclical developments inflation and expectations about the future. Nevertheless these rates tend to influence each other because of the opportunities for both lenders and borrowers to shift their holdings among different types and maturities of financial instruments ( Chart ) Monetary policy through its direct impact on interest rates for short-term obligations can influence but not determine the cost of financing business investment and hence affect its growth in the years to come Monetary policy is also important for the housing sector. Residential construction is highly sensitive to financial conditions both on the demand side through the mortgage market and on the supply side through construction loans to builders. For the average buyer of a single-family home the purchase price is about times income. For such a family an increase of percentage point in mortgage rates would raise the share of income committed to interest payments by about / percent. Hence the state of financial markets will significantly influence the demand for housing and the pace of residential construction Maintenance of a financial environment conducive to significant increases in investment during a prolonged period of economic expansion is a difficult task and will require an appropriate balance between monetary and fiscal policy ; but it is not without precedent. Between and real output grew at a fairly steady rate from a level about percent below potential to a level that was approximately equal to potential. Fiscal policy was stimulative throughout this period and monetary policy was supportive The inflation rate was very moderate percent per year during the period and interest rates were quite stable ; the short-term Treasury bill rate rose only percentage points during the entire period while rates on long-term Treasury bonds rose only percentage point. This pattern of interest rates was associated with growth in the money supply ( Mi ) at an average annual rate of percent so that velocity grew about / percent per year a rate slightly above postwar trends Careful management of economic policy will be necessary to reach and maintain high employment in the years ahead. At the present time there are still ample supplies of idle labor and capital resources available. In the period immediatey ahead growth in real output can therefore proceed at a rate above its long-term trend without risking a resurgence of demand-induced inflation. But fiscal and monetary policies should not attempt to close the remaining output gap at an excessively rapid pace since this could lead to an unbalanced and unsustainable pattern of recovery. And Chart Rates of Interest or Return and the Rate of Inflation PERCENT PER ANNUM & EARNINGS/PRICE / / ^ RATION // \ ' V \ \ \ CORPORATE Aaa BOND YIELDS \ V fi \ VV A / ^ y v * I I I I v TREASURY BILL RATE ^ CHANGE IN CONSUMER PRICE INDEX * / > / I I I I lii i 1/ STANDARD & POOR 'S SERIES FOR COMMON STOCKS i / MOODY 'S / RATE ON 3-MONTH NEW ISSUES t/ CHANGE FROM YEAR AVERAGE TO YEAR AVERAGE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION / _ i as the economy approaches its potential macroeconomic policies must adjust in order to avoid the creation of excess aggregate demand The inflation problem for the immediate future does not stem from excess aggregate demand but from the momentum of inflation inherited from the past. An inflation rate in the to 65/2 -percent range is a serious problem and it needs to be lowered while slack remains in the economy. When higher rates of inflation become built into the expectations of the public however the process of unwinding the inflationary momentum is a slow and arduous task and one that is only partially amenable to the tools of demand management. If the anti-inflation proposal by the President is widely supported and succeeds in lowering inflation rates gradually slower growth of the monetary aggregates will be consistent with a strong and healthy economic expansion. Efforts to hasten the process of reducing this inherited inflation rate through restrictive fiscal and monetary policies would however be unproductive. Such measures would result mainly in a slowing of real growth rather than a reduction in the rate of price increase ECONOMIC GOALS BEYOND The projections in the budget show the unemployment rate continuing to decline to percent in in line with the targets embodied in the proposed Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act. A primary objective of this legislative proposal ( popularly called the Humphrey-Hawkins bill ) is to modify and extend the general principles enunciated in the Employment Act of That act which also established the Council of Economic Advisers and requires the President to submit an annual Economic Report gave the Federal Government the responsibility for promoting high levels of employment and output. It established broad economic objectives that have served as useful guidelines for the formulation of macroeconomic policy during the past years. However the economy has changed in many respects since ; the task of making economic policy has become more complex ; and the standards for acceptable economic performance have been raised. The Administration therefore believes that an updating of the Employment Act of is appropriate to deal with the changing economic environment and a new set of policy requirements The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act would require the President to enunciate explicit short-term ( 2-year ) goals and to recommend the fiscal policies necessary to achieve them. It would also require the President to set forth intermediate-term ( 5-year ) goals each year and to present projections of Federal receipts and outlays consistent with them The target for the overall unemployment rate in assuming the bill is enacted in would be percent The bill would for the first time explicitly establish the goal of reasonable price stability as a high priority objective of national policy. Moreover it O directs the President to pursue this goal by a variety of measures : an earlywarning system to detect emerging capacity problems stockpiling of agricultural commodities and other critical raw materials to dampen price fluctuations regulatory reform vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws and the promotion of labor-management cooperation in efforts to boost productivity Though the bill sets ambitious economic goals it is designed to achieve a careful balance among various competing objectives. The potential conflict between low rates of unemployment and inflation is implicitly recognized and flexibility is retained to adjust the economic strategy. In the third Economic Report after passage of the bill and in any subsequent ones the President may modify the numerical unemployment goal contained in the bill or the timetable for achieving it if he finds such changes necessary In recognition of the fact that macroeconomic policies alone are not able to reduce unemployment to acceptable levels the President is directed to develop as appropriate supplementary employment programs to help achieve the long-run unemployment target. There is no requirement that any specific programs be introduced but those recommended to the President for his consideration include the following : countercyclical employment programs including public works projects countercyclical public service employment and countercyclical revenue sharing ; regional and structural employment policies designed to reduce unemployment among specific demographic groups and within depressed geographic areas ; youth employment programs ; job training and counseling programs to prepare persons for employment in the private sector ; and finally establishment of such additional public or private nonprofit employment projects as are needed to meet the long-term target for the unemployment rate. These additional projects may be created only after an official finding by the President that all other means of reducing unemployment are insufficient. Any new programs would require authorization and funding by the Congress The bill requires the Congress to evaluate the President 's economic strategy and adopt its own set of goals and policies which may or may not coincide with those of the President. The Federal Reserve would be required to submit its own plan for monetary policy to the Congress and to explain the relationship between its intended policies and the President 's short-term goals. These procedures for establishing and reviewing goals and policies are designed to achieve a better coordination of the actions of the President the Congress and the Federal Reserve and to produce a more coherent set of macroeconomic policies The procedures established by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act are an important advance beyond the Employment Act of The bill does not authorize massive new Federal programs. Nor does it impose controls on the economy or create additional governmental institutions. On the contrary it reaffirms the critical importance of a healthy and dynamic private sector in achieving our long-term goals and it relies on existing institu- tions to improve the formulation and coordination of economic policy While this new framework can not guarantee a return to full employment and price stability it should help identify the most serious obstacles and point the way toward rational solutions A 4-percent rate of unemployment in is a very ambitious objective for it would imply that actual GNP would exceed our present estimates of potential GNP. The major unanswered question regarding this target is whether it can be achieved without creating pressures in labor and product markets that would touch off a new round of inflation. Given the present structure of these markets it is unlikely that a 4-percent unemployment rate could be achieved through aggregate demand policies alone without at the same time causing a significant increase in the rate of inflation. Responsible policy however requires not that we abandon efforts to reach the unemployment goal but that we work steadily to reduce the conflict between low unemployment and inflation by developing structural measures to improve the functioning of markets. Chapter discusses in some detail the role of such policies in improving the efficiency of labor markets CHAPTER The World Economy a Hesitant Recovery T HE WORLD ECONOMY in continued to feel the aftershocks of the period : output remained well below productive potential while unemployment reached new peaks in many countries inflation continued at high levels and unusually large imbalances in current accounts persisted. These are problems that are likely to continue to command the attention of policy makers in the coming year. Economic growth in the United States was stronger than that in industrial countries abroad This difference in growth rates and strongly rising oil imports contributed to the emergence of an unprecedented U.S. deficit on current account transactions. Concern over the U.S. deficit was a major factor leading to a substantial depreciation of the dollar against many foreign currencies which was especially rapid toward the end of the year This chapter focuses on the causes of the hesitant recovery of the world economy from the recession and on the challenge to the conduct of national economic policies that it represents. Developments in the world economy over the past years are assessed. Then a closer look is taken at developments in concentrating on the largest foreign industrial countries which along with the United States set the pace for the world economy as a whole. Finally the major continuing problems in the world economy that grew out of the disturbances in the first half of the 1970s are assessed and the Administration 's approach to these problems is set forth Thus the discussion is not a complete catalog of world economic problems or of U.S. international economic policies. One important omission is the long-standing challenge to raise incomes in the poorer countries. U.S programs specifically directed toward this goal are not examined. Nevertheless solutions to the problems that are examined hesitant world recovery imbalanced international payments volatile commodity prices and slow growth of world trade are crucial to the success of development programs ORIGINS OF THE CURRENT WORLD ECONOMIC DISORDER Although individual countries have from time to time faced conditions similar to today 's the combination of prolonged inflation along with unemployment in many countries and large current account imbalances is a new experience. A first step toward developing policies to deal with the present constellation of problems is to study how they arose and to sort out what has changed in the world economy and what has not The period from the late 1940s to the late 1960s counts as one of the most successful periods of modern world economic history. Successive steps were taken to liberalize world trade. Real incomes in Western Europe grew at an average rate of percent between and The economy of Japan grew an average of percent per year as that economy joined the front ranks of the industrial economies. Major economic gains were also made in many developing countries and growth in this group averaged percent per year. Problems with inflation and with international payments tended to be isolated in individual countries and were tractable Consumer price increases in the group of developed countries making up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) were brought under increasingly better control and averaged only percent per year from to During the late 1960s problems began to appear. Inflationary tendencies gradually developed as labor and product markets tightened in some countries and wage pressures increased even in economies that appeared to have some slack. The mild recessions that occurred in various countries seemed less able to eliminate the inflationary momentum that had built up in the preceding expansions. In addition the mechanisms of the Bretton Woods system of par value exchange rates were increasingly unsuited to deal with the imbalances that arose in countries ' payments positions. Although these developments posed serious puzzles for policy makers in the late 1960s and early 1970s the problems seemed manageable. In retrospect they were dwarfed by later events INFLATION The slow upward drift of inflation rates in the late 1960s quickened after carrying inflation in most industrial countries above percent per year in and more than twice that high in some countries. Although inflation rates have since receded they remain well above those previously experienced and further declines are now coming only slowly in most countries ( Chart ) The upward movement of inflation rates was the consequence of a series of events that culminated with the oil embargo and oil price increases of late Economic policies in virtually all industrial countries were oriented toward expansion in As a result growth was strong virtually everywhere that year and the next year. Although aggregate capacity utilization and unemployment data indicate that demand had been pushed beyond potential output in only a few national economies the nearly simultaneous expansions outran available supplies of many raw materials and strained worldwide capacity in a number of basic industries. Industrial commodity prices climbed rapidly. The nonfood component of The Economist index of Chart Consumer Prices and Hourly Earnings in Major Industrial Countries PERCENT CHANGE FROM YEAR EARLIER UNITED STATES HOURLY C LI EARNINGS CONSUMER PRICES I IIIIIIIII1 III1 II11 III1II11 IIIIIII I I [ I I I CANADA Ib HOURLY EARNINGS * y I I I I I I I I I M i rTi M CONSUMER PRICES till I i i i I i i i ! i i i I i I FRANCE r J f HOURLY EARNINGS / " \ \ CONSUMER PRICES i h i i I i i i I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I WEST GERMANY HOURLY EARNINGS f i I iiilTT>viIi u ~ * \ CONSUMER PRICES I ^ * ~ SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT Chart Continued Consumer Prices and Hourly Earnings in Major Industrial Countries PERCENT CHANGE FROM YEAR EARLIER CONSUMER PRICES I I I I I I I I M ^ iH ' ^ T I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I JAPAN A HOURLY EARNINGS A / \ A yv/ \ ^ I \ ^ j I I I I I I I I I I A V ^ / v N ^ y K \ CONSUMER PRICES I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I M I I l I I I I I I II I 3b UNITED KINGDOM / HOURLY EARNINGS / / A J ^ V J CONSUMER PRICES i i i rfi " i i I i i i M i l M l I I I I I I I I SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT I I I I I I I I commodity prices ( measured in dollars and excluding petroleum ) rose percent from December to December Less than one-twentieth of this increase can be attributed directly to the depreciation of the dollar in the early 1970s Grain prices also began to rise following declines in world harvests of wheat corn and rice in from year-earlier levels. World grain stocks ( held mainly in the United States ) had been whittled down from mid1960s levels so that poor harvests had a greater effect on prices than earlier The food component of The Economist index rose percent from December to December Prices of manufactures also began to move up at a faster clip in reflecting higher input costs and strong demand. Consumer price increases in the large countries ranged from percent in Germany to percent in Japan over the quarters ending in the fourth quarter of Wage pressures built up steadily in most countries. Trends in consumer prices and hourly earnings for the seven largest industrial countries are shown in Chart Although inflation rose in all countries during this period there was considerable divergence of inflationary experience across countries. This divergence partly reflected differences in demand pressure and the extent and speed of wage responses to increases in the cost of living. The exchange rate realignments that began in also contributed to widening differences in inflation rates. Countries that had recorded above average inflation in the years up to and consequently experienced declines in their currencies faced additional inflationary pressure from rising import prices. Countries whose prices had been more stable and whose currencies therefore tended to appreciate received a dividend from slower import price increases. The shift to flexible rates among major currencies over the period also provided countries with more freedom to pursue policies with different consequences for inflation Inflation was already recognized as a serious problem in late when the world was surprised by the Arab oil embargo and a series of oil price increases that more than quadrupled the world price of crude oil Of all the shocks of the early 1970s the oil price increases have had the most profound and persistent effects. The direct effect alone added about ^ percent to the price level in developed countries in Prices of substitute fuels were also bid up thus further increasing price levels Coming at a time when upward price pressures were already intensifying the oil price increases touched off an inflationary chain reaction. Fears that those who controlled supplies of other raw materials might succeed in emulating the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) speculation fed by fluctuations in exchange rates for major currencies and a very tight supply situation led to another burst of industrial commodity price increases. With stocks of grains having already reached very low levels a second poor world harvest in contributed to further large increases in food prices The rise in oil food and other commodity prices reduced real incomes from wages and profits in manufacturing and service sectors. Attempts by workers and firms to restore previous positions put added upward pressure on wages and prices. The extent of these secondary wage-price forces varied with conditions in individual economies. Where automatic wage adjustments to compensate for consumer price rises were widespread as in Italy or the United Kingdom or where wages were adjusted annually as in Japan the pressures were greatest. Average increases in hourly earnings over 12-month periods reached percent or more in these countries. Even in Germany where wage pressures were more moderate increases in hourly earnings approached percent over a 12-month period The direct upward pressures from commodity prices abated as the world moved into recession in late and early Indeed most non-oil commodity prices moved sharply downward. As a result inflation rates receded but the wage-price momentum that had been built into economies sustained rates of consumer price increase that continued to be roughly double what they had been in the late 1960s. In some countries such as Italy the upward shift in the ongoing rate of price increase was substantially greater. The persistent high unemployment and low capacity utilization in the world since has had a relatively small effect in dissipating the momentum of the wage-price spiral CURRENT ACCOUNT IMBALANCES The oil price increases of led to huge surpluses in the current accounts of most OPEC countries and to their mirror image large deficits elsewhere. The OPEC countries could not immediately increase their imports to match their higher revenues. Hence their combined current account surplus which measures the amount by which export receipts ( including investment earnings ) exceed payments for imports and net transfer payments climbed from less than $ billion in to over $ billion in A large part of the corresponding shift in the position of the rest of the world was seen in the emergence of a combined deficit of more than $ billion in the OECD countries including the United States after surpluses averaging $ billion for The deficit of the non-OPEC developing countries widened to about $ billion from an average of $ billion in ( Table ) After being compressed by reduced oil consumption during the recession of the combined OPEC surplus expanded to the neighborhood of $ billion in and as demand for oil picked up again. This surplus has become concentrated in the Persian Gulf states whose revenues continue to outstrip their ability to absorb goods and services. The deficit of the non-OPEC developing countries has receded from a peak of $ billion in to less than $ billion in while the deficit in the OECD countries has risen to more than $ billion again TABLE World current account patterns * [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country OECD United States Canada Japan.. European Community West Germany Developing countries : OPEC Non-OPEC Other < Residuals Data are on the OECD basis Preliminary estimates Excludes cancellation of Indian debt ( $ billion ) and extraordinary grants ( $ billion ) Includes the Communist countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Residual arises from timing differences and inconsistencies in nationally collected data Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) RECESSION The massive increase in commodity prices especially oil led directly and indirectly to the worst recession since the 1930s. The direct effects were the result of a transfer from consumer incomes in the industrial countries to the revenues of oil-exporting countries. Spending generally declined in importing countries in response to the change in real incomes while the OPEC countries increased their spending only slowly at first. Even after the OPEC countries made the initial adjustment of their spending to their increased wealth their saving remained high. The result was a massive change in world saving patterns as is dramatically shown in Table by the pattern of current accounts in The change became increasingly evident as the total real gross national product ( GNP ) of the seven largest OECD countries fell at an increasingly rapid rate starting in the first half of Two less direct responses added to the contractionary impetus of the price increases. First consumers and business became progressively more pessimistic as wore on. There were extraordinary rises in saving rates in all major foreign countries while sharp declines in real investment occurred in most areas A second depressing effect came in the reactions of policy makers. Virtually every country was faced with the dilemma of how to respond to the simultaneously inflationary and contractionary effects of the oil price rise. On the one hand there was widespread reluctance to accommodate the inflationary effects by allowing nominal demand to grow at a sufficient pace to keep unemployment from rising. Many felt that such an accommodative policy would allow the new wage-price spiral to continue unchecked. On the other hand most analysts perceived that a continuation of restrictive policies initiated to counter the tight markets in would lead to a sharp decline in real incomes and to a serious contraction Faced with this dilemma countries chose different routes. The predominant response was to continue the restrictive policies initiated in into When the full contractionary force of the oil price increase was not felt immediately monetary policy in some countries was made even .more restrictive. Fiscal policy automatically became more restrictive when inflation raised tax liabilities by pushing individuals into higher personal income tax brackets and caused real corporate profits to be overstated By late the cumulative effects of the oil price increases and contractionary monetary and fiscal policies began to be felt more strongly. Rising saving rates added to contractionary forces as consumers became more cautious. Real investment fell with firms ' growing concerns about the outlook for sales high interest rates and the structure of their balance sheets. Firms also moved to reduce inventories of materials that had been built up as a hedge against further commodity price increases. The combination of these forces produced the deepest recessions of the postwar period. Those few countries that were less affected by the oil price increase like Canada or that moved to counter its contractionary effects like Sweden had milder recessions. They were seriously affected by the subsequent prolonged period of weak demand in other industrial countries however. Governments in these countries also ultimately adopted more restrictive policies to control inflation In authorities in most countries moved to counter their deepening recessions with expansionary fiscal policies. The view that increased rates of monetary expansion would raise inflationary expectations even under depressed conditions inhibited most countries from taking similar steps on the monetary side. The expansionary fiscal measures and the completion of inventory adjustments provided an initial burst of growth in most countries after the trough was passed. Since then real private spending has been relatively sluggish in most countries and fiscal policies have become more restrictive. Hence output growth in industrial countries has slowed markedly outside the United States. Unemployment rates in most foreign countries now stand at or above the levels reached in and are rising ( Chart ) THE WORLD ECONOMY IN Outside the United States the major industrial countries virtually stagnated after the first quarter of ( Table ) Growth in the smaller industrial countries averaged even less than in the larger ones. Unemployment reached new highs in many countries. Commodity prices surged upward at the beginning of but the rise was short lived. Wage increases were smaller than a year earlier and the momentum of inflation edged slowly downward. Sharply declining prices for food and many industrial commodities helped to bring inflation rates below underlying rates for most of the second half of the year Chart Unemployment Rates in Major Industrial Countries PERCENT ; ADJUSTED TO U.S. CONCEPTS CANADA I I I i I i i i ! i i i i I i FRANCE ' I I I I i i i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I I l i I I i Chart Continued Unemployment Rates in Major Industrial Countries PERCENT ; ADJUSTED TO U.S. CONCEPTS WEST GERMANY I I I I I I I I I I I I i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i I I i I i i i i i i UNITED KINGDOM ^ I I I I I I I I I 1/ EXCLUDES NORTHERN IRELAND SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I I I I TABLE Real GNP growth in major industrial countries [ Percent change at seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Country II United States Canada .France2 West Germany Italy s Japan United Kingdom III IV II III i Preliminary Gross domestic product excluding nonmarket activity such as compensation of employees in the government sector Gross domestic product Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and national sources As inflationary fears receded current account imbalances became the most serious constraint on expansion in many economies. Persian Gulf oil producers and several industrial countries continued to have large surpluses Other governments were inhibited from adopting the more stimulative economic policies that were needed to restore the momentum of economic expansion in part because of concerns that they would be unable to finance the larger current account deficits that would result. The emergence of a large current account deficit in the United States in was associated with some improvement in the positions of industrial and developing countries that had been hard pressed in but more than one-third of the U.S. deficit was offset by a jump in the surplus of Japan AGGREGATE REAL GROWTH The growth of real economic activity in was disappointing especially in Western Europe. Real output in OECD Europe increased only an estimated percent. By the third quarter the number of unemployed in these countries excluding Portugal and Turkey stood at about million or above the figure a year earlier. This performance was in part the consequence of the restrictive policies adopted by a number of countries as a means of slowing inflation and reducing current account deficits. Italy and the United Kingdom accepted restrictions on their economic policies as part of the establishment of standby credits with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Other countries France many smaller industrial countries and many developing nations also assigned high priority to reducing inflation and current account deficits and maintained or adopted restrictive monetary and fiscal policies in Because of the constraints on policies felt by many governments hopes for sustaining a global recovery in were pinned to a group of " strong countries " those with relatively moderate inflation rates and favorable balance of payments positions. The United States Germany and Japan were the major states in this group but Switzerland and the Netherlands also fit the description. The United States was in a somewhat different position from the others in that it had moved to approximate current account balance in A deficit was seen as an acceptable position for the United States and given the continuing OPEC surplus even a desirable one from a global standpoint. It was expected that the other strong countries would also move toward and into current account deficit For world growth to be maintained at a satisfactory rate it was necessary that growth in domestic demand in these strong countries be vigorous thereby counteracting the restrictive measures taken in the " policyconstrained " countries. Reduction of current account deficits in the policyconstrained countries would be facilitated by such a strategy and these countries would soon be able to move back to quicker recoveries A comparison of major countries ' publicly announced forecasts for with what now appears the likely outcome ( Table ) shows that except for the United States countries have fallen below their governments ' growth expectations. Germany has probably fallen to ^ percentage points short of the * to percent growth rate discussed early in the year. German authorities had counted on strong private demand at home and growing exports to achieve satisfactory growth. Investment and exports did not rise as much as expected however and the government budget deficit was smaller than projected. As a result output growth stalled after the first quarter. The government responded by postponing measures intended to reduce the public sector deficit and by adopting a small fiscal stimulus package in November. However the package came too late to affect the outcome for The Japanese announced a growth target of percent for the fiscal year ending in March Although the Japanese economy fell well behind the pace needed to achieve this stimulative measures adopted in September and a second set of measures taken at the end of the calendar year will make the gap less than it would have been. Japanese GNP growth was supported mainly by strong exports. Domestic demand expanded at an average rate of less than percent for the first quarters of calendar year Thus the pattern of Japanese growth in and the resulting inTABLE National forecasts and realized real GNP growth for [ Percent ] Country United States... Canada France West Germany.. Italy Japan United Kingdom Change from Fourth quarter to fourth quarter Year to year .do .do. .do. Fiscal year to fiscal year Year to year Early forecast Realized V/i % i Preliminary estimates Sources : Forecasts from public statements of government officials and other official sources ; estimates of realized growth from Department of Commerce Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers crease in the current account surplus by nearly $ billion served to tighten current account constraints on other countries Economic growth in all other major foreign countries also fell short of expectations. The pervasively weak element in the growth of demand in was business fixed investment. Among the seven largest countries only in Canada was real business fixed investment above levels. Business fixed investment has slowed in most countries since and virtually no growth appears to have occurred in the second half of in any of the large foreign countries Real private consumption expenditures rose only moderately in most countries in Consumption declined in the United Kingdom where falling real wages depressed disposable income and hence real consumption and was virtually unchanged in Italy because of sharply increased personal tax collections. In Germany and France taxes net of government transfer payments also took an increased share of household income in Saving rates in the large foreign countries were lower than in except for Japan but the declines since the recovery began were generally less than in the United States Government spending made only a modest contribution to demand growth in most countries. Authorities in Italy and the United Kingdom followed strongly restrictive demand management policies. Limiting the government share of total spending over the medium term is an independent policy objective in these and other countries. Authorities have therefore been reluctant to increase spending in the short run as an aggregate demand measure Japan where the government sector is still substantially smaller than in other countries was an exception to the general pattern of slow growth in real government spending Despite the slower growth of world trade in the growth of real exports was relatively strong in Japan Canada Italy and the United Kingdom. Except for Japan these are countries whose exports benefited from substantial exchange rate depreciations although in Canada the growth of the U.S. market was undoubtedly more important for exports and petroleum exports played a role for the United Kingdom. In Germany and France exports grew more slowly and in the smaller OECD countries they contracted on average. Thus the smaller countries were most adversely affected by external developments and these countries were the ones registering the slowest real growth with output declining in many of them INFLATION IN While inflation rates in most countries remained high in ( Table ) they did come down somewhat particularly in those countries where inflation had been highest. A surge in world commodity prices in late and early pushed up consumer prices in the first half of the year. However these prices turned around by midyear. In some countries the United Kingdom Italy France and a number of smaller countries price pressures continued to be exacerbated in the first half of by large exchange rate depreciations that had occurred in These currencies were stable even rising somewhat in and this source of price pressure abated or was reversed as progressed TABLE Inflation in major industrial countries [ Percent change in the consumer price i ndex ; seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Country United States ._ Canada France West Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom II III IV II III Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers A significant decline in inflation was achieved in in the United Kingdom where a wage restraint program prevented import price increases from being reflected in wage settlements. Although no wrage norm was agreed to following the end of the second year of wage restraint in August the government has been largely successful in preventing contracts from being reopened until months after the previous settlement. Increases since August have not averaged substantially more than the 10-percent figure that the government views as consistent with controlling inflation Inflation also declined in in Italy. Italian wages which are indexed to the cost of living did respond to import prices and rose sharply through the first half of With the stabilization of the lira and the turnaround in commodity prices cost-of-living increases in wages are now declining rapidly. The declining trend has been reinforced by some shrinkage of wage increases granted in addition to cost-of-living increases Thus inflation has been moderating in the two large countries where it had been most rapid. Elsewhere however wrages and prices appear to be locked in a stable pattern of increases. Price increases in Japan have been held down by the appreciation of the yen in ; and other countries whose currencies appreciated substantially late in the year should post lower price increases in early It remains to be seen however to what extent these smaller price increases will lower inflation rates over the longer term by holding down money wage increases. In other countries there appears to be little risk that inflation will accelerate markedly but also little hope that it can be brought down quickly from current levels. Wage settlements and prices of manufactured goods have proved to be relatively insensitive to the high unemployment and low capacity utilization now prevailing. Wage and price controls have been effective only when combined with very restrictive demand management policies and only for limited periods of time. The Cana109 O i dian government is in the process of phasing out one of the few remaining general programs of wage and price controls. In addition there have been tentative experiments with the use of taxes as measures to slow inflation. In one approach governments have proposed general tax reductions in return for agreements by labor unions to accept lower money wage settlements When tax relief is warranted on other grounds and labor negotiations are highly centralized something may be gained through such a bargaining process. An alternative set of approaches discussed in Chapter would use decentralized tax incentives for reducing inflation. These approaches are novel and raise important substantive questions that must be answered before they could be responsibly proposed CURRENT ACCOUNT POSITIONS IN Four industrial countries that have had persistent surpluses Japan Germany Switzerland and the Netherlands had a combined surplus of about $ billion in The United Kingdom and Italy moved from deficit into surplus Efforts by other OECD countries to reduce their sizable deficits in met with little success because of slow growth in their export markets. Some countries within this group Portugal and Turkey for example have encountered difficulties in continuing to finance deficits. The non-OPEG developing countries appear to have reduced slightly their combined current account deficit in Their export earnings were boosted by commodity price increases early in the year and some of them had sharply curtailed imports as well. Brazil and Mexico achieved substantial reductions in their deficits and a number of Asian countries appear to have realized smaller shifts The $ l7-billion rise in the U.S. current account deficit from $ billion in to about $ billion in reflected a $ 20-billion increase in our trade deficit. Although an increase in the deficit was widely expected the magnitude of the shift proved to be much greater than anticipated since growth abroad failed to develop as strongly as expected and U.S. oil imports were pushed up by a series of unforeseen developments. Rising payments for oil accounted for more than one-half of the increase in our trade deficit in The weak U.S. export performance and rise in the trade deficit in does not appear to stem from trends in relative domestic prices. U.S and foreign prices measured in dollars held about the same relationship in early as in mid-1974 although there have been fluctuations in the interim. There has been some shift in relative export prices for manufactured goods however suggesting a greater willingness on the part of exporters in some foreign economies to compete on the basis of price. Nevertheless the depreciation of the dollar in late should result in a noticeable improvement in U.S. competitiveness with the trade volume response occurring after a lag of or years FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS The most notable development in foreign exchange markets in the first half of was the strength of the U.K. pound and the Italian lira after these countries completed standby financing agreements with the IMF. As the year progressed exchange market attention focused increasingly on the dollar Concern over the large U.S. current account deficit generated downward pressure on the dollar particularly vis-a-vis the currencies of countries with large surpluses. As market uncertainties grew over what measures would be enacted by the United States to control the rise in oil imports and as demand in foreign economies showed few signs of strengthening the pressures intensified. The decline of the dollar from December to December against a weighted average of the currencies of ten major foreign countries ( Belgium Canada France Germany Italy Japan the Netherlands Sweden Switzerland and the United Kingdom ) was percent weighting currencies by countries ' shares of the total trade of the group Weighting the same currencies by countries ' trade with the United States gives a depreciation of only percent during The difference is mainly due to the much larger weight of the weak Canadian dollar in the latter index. Indexes including more currencies also tend to show smaller depreciations of the dollar since currencies excluded from the index of ten currencies were virtually all weaker than the average of those included The yen appreciated against the dollar by percent from December to December the largest appreciation of any currency. Increases in the dollar value of several other currencies were also sizable : German mark percent ; Swiss franc percent ; and U.K. pound percent. On the other side the Canadian dollar fell percent The magnitude of these movements was not unusual for the floating rate period. In the period since the dollar floated it has twice depreciated by more than percent on a weighted average basis in months or less Three times the dollar appreciated by percent or more with the appreciation exceeding percent in two cases. Individual rate changes of percent have been common and even the change in the yen rate this year has been matched several times by movements of other currencies Rapid movements at the end of the year occurred under disturbed market conditions however with wide spreads between bid and ask quotations and large intraday gyrations in rates. Thus the efficiency of the current system of rate determination was called into question a topic pursued below UNFINISHED BUSINESS At the beginning of the world economy faces the same problems that have confronted policy makers since unemployment is high margins of unused productive capacity are substantial inflation continues at excessive rates protectionist forces are strong and current accounts are extremely unbalanced. On the brighter side the virulence of underlying contractionary and inflationary forces has abated as governments have taken cautious and for the most part cooperative steps to improve economic performance. The international financial system has adapted to the need to channel the large accumulation of savings in OPEC countries to countries in deficit The serious problems that have beset the world economy have led some to argue that we must permanently set more limited economic objectives In some respects this is true we must plan for a world of less secure and more expensive energy. Nevertheless higher employment and output are achievable virtually everywhere without creating new inflationary pressures. The problems are global and the pursuit of appropriate domestic policies is constrained in many countries by international payments imbalances. Achieving the potential of the world economy will require bold policies and close international economic cooperation Four major economic challenges are discussed below. International cooperation is essential to meeting each one of them. If instead of working together to sustain economic recovery and solve our other problems governments accept a continuation of the poor performance of as inevitable the world may well face a darkening economic future. Unilateral protectionist trade policies will flourish. Pressures for international arrangements to allocate markets in especially depressed sectors will grow stronger. The result will be a more rigid world economy no longer capable of generating the rapid growth of trade and incomes that has characterized the post-World War II period. The developing countries which are looking for opportunities to participate more broadly in world trade will be particularly hurt by such an outcome TO RESTORE HEALTH TO THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY Foreign industrial economies as a group have shown only scattered signs of renewed strength following their extreme weakness in mid-1977. The Japanese economy is experiencing very slow growth. Even with the stimulative measures announced at the end of the appreciation of the yen together with a high personal saving rate and depressed investment raises questions whether growth in will exceed In Europe the economic outlook with existing policies is for rising unemployment of labor and falling capacity utilization. For the OECD as a whole GNP growth is likely to average * /2 to percent in unless there are major policy changes in addition to those announced for Japan and those proposed for the United States in this Report At the same time most forecasts indicate that the rate of increase of consumer prices in the OECD should slow somewhat from about percent in to around percent in There continues to be sufficient slack in most economies to permit growth at rates moderately higher than current forecasts without forgoing a gradual reduction in average inflation rates Governments recognize the need for stronger expansion. In November the member countries submitted their preliminary objectives for to the OECD. In the aggregate these goals would lead to ^ percent real GNP growth for the OECD as a whole. Such an outcome would be the minimum that could be expected to arrest the rise of unemployment abroad The generally sluggish behavior of business fixed investment has been a major factor keeping countries from achieving their goals. Stronger investment is important in the short run to provide stimulus for sustained recovery Over the longer run some are concerned that capacity constraints may have become relatively more important limitations on noninflationary expansion Thus when capacity limits are reached unemployment may still be above levels that would be inflationary on the wage side. Greater business fixed investment during the recovery period would reduce the potential for capacity constraints and make possible a further reduction in unemployment A number of explanations have been offered for the weakness of investment. No single explanation will suffice for all countries. Nevertheless a substantial portion of the current weakness of investment in every country is accounted for by the low current and prospective rates of capacity utilization and the effects of low levels of output on profits. In addition the persistence of inflation has undoubtedly added to concerns that recoveries may not be sustained. Much investment that has occurred has been for modernization projects that promise to save more in labor energy and other inputs than their capital costs ; projects that would add to capacity have in many instances been deferred Considerable attention has been focused as well on lowr after-tax returns on capital and the poor outlook for improvement as explanations for sluggish investment. Measures of profits and the total return on capital must be treated with some reservations but there is substantial evidence that over the past to years they have declined relative to GNP and relative to capital stocks in many foreign countries. Moreover it appears in contrast to the U.S experience that the fall in the return on capital has been too large and too prolonged to be entirely attributable to the recent recessions at least in Germany the United Kingdom and Italy Investment is not being held back by insufficient savings. Given the savings represented by the OPEC current account surplus and with consumer saving rates in most foreign economies high by historical standards there is no shortage of savings in the world today. Thus a higher return on capital is not required today to assure an adequate supply of funds for investment Rather to encourage firms to make use of the available pool of savings for productive investment what is needed is a sufficient margin of the expected return on capital over the cost of capital One way to increase this margin and call forth more investment is to raise expectations and reduce uncertainties concerning after-tax returns on capital Many government actions can have an effect on these expectations by achieving continued economic recovery reducing tax liabilities associated with new investment and reducing uncertainties and inefficiencies that result from the government regulatory process. A second way to increase the margin is to maintain an expansionary monetary policy which reduces the cost of capital Monetary policy is more flexible than policies that work by raising the rate of return on capital but there is a role for both kinds of policies. Each generates higher expected incomes for those who are willing to accept the risk of new investment. But the two kinds of policies do of course have different effects on the distribution of income and these must be taken into account To some extent views concerning the indicators of macroeconomic management threaten to prevent some countries from reaching their goals. As discussed below the significance of current account positions has changed in view of the OPEC surplus. In addition attitudes about budget deficits and the growth of monetary aggregates should be formulated in the light of current economic conditions. As noted in Chapter it is difficult to hold down deficits in government budgets when the drag on industrial economies from external deficits is as high as it is now and especially so when investment is weak as well. Similarly rates of monetary expansion must make realistic allowance for the inherited momentum of price and wage increases and the rate at which this momentum can be dissipated. It is important to avoid such a progressive tightening of monetary conditions that investment objectives are thwarted In recent years the appropriate use of monetary and fiscal policies has sometimes been constrained by views on their significance and impact. The principal tools of macroeconomic policy are not themselves the ultimate objectives of policy. In reality monetary growth rates and budget deficits are strategic variables and they must adapt to economic conditions. The significance of these strategic variables lies in their effects on output unemployment and inflation Sometimes it has been suggested that monetary growth or budget deficits affect inflation rates directly through expectations aside from their effect through actual or expected demand. Expectations of inflation are indeed important determinants of economic behavior but these expectations are linked to actual price pressures that are expected to develop in markets It is difficult to see how inflation ( or the expectation thereof ) would be raised significantly more by monetary or fiscal policy measures that moved an economy toward full utilization of its productive potential compared with a fortuitous shift in exports or in saving behavior that had the same effect on demand. A more carefully articulated view is that monetary and fiscal policy affect the level and composition of economic activity and thus affect inflation through this linkage A program for achieving full recovery in the industrial economies must begin with measures to raise domestic demand and capacity utilization. Only then is sufficient investment likely to be forthcoming to achieve structural objectives such as reducing dependence on export demand and forestalling potential imbalances between capital stocks and labor forces. Both monetary and fiscal policy can make a contribution. With excess capacity everywhere world recovery can proceed without undue concern that reasonable expansionary policies will trigger a new round of inflation. As recovery continues and utilization of capacity reaches high levels unemployment may still remain unacceptably high in some countries. A more cautious approach to further reductions in unemployment would then have to be taken. It may be necessary to move progressively toward fiscal restraint to keep demand within the productive potential of the economy and meanwhile continue to promote investment with continued stimulative monetary policy and special incentives for investment Improved cooperation in economic policy making will be essential if countries are to succeed in carrying out such a program. The consequences of insufficient attention to the global implications of national policies are seen in the inflationary pressures generated by the simultaneous expansion of and in the poor performance resulting from too great a reliance on exportled growth in The mechanisms for international cooperation have improved in recent years The heads of state of the largest industrial countries have met three times since to address economic problems. At the London Summit last May the heads of state discussed their domestic economic goals and agreed to monitor progress toward them While not all of the specific goals for that were laid down at the London Summit have been achieved the exercise has proved a useful tool in improving international economic cooperation. When the German and Japanese economies proved to be weaker than officials in those countries had expected the Summit commitments reinforced domestic considerations that led both governments to implement stimulative measures in the fall. Summit commitments also supported the efforts of other governments to maintain policies directed primarily at reducing inflation and current account deficits The process of setting economic objectives and examining their consistency and desirability is being extended in the Economic Policy Committee ( EPC ) of the OECD. The EPG will continue to monitor economic activity in relative to countries ' own internal goals and to the overall balance of demand and supply in the world economy. The international discussion of goals and the means to achieve them is necessary to assess the consistency of individual countries ' aims to guide the formation of policies that have good promise of achieving them and to respond to developments that push economies off their desired courses TO DEAL WITH EXTERNAL IMBALANCES A country 's current account balance measures its net receipts from trade in goods and services ( including investment income ) plus net transfers from the rest of the world. It is closely related to the level of economic activity Higher demand at home generally leads to more imports and thereby to a smaller surplus or larger deficit. Moreover a decline in the balance generated by external forces must be offset by stronger domestic demand if GNP growth is to remain unchanged. Thus a country 's current account position is an important indicator for setting demand management policies A country 's current account balance is a useful economic indicator for a second reason. A current account surplus must by definition be matched by a net outflow of private and official investment to the rest of the -world while a deficit must be matched by a net inflow of investment. Policy makers must consider the sustainability of a current account deficit whether the willingness of foreign investors to acquire claims on a country or the willingness of domestic investors to reduce claims on foreigners will remain strong enough to finance a given deficit. Changes in a country 's current account position may require exchange rate changes to reconcile domestic objectives with a current account position that can be sustained. But neither the current account nor the exchange rate should be viewed as an ultimate objective of policy in the same sense that real income and the rate of unemployment are. These external variables do not directly affect the welfare of citizens although they have important effects on variables that do The presumption in the past has been that a mature industrial country like the United States would normally be in current account surplus thus supporting a private capital outflow to capital-poor developing countries where the productivity of capital was thought to be relatively high. The emergence of the OPEC countries as major capital exporters and the troubled state of the world economy have altered this presumption at least for the present. Although developing countries continue to welcome small current account deficits that is an inflow of capital large deficits are not welcome since these countries ' export earnings are insufficient to meet the resulting increase in debt service. Thus industrial countries following appropriate policies are more likely to have current account deficits under today 's conditions. Surpluses most often occur when domestic demand is particularly weak when the currency is undervalued or when there are barriers to imports or inducements to exports which are disruptive to world trade Over the last years there has been an extraordinary divergence in countries ' current account positions. Surpluses have been common among those countries best able to finance a deficit including the United States in As a result borrowing by many weaker countries with large deficits strained the limits of international lenders ' willingness to extend credits to them and the fabric of the international financial system was stretched thin The movement of the United States into deficit has relieved these strains somewhat but has led to new strains in exchange markets Some perspective on the relative current account positions of the OECD countries in is given in Table The current account positions of the OECD countries in ( as projected by the OECD ) are shown as well as the size of the surpluses or deficits relative to gross domestic product ( GDP ) The scaling by GDP is intended to facilitate comparisons of countries of different size not to suggest a norm for current account positions. As can be seen in the table the relative size of the estimated deficit is somewhat larger for the United States than for the OECD countries as a whole. Several major countries and many smaller countries have relative deficits substantially larger than the U.S. deficit however. The table also shows clearly the extreme positions of many small countries In time as the United States and others finally accept the need to take effective measures to limit oil consumption the OPEC surplus will dwindle and the corresponding deficits will shrink. But in the interim only action by OPEC members to reduce oil prices or dramatically raise imports or a repetition of the world recession would significantly reduce the OPEC surplus. The latter would be an extraordinarily costly way to reduce oil imports. Hence for some time to come appropriate national policies and international cooperation will be particularly important to ensure that the international financial system remains adequate to the demands that will be made on it and to reduce the large imbalances that exist aside from the OPEC surplus TABLE OECD current account estimates for Percent of gross domestic product Country Switzerland Japan Belgium-Luxembourg Italy Netherlands 5H IX West Germany United Kingdom Iceland TOTAL OECD -H France Finland United States Canada Spain -2X Australia Sweden Denmark Greece New Zealand -VA Ireland Austria Turkey Portugal Norway Estimates not comparable with those shown in national sources because of an OECD correction for a once-and-for-all negative impact of $ V * billion on the current account balance due to a change in Sweden 's method of statistical reporting Calculated using gross domestic product Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers When current account imbalances arise for a given country there are several alternative courses of action. If a deficit appears temporary from say a bout of cold weather or a sharp cyclical movement one would expect extraordinary deficits to be financed by private and official capital flows. For large and unsustainable surpluses or deficits which are likely to persist and reflect underlying trends adjustment must come either through adjustment of macroeconomic variables such as a change in interest rates or economic activity or through changes in the exchange rates. Finally there are a number of " microeconomic measures " that can be pursued such as trade policy protective actions changes in the tax structure or export promotion By and large these latter measures are not appropriate to promoting adjustment between regions : they greatly distort the underlying priorities of an economy with little payoff in adjusting imbalances. The roles of exchange rate adjustment macroeconomic measures and financing are explored further in the following sections Exchange Rates and Current Account Adjustments During the first half of the 1970s the industrial world moved from the Bretton Woods system of predominantly par value exchange rates to one in which the exchange rates between major currencies are determined primarily by market forces. The role of the exchange rate in the adjustment of countries ' current account positions is potentially a powerful one. Exchange rate changes can help to eliminate persistent current account imbalances and they can forestall imbalances that otherwise would arise in a world where inflation rates and real growth rates differ widely. Now that we have several years of experience operating with more flexible exchange rates it is useful to review events and ask how and how well the system has functioned The present system of flexible exchange rates is not a pure floating rate system. Many smaller countries have continued to maintain the exchange rates of their currencies within specified limits with respect to one or more major currencies. The European Joint Float ( the so-called " Snake " currently consisting of the currencies of Belgium Denmark Germany the Netherlands and Norway ) is a significant regional arrangement for keeping exchange rate movements among members within fixed limits. The existing exchange rate system is also distinguishable from a pure floating rate system in that governments and central banks buy or sell foreign currencies in intervention operations to counter disorderly market conditions to slow movements in rates and occasionally to prevent rates from moving In the period since the dollar floated in March exchange markets have gradually adjusted to the new regime. Although there have been large rate movements during this period these movements have generally reflected fundamental developments. The historical record indicates however that exchange market attention has focused on different factors at different times Soon after it was allowed to float in March the dollar came under downward pressure once again and by July it had fallen to levels that with hindsight appear too depressed. To a certain degree the further decline was caused by those forces that had generated pressure under the par value system at the old exchange rate the United States was not competitive Also important however was the desire of foreign holders of dollars to diversify their foreign exchange positions given the initial uncertainty in the market about how the new system would function and the likelihood of larger more frequent and less predictable changes in exchange rates. One piece of evidence for this diversification is the substantial decline in the dollar share of gross Eurocurrency assets that occurred in Evidence that central banks stood willing to enter the market forcefully to counter disorderly market conditions helped to dispel some of the uncertainties and contributed to a stabilization of the dollar in July Following the Arab oil embargo and the announcement of higher OPEC oil prices in late exchange markets focused on individual countries ' dependence on foreign oil. In view of the United States ' relatively high degree of self-sufficiency in energy as well as the central role of the dollar as an investment vehicle for OPEC surpluses the dollar appreciated by percent on a weighted-average basis from October to January During the recession and early recovery period from mid-1974 through the end of exchange rate movements were dominated by differences in interest rates. U.S. short-term interest rates fell relative to rates in other major countries during the U.S. recession. The decline in interest yields on dollar assets relative to yields available in other currencies caused investors to attempt to shift out of dollars and the dollar depreciated over a 6-month period by percent against a multilateral weighted average of ten currencies. Short-term dollar interest rates turned around as the U.S. recession bottomed out in the second quarter of while rates in other countries continued to fall. As a result the dollar rose wiping out the earlier depreciation by September. It is interesting to note that neither the swing in the U.S. current account from a deficit in to a surplus at an annual rate of $ billion in the second quarter of nor the subsequent turnaround in the current account developments that were largely the result of the depth and timing of the recession in the United States and in major foreign economies had a major impact on the value of the dollar during this period In exchange market participants seemed most influenced by differential rates of inflation. Market commentary at least was preoccupied by these differences although countries whose currencies depreciated also had current account deficits. The dollar appreciated by a small amount during the year in line with the better-than-average U.S. price performance The currencies of the two major countries with the highest inflation rates the United Kingdom and Italy depreciated against the dollar by percent and percent respectively Most accounts of exchange rate movements in relate these movements to trade and current account developments. Indeed the initial pressures on the dollar developed in the wake of a string of record monthly trade deficits reflecting a major increase in oil imports and differences in growth rates between the United States and other OECD countries. As it became clear that these deficits were unlikely to shrink over a reasonable period of time the pressure on the dollar intensified. The countries with the largest appreciations Japan Germany and Switzerland were those with the largest and most persistent current account surpluses. The turnaround in the pound sterling also coincided with the turnaround in the U.K. current account Although Germany and Switzerland had somewhat lower inflation than the United States only a small fraction of the appreciation of these currencies could be attributed to actual differences in inflation rates. Moreover developments during the year did not warrant a shift in expectations of future inflation large enough to account for a substantial part of the movement in exchange rates The dollar depreciation in ran counter to a strong rise in U.S. interest rates and declines in most foreign interest rates. During the year U.S. shortterm interest rates rose about basis points relative to those in major European countries. In the past interest rate movements of this magnitude generated substantial private capital inflows or exchange rate changes The size and timing of the exchange rate changes in the episodes recounted above illustrate some implications of the fact that trade and price developments affect exchange rates through their effects on the supply and demand for assets denominated in different currencies. Among the most important determinants of the price of any asset are portfolio risk current return for example interest and expectations concerning its own future value. Interest rates and perceptions of risk have been major determinants of exchange rates as seen in the and episodes. Moreover relative price and current account developments have strongly affected exchange markets primarily by altering expectations concerning future exchange rates. Thus exchange rates have responded to inflation and current account developments as market participants have concluded they would persist. Rate changes have sometimes led to actual changes in underlying variables and often followed them. When nonfinancial developments have been viewed as temporary such as the U.S. current account surplus in they have had little effect on expectations and therefore on exchange rates While exchange rate movements during the flexible rate period have broadly reflected underlying developments sustained large movements in one direction followed by reversals have occurred surprisingly often. These movements have often not corresponded to discounts or premia on forward exchange rates. They have been of sufficient regularity and magnitude to cast doubt on whether large exchange rate changes have always reflected the workings of a market in which new information is efficiently incorporated into currency prices. Markets have also been characterized from time to time by very thin trading much wider than normal bid-ask spreads and large intraday rate movements in the absence of significant fundamental developments. When these disorderly conditions prevail in the market there is a question whether the longer-run prospects for currencies may be lost from sight. Critics of floating exchange rates have pointed to these features of the current regime to underscore the need for more active intervention by central banks and governments Responding in part to these concerns as well as to domestic policy needs, foreign central banks in made heavy purchases of dollars to smooth and in some cases to limit the appreciations of their currencies against the dollar. These activities are crudely indicated by reserve movements over the year. British official reserves rose $ billion through October when largescale intervention was suspended. Japanese reserves rose $ billion and German reserves $ billion for the full year It is unlikely that intervention had a major lasting impact on exchange rates. The large volume of liquid funds in international financial markets and the one-sided risks that arise when central banks come into the market heavily on one side have meant that a large and continuing flow of intervention would be needed to keep rates from moving in response to changing expectations among managers of private foreign exchange positions. Thus the volume of intervention required to keep a rate from moving is not a reliable indicator of how far the rate would go if it were permitted to adjust freely When the Bank of England suspended its massive intervention on October the pound moved to a level only percent higher against a weighted average of foreign currencies than the level at which it had been held. Even with the later weakness in the dollar the weighted average pound was only percent above its October level in mid-January. While intervention can be a useful tool in restoring order to exchange markets substantially larger intervention than seen in would be necessary to have a large effect on rates for any time Eliminating most cumulative rate movements would not be desirable even if it were easier. Flexible exchange rates have been beneficial because they have helped to reduce the large changes in countries ' relative price levels that would have occurred as a consequence of differential price movements among trading partners ( Chart ) Some significant and lasting changes in relative price levels have resulted from exchange rate changes however These changes have generally helped to reduce unsustainable current account surpluses or deficits It is not an indictment of flexible exchange rates that current account imbalances have continued to occur and in some cases have proved to be Chart Relative Wholesale Prices Unadjusted and Adjusted for Exchange Rates INDEX MARCH = ( RATIO SCALE ) UNITED STATES ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPI _ ^ " " ^ / RELATIVE WPI I I I I I I i I I I I I I I I I I RELATIVE WPI I I I I I I FRANCE ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPI RELATIVE WPI I I I I I I I I I I2U WEST GERMANY ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPI ^ x \ / ^ ^ QH -vx / \ ^ " * ~ / X ^ * RELATIVE W P I i i i I I I I l I NOTE : RELATIVE WPIs ARE DOMESTIC WPIs DIVIDED BY AVERAGE OF WPIs IN TEN OTHER COUNTRIES ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPIs ARE RELATIVE WPIs MULTIPLIED BY WEIGHTED AVERAGE EXCHANGE RATE OF DOMESTIC CURRENCY SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Chart Continued Relative Wholesale Prices Unadjusted and Adjusted for Exchange Rates INDEX MARCH = ( RATIO SCALE ) ITALY ~ * * ~ * " " _ _ RELATIVE WPI ^ ' \ < ' " V / / / ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPI / \ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I RELATIVE W P I JAPAN ADJUSTED RELATIVE W P I I I I I I I UNITED KINGDOM I I NOTE : RELATIVE WPIs ARE DOMESTIC WPIs DIVIDED BY AVERAGE OF WPIs IN TEN OTHER COUNTRIES ADJUSTED RELATIVE WPIs ARE RELATIVE WPIs MULTIPLIED BY WEIGHTED AVERAGE EXCHANGE RATE OF DOMESTIC CURRENCY SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM persistent. Not all imbalances can or should be dealt with through exchange rate adjustment. As noted above it is normal and sustainable for some countries that have especially attractive investment opportunities to be capital importers and therefore to have a deficit while others have surpluses In addition the aggregate deficit that is the counterpart of the OPEC surplus can not be eliminated by exchange rate changes although exchange rates can play a role in allocating this deficit among countries Finally while exchange rate changes can have a significant impact on current account balances after to years their effect initially may be perverse since the strongest immediate effect of an exchange rate change is to raise many import prices and thereby increase the size of the deficit. This fact has two important implications. First if imbalances seem to be temporary owing to demand conditions that are likely to be reversed or to supply disruptions such as droughts expectations will not be changed and such imbalances normally will be financed by private capital flows. Exchange rates need not change. Second when exchange markets are orderly and functioning efficiently exchange rates will respond quickly even abruptly whenever it becomes clear that a country 's underlying position has moved away from what is sustainable over the longer term. Once exchange markets have moved to reflect the new assessment a return to exchange rate stability is possible even though the adjustment in trade flows may take considerable time. Capital flows can be expected to finance imbalances during the period of transition without the need for significant changes in interest rates The Administration 's policy toward dollar exchange rates has been to let market forces determine them but to intervene when necessary to counter disorderly market conditions. This approach is based on the view that it is better to give market forces continuous influence on rates rather than to have a period of officially determined rates followed by a sharp and disruptive adjustment. The historical experience with attempts to fix exchange rates is not an enviable one. Such policies more often than not sustained inappropriate exchange rates rather than correcting the underlying values of currencies ; more often than not they generated large private capital flows that led to serious dislocations in financial markets and spilled over to afTect other policy objectives While the Administration does not believe it is appropriate to maintain anyparticular value for the dollar it recognizes its responsibility to act forcefully when market conditions become disorderly. Many managers of private foreign exchange positions normally help to stabilize the market by adjusting their positions on the basis of careful assessments of factors affecting currency values over the medium term. These managers tend to cover more of their foreign exchange exposure in the face of the increasing risks associated with market disorder. Rates are buffeted by the flow of commercial transactions and the buy and sell orders of traders whose time horizon is measured in days or at most weeks. Under these circumstances intervention can help to restore markets to their normal functioning. It is not the objective of such intervention to maintain a particular rate. To fix a rate would endanger the leeway that a flexible exchange rate system has provided for countries to pursue domestic objectives In summary while exchange rate fluctuations sometimes have been undesirably large and are often unpleasant reminders about unsatisfactory aspects of underlying economic conditions the evolution of the system of market-determined exchange rates has been a major achievement of this decade Macroeconomic Policy and Current Account Adjustment In setting policies to achieve domestic objectives authorities must consider the strong two-way interactions between domestic growth and inflation on the one hand and the current account balance and exchange rate on the other. Going one way stronger domestic demand tends to result in a larger current account deficit within a short time. Going the other way an increase in the current account balance resulting from an exchange rate change or external factors will raise domestic output and employment In considering policies to achieve domestic goals authorities sometimes find that policies appropriate for achieving domestic objectives also move the current account toward a more sustainable position. At other times they face a dilemma. Two easy cases present no dilemma. One of these occurs when a country is falling short of its domestic goals and has a current account balance that is in surplus. Authorities should then view the current account position as an additional signal to adopt expansionary measures. The second easy case occurs when demand threatens to strain the potential of the economy. A current account deficit then reinforces the need to adopt restrictive measures. In both cases current account adjustment may take place without sacrificing domestic objectives and with policy actions reducing the need for exchange rate adjustment The dilemma arises when there is conflict between domestic goals and the requirement for the current account to be maintained in a sustainable range. This may occur when an economy with inflationary demand pressures has a surplus. In the world economy today however nations more often face the dilemma of a sluggish economy with an unsustainable current account deficit. In this case the appropriate response is to use domestic fiscal and monetary policy to attain domestic objectives while allowing exchange rate adjustment to restore sustainable external positions. Especially for large countries like the United States where the economic cost of changing domestic growth is large relative to the improvement in the current account that would result it is not appropriate to modify domestic objectives for economic growth in order to reduce the current account deficit A second way in which macroeconomic policy can affect the external balance is through a shift in the mix of policies. Thus a country might shift to a tighter monetary policy and a more expansionary fiscal policy when O faced with a large current account deficit and a weak currency. In principle such a change in the policy mix could be made with an unchanged GNP growth target. If investment were undesirably strong and if it were thought that the current account deficit would soon improve such a change in the mix of policies might be appropriate. In practice however differences in the lags with which each policy works and the uncertainties surrounding their effects make a shift of this kind difficult to achieve. Such policies also have effects on the composition of demand and output. First to the extent that they strengthen the currency they reduce exports and increase imports with a significant time lag. Second they tend to shift demand away from private investment and toward other forms of spending thus reducing the rate of capacity growth It should be noted that allowing exchange rates to adjust when a country 's domestic objectives and external positions are inconsistent has effects on the domestic economy that must be taken into account in setting domestic objectives and policies. Appreciation of a country 's exchange rate tends to depress demand. Depreciation tends to add to inflationary pressures by raising import prices and to reduce real incomes as imports become more expensive Thus when exchange rate changes do occur they must be supported with monetary and fiscal policy if an unchanged domestic growth target is to be met and if the full adjustment of the current account is to be realized Countries with appreciating currencies will face a slowing of demand growth as exports are reduced and imports rise. If these effects are not offset by stimulative policies the economy will slow and some of the potential adjustment will not be realized since import growth will be retarded along with the slowing of domestic demand. Countries with depreciating currencies will experience a stimulus to demand that may also have to be offset. Whether the adjustment of policies should be greater in countries with appreciating or with depreciating currencies should depend on whether the countries are undershooting or overshooting their internal goals for output and employment It should also be noted that adjustment through exchange rate movements succeeds only if the improvement in competitiveness of countries with depreciating currencies is not undone by higher wage and price increases to maintain workers ' purchasing power or to obtain higher profit rates In those economies where such wage and price adjustments are rapid and nearly proportional to exchange rate changes gains in competitiveness from exchange rate depreciation evaporate quickly. Adjustment through exchange rate change is much more difficult and costly in terms of inflation Such countries may be forced to accept depressed demand as the only effective way of reducing a deficit. Hence structural measures by authorities that retard the pass-through of import price increases into domestic prices and wages have a high payoff in allowing less costly external adjustment Strengthening International Financial Institutions Private financial institutions have been the main source of financing for the large current account deficits since the oil crisis accounting for roughly three-fourths of the total flows from to During this period current account deficits totaled $ billion and countries in deficit borrowed over $ billion. Some inflows particularly in industrial countries have been a private response to market incentives. A large share of the financing for many countries however has been raised by governments or by government-controlled corporations from private international banks. Private and official net borrowing from international banks by countries in deficit totaled an estimated $ billion over the to period. These banks in turn received funds directly or indirectly from countries in surplus. Funds raised by countries in deficit from other private sources including international bond issues and direct investment inflows totaled about $ billion About one-fourth of all current account financing or more than $ billion was financed through official credits. These credits have played a crucial role in the overall financing process by providing assistance to countries with limited access to financial markets. Without official financing a number of countries would have been forced to take overly drastic measures and reduce their current account deficits at an excessively rapid pace. Such measures would have been disruptive to their own economies and to the world trading system. Moreover in the absence of official financing deficits would become concentrated in fewer countries. Some countries that have been able to meet their needs from private markets would find their access to private credit jeopardized by larger deficits. Thus the availability of a continuing flow of official financing to countries has been essential to the stability of the world financing system and to the continued flow of financing through private financial institutions Two long-established sets of multilateral institutions have played a major role in providing financing during the recent period : the international development banks and the International Monetary Fund. The international development banks the World Bank group and regional development banks provide financing for sound development projects and assist developing countries to formulate appropriate development strategies. In doing so they help meet countries ' overall financing needs while fostering investment in productive activities that will generate the funds needed to service the debts. Their new credits totaled $ billion in the year ending June These institutions had more than $ billion in loans outstanding then Part of the resources of these institutions are provided by governments in the form of capital subscriptions and direct contributions. For their nonconcessionary activities however the development banks rely heavily on securities issued in international markets and this reliance on debt has been increasing. In order to preserve their well-deserved reputation for prudent and sound financial management and their key role as a source of capital to developing countries for productive long-term investment an increase in resources contributed by governments is needed Strong U.S. support for the development banks is essential to their continued ability to assist developing countries. Through such support the United States can both enhance the stability of the international financial system and respond to the needs of the developing countries. Moreover U.S. resources devoted to these institutions are multiplied by contributions from other countries and by funds raised from markets. In legislation was enacted authorizing over $ billion for increased U.S. participation in these institutions. Appropriations in support of the development banks for fiscal were $ billion an increase of percent over the year before This demonstrates strong U.S. commitment to these institutions but further large sums will be needed in the years ahead to maintain their strength The International Monetary Fund was established at the end of World War II specifically to augment the resources available to finance temporary payments imbalances in a par value system of exchange rates. While the nature and circumstances of countries ' needs have been altered by the introduction of more flexible exchange rates the need for official financing of deficits has continued. A country that draws on Fund resources must satisfy conditions laid down by the Fund to assure that policies are consistent with adjustment of the country 's external position. The goals are a current account that is sustainable without continued official support and repayment of the drawing. Thus the operations of the Fund not only finance deficits but also constructively influence policies The large current account imbalances since have resulted in heavy demands on the Fund. It provided about $ billion of financing in the period. The IMF has also found it necessary to broaden its view of appropriate adjustment. Whereas the previous expectation had been that adjustment could take place and drawings could be repaid within to years it has not been possible to eradicate the aggregate oil deficit so quickly The IMF membership has responded to the new circumstances by increasing the resources of the Fund 's general account and raising the limitations on countries ' drawings. In addition a temporary " oil facility " was set up in to help countries meet their larger oil bills. The resources for this facility which concluded its lending program in were provided primarily by oil-exporting countries but several industrial countries also contributed substantially As OPEC countries have continued to pile up assets a continuous flow of new financing has been needed. The IMF 's usable resources have fallen to about $ billion with another $ billion available from larger countries only for lending to other large countries under the General Arrangements to Borrow. These resources will be increased by another $ to $ billion when the sixth quota review has been ratified by enough member governments. Even with these additions however the Fund 's resources will be in- adequate to assure available financing for those countries that need it. Moreover there is a particular need for long-term funds To meet this need the decision was made to seek to establish the Supplementary Financing Facility which initially would have about $ billion provided by seven industrial countries and seven OPEC members. These funds would be available over the next to years to countries whose balance of payments needs exceed the amount available under the IMF 's regular policies and require a longer period of adjustment than provided for under regular IMF policies. Borrowing countries must undertake to adopt corrective economic policy measures to deal with their balance of payments problems. When established the Supplementary Financing Facility can make an important contribution to the stability of the international financial system for the next several years There will be a continuing need for growth in IMF resources however even if the Supplementary Financing Facility is established. Discussions are now under way in a seventh review of quotas. A further increase in quotas wall be required to ensure that the IMF has sufficient resources to meet the legitimate demands on it over the longer term TO ACHIEVE GREATER STABILITY OF COMMODITY PRICES The central role of food fuel and other raw materials in the domestic and world economies in recent years has been noted in every chapter of this Report. Although price fluctuations are always the norm commodity prices have shown more than normal volatility over the last years. The 56.4percent rise in The Economist index during was the largest rise in the last years. Nonfuel commodity prices have leveled off since but the economic aftershock and fears of renewed bursts continue to be of concern today The increased volatility of commodity prices has caused serious economic dislocations in virtually all countries. In consuming countries rising commodity prices in and were reflected in final product prices fueling an inflationary wage-price spiral. Yet because of asymmetries in response the subsequent decline in several key commodity prices did not evoke a comparable downward movement of wages and prices. Periodic declines in the prices of certain commodities over the past few years placed severe external constraints on developing countries that derive a substantial fraction of export earnings from sales of those commodities. Consequently these countries have borrowed heavily on world markets and have been forced to curtail their purchases of goods from industrial countries in an effort to conserve their foreign exchange reserves The Need to Reduce Volatility Random variations in weather cyclical movements in demand and political disturbances along with the relative insensitivity of supply and demand to price changes have made sharp price movements the rule rather than the exception for primary commodities. Private precautionary and speculative stockpiles and the development of organized commodity markets have in general allowed these fluctuations to be partially buffered. Private participants in these markets who sell their stocks when prices are relatively high and accumulate stocks when prices are relatively low exert a price stabilizing influence. The importance of these stocks is illustrated in the case of grains where prices are more closely related to stock levels than to production flows ( Chart Chapter ) A reduction in the volatility of commodity prices would serve a number of useful purposes. Aside from the relatively modest advantage to consumers of having more predictable price movements moderation of price fluctuations lowers inflation by reducing the impact of the asymmetries in the relationship between commodity prices and general inflation. Producers also benefit as countries in which price movements in a single commodity have a major impact on national income can achieve more stable economies Furthermore a lower level of price volatility would reduce producers ' risks and remove an important deterrent to the development of greater supplies Finally major price movements sometimes induce governments to introduce rigid price and income support programs with the kinds of problems discussed in Chapter Once introduced these programs develop their own momentum and can engender a new set of inefficient and price-raising side effects Unfortunately commodity price stabilization is neither politically easy nor economically costless. The economic costs of stabilization schemes are often paid through direct government outlays. Alternatively the costs of stabilization may be paid directly by consumers through higher average prices. Some types of programs require capital outlays that could otherwise be used for investment in productive equipment. The benefits of any proposed program to reduce volatility must be weighed against these costs One price stabilizing technique is to encourage large stockholdings by the private sector. In the United States this is done for grains by subsidizing interest and storage costs as in the Administration 's farmer-held reserve discussed in Chapter The costs are direct budgetary outlays that can be compared to the benefits of holding larger stocks. Outside of agriculture the United States has no major programs to encourage stockholding ; but some European countries have instituted tax preferences for inventories thereby encouraging larger commodity stocks and smaller price fluctuations Publicly held buffer stocks are another widely recognized stabilization tool. These usually require purchases and sales of the commodity to defend predetermined floor and ceiling prices within the limits of available financial resources or commodity stocks on hand. The effectiveness of such programs depends largely on the financial resources available for the programs and on the rules governing the prices at which buffer stocks are bought or sold In international discussions the United States has therefore favored pure buffer stock programs which if properly designed would not raise the average of the price over time Commodity stabilization programs may include production and export controls to defend established price floors. While direct budget outlays are thereby avoided systems involving production controls are likely to involve serious economic inefficiencies. While the ability of a buffer stock to affect prices is limited by its financial resources production and export controls can indefinitely hold prices higher than they would be without them. Because the productive potential is unused rather than used to build buffer stocks such programs can prevent prices from falling but they can not be used effectively to keep prices from rising Producers ' vulnerability to sharp changes in income because of commodity price and quantity fluctuations can also be reduced through international efforts providing loans or grants to producer nations. Such transfers do not affect the price of commodities in the market place but they can ameliorate the adverse impact of sharp price declines on producing countries. Compared to actions that raise the level of commodity prices these compensatory measures are a more efficient and less inflationary way to transfer resources between countries. The Compensatory Financing and Buffer Stock facilities of the IMF and the STABEX system of the European Economic Community are operating at present to mitigate the impact of commodity price instability Recent Policy Developments Since increased attention has focused on arrangements to stabilize commodity prices through internationally managed stockpile programs. International discussions under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) led in to enunciation of the UNCTAD Integrated Commodities Program. This program has provided the framework for discussions on a number of commodities of interest to the developing countries and on a " common fund " for international commodity agreements In and again in the idea of a common fund to provide additional financial support for international commodity agreements was a focal point of the North-South economic dialogue. As envisioned by the developed countries the common fund would pool the resources of individual commodity agreements ( ICAs ) and enable those ICAs needing additional funds for stock accumulation to borrow through the common facility from other ICAs and from the private market. By pooling resources in a common fund overall financial contributions by member nations to individual stockpiling agreements could be reduced because all ICAs would generally not be accumulating stocks at the same time. Moreover because it would have broader-based financial backing a common fund would probably find more ready acceptance in world credit markets than individual com- modity agreements. The United States is prepared to participate in a common fund that is structured along these lines At the London Economic Summit in May the seven heads of state noted that it was their goal " to secure productive results from negotiations about the stabilization of commodity prices and the creation of a common fund for individual buffer stock agreements. " Developing countries envision a broader common fund financed by direct government contributions. Such a fund would serve as a source of finance for commodity agreements and would also supplement the functions of existing international financial institutions. Negotiations during were unable to bridge the conceptual gap between alternative versions of the common fund. However negotiations will continue in The United States attaches great importance to talks on individual commodities. While discussions on a common fund proceed the United States is participating in talks involving several individual commodities. The United States joined the International Tin Agreement in Discussions on a commodity agreement for natural rubber in which the United States has taken part have made progress and preliminary discussions on other commodities are getting under way Discussions on a system of nationally held wheat reserves begun in June under the auspices of the International Wheat Council are continuing in The United States favors a new International Wheat Agreement with a reserve system to replace the expiring agreement which has no such provisions. In the U.S. proposal each participating country would release or acquire reserve stocks at specified target price levels. Member consultations on additional measures would also be required in the event of extreme oversupply or shortage situations There were several major policy developments for sugar in In March the U.S. International Trade Commission ( ITC ) found upon petition that the domestic sugar industry was being threatened with serious injury by increased imports. It recommended a 5-year annual quota on sugar imports of million tons. The President rejected the recommendation however and established an interim program of direct payments to U.S. producers Congress-later mandated a program to support the price of sugar in the U.S market at a minimum of cents per pound but stipulated that it could be terminated if an international sugar agreement would achieve the same objective The Sugar Conference sponsored by the United Nations concluded an agreement in October which comes before the U.S. Congress for ratification early in The agreement sets minimum and maximum price targets of and cents respectively. These targets will be defended through a system of export quotas and reserve stocks held by exporting countries. The carrying costs of the stocks will be financed through a fee levied against all sugar traded by member countries. Export quotas will remain in effect until the world market price rises above cents a feature that may lead to production cutbacks after exporting countries have accumulated their mandated stockpiles This review of the analytical aspects of commodity price stabilization alongside the reality of actual agreements highlights critical issues of their design. On the one hand policies to increase the size of private stockpiles or to develop public buffer stocks can help reduce long-run inflationary pressures. The history of the last years has shown that drastic commodity price movements can hinder economic growth. Yet these commodity programs prevent prices from falling as stocks are acquired and they absorb scarce capital in stocks that are essentially sterile outlets for a nation 's savings. In addition an agreement that restricts output will raise the long-run average price of a commodity and should be avoided. Higher long-run prices impose costs on commodity-importing developing countries that rank among the world 's poorest nations. Alteration of the long-run price trend would also impair the ability of the price system to allocate resources efficiently. For these reasons the United States will continue to give priority to pure buffer stocks as a price stabilizing technique. Each prospective commodity agreement must be examined in great detail to determine whether it contributes to or detracts from economic performance TO MAINTAIN THE GROWTH OF WORLD TRADE Over the past years world trade has grown more rapidly than world output playing a key role in economic expansion by widening available markets for raw materials industrial products and agricultural goods. During this period the volume of world trade showed a fivefold increase an average growth of percent per year. This growth was facilitated by a major movement to reduce tariffs and other trade restrictions under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) The Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations which was completed in resulted in an average reduction of one-third in the tariffs set by industrial countries on industrial products. The growth of world trade was also supported by the reduction of trade barriers on a regional basis such as the elimination of tariffs within the European Common Market. In agreement was also reached on a generalized system of preferences for industrial countries ' imports from developing countries The growth of world trade has slowed since ; trade volume was estimated to have expanded only percent in The slower growth of trade is mainly attributable to the general weakness in the world economy However there has been a disturbing reversal of the trend toward trade liberalization ; this development has also contributed to the slowing growth of trade. The GATT Secretariat has estimated that new restrictive trade measures have been imposed on to percent of world trade since The worldwide pressure for protection from imports was also evident in the United States. In the ITC investigated petitions for import relief by over industries covering imports of nearly $ billion. The ITG recommended increased protection in the form of tariffs or quantitative restrictions on $ billion of trade including shoes color television receivers mushrooms and above-ground swimming pools The Benefits of an Open Trading System Despite rising domestic pressures for protection from imports at home and abroad the Administration remains committed to a policy of open markets for both U.S. exports and imports. The case for open markets and against import restrictions is strong. In an open trading system a country will export those goods it can produce at relatively lower cost than other countries and import goods that other countries can produce at lower cost Countries thereby realize gains from trade that make possible higher levels of consumption and investment. Import restrictions reduce these gains Through an open trading system the United States can obtain larger quantities of goods for consumption and investment than it could by restricting imports and diverting resources from export industries to import-competing industries In addition to reducing the gains from trade the imposition of import restrictions has an immediate inflationary impact. Consumers pay higher import prices and usually higher prices for domestic substitutes as well. Competition from imports not only helps to keep prices down but fosters efficiency and responsiveness among domestic producers. For example production of attractively priced American small cars has obviously been hastened by the availability of small low-priced fuel-efficient imports Import restrictions do not increase employment even if potential retaliation against exports is ignored. As a result of decreased imports and higher domestic prices there may be an increase in domestic output and employment in the industry that is granted protection from imports. But the higher prices associated with reduced import competition reduce real consumer incomes and hence tend to reduce real consumption and output. In the absence of changes in overall economic policy the net effect of these opposing tendencies in the protected industry and in the rest of the economy is usually a reduction of real output and employment. Only in the rare instances when import protection results in very small price increases and very large import reductions will protective measures increase employment Responses to import restrictions will make the net employment reduction larger. Unilateral imposition of new tariffs or quotas invites retaliation through higher barriers for our exports. Indeed GATT rules allow tariffs to be raised on imports from a country that imposes unilateral trade restrictions. Induced upward exchange rate adjustment also decreases the demand for exports. Thus in most cases import protection has the effect of shifting employment from dynamic export industries to contracting import-competing industries while reducing aggregate employment Recent restrictions have primarily taken the form of quotas import licensing requirements and other nontariff barriers to trade. Quantitative restrictions are more damaging than equivalent tariffs to an open system of world trade. During recessions they provide less protection from imports at a time when business and labor are in a weaker position ; during expansions they do not permit imports to play their role as safety valves limiting sharp price increases when supplies are tight Dealing with Trade Problems Although the advantages of an open trading system are widely understood two conditions give rise to demands for protection. First as markets evolve countries lose comparative advantage in some products and gain comparative advantage in others. For example as developing countries have entered markets for products that rely primarily on well-established technologies the more advanced industrial countries have found their comparative advantage shifting to products using more skilled labor and more sophisticated technology. However firms in industries that have lost markets to new competitors have capital in place and their workers have specialized skills that make shifting to new industries costly for them. Their demands for protection from imports are often more effectively voiced than the demands of consumers for lower prices even though the gains to consumers from an open trading system outweigh the costs to domestic firms and workers Second excess capacity and high unemployment increase domestic sensitivity to competition from imports. Under these conditions displaced labor and capital are less likely to be absorbed in industries where the United States has a comparative advantage. Moreover imports that might have been considered a welcome supplement to limited domestic production in some industries during periods of high employment are blamed for domestic unemployment during periods of low utilization. Economic slack abroad also adds to trade tensions because it provides an incentive for some foreign producers to increase exports by cutting prices in the U.S. market. Selling abroad at less than home market prices constitutes grounds for assessing countervailing duties under GATT rules if the domestic industry is injured Adjustment assistance. The Federal trade adjustment assistance programs are designed to facilitate the adjustment of workers firms and communities injured by import competition. They provide readjustment allowances training and relocation payments for workers displaced by import competition. Technical and financial assistance is provided to affected firms and public works money is allocated to trade-impacted communities. The Administration reviewed these programs in and is implementing a number of administrative improvements. A major effort has been undertaken to speed up and improve the delivery of assistance and efforts have also been made to tailor assistance to the needs of particular industries Import relief. Problems created by rapid growth of imports in several industries were so acute that the Administration established temporary import restrictions. These restrictions were intended to provide an opportunity for the affected domestic industries to stabilize to permit firms to take measures to restore competitive positions and to allow for more orderly adjustment. In two major cases footwear and color television receivers where the International Trade Commission had found that increased imports were a substantial cause of serious injury to the domestic industry the Administration decided to provide temporary import relief. Temporary orderly marketing agreements ( OMAs ) which are negotiated quotas were established with major exporting countries. These OMAs will halt the rapid rise of imports and give domestic producers an opportunity to adjust to import competition over the longer term Steel trigger prices. Developments in the carbon steel industry presented the Administration with a particularly difficult trade policy problem. Steel industries throughout the world have been especially hard hit by the protracted weakness of economic activity in the industrial countries. Even under moderately optimistic assumptions about the growth of demand excess steelmaking capacity is likely to persist through The cost of production of steel in the United States rose by percent over the past years according to a study by the Council on Wage and Price Stability ( CWPS ) The increase in costs was to a significant extent the result of developments within the industry itself. In part they were the reflection of broader economic forces. Steel wages have risen percent faster than the average manufacturing wage from to Raw material and energy costs particularly coal have shown very sharp price increases while pollution abatement costs have risen sharply and will be an increasingly important component of costs in the future. According to CWPS however costs have also risen rapidly abroad and the domestic cost of production is not significantly above that of efficient foreign producers plus transportation and tariffs Poor domestic sales reflecting sluggish demand and an increase in the import share led to a drop in steel production in This development and other factors led to a series of layoffs and plant closings in These were concentrated in older steel plants in Ohio Pennsylvania and New York This pattern was dictated by the desire of domestic firms to consolidate their operations in their most efficient installations. The timing and allocation of the layoffs were also affected by provisions in the new labor contract that will increase the cost of layoffs after The cost of meeting environmental standards at older facilities also played an important role. Thus the layoffs reflected efforts by the industry to reduce costs over the long term as well as to respond to the immediate problem of weak demand and import competition. Although several factors contributed to the layoffs public attention focused on the problem of imports The industry filed a series of dumping cases in some of which led to findings that foreign steel was being sold in the United States below full costs of production. In light of evidence that significant volumes of foreign steel may have been dumped the Administration developed a program designed to respond to the problems of the steel industry. The centerpiece of the program is a system of trigger prices for steel imports based on the cost of production in the most efficient foreign country currently Japan. If imported steel is sold in the United States below the trigger price for that product an antidumping investigation will be initiated immediately by the Department of the Treasury. The industry maintains the right to file petitions under the regular procedure. Nevertheless it is hoped that the system will eliminate the necessity for anti-dumping actions The trigger price concept has significant advantages over alternative measures. Although in a static and certain world of perfect competition a trigger price a quota and a tariff that gave the same protection would have the same effects on prices their effects differ in practice. A tariff that assured the same protection would have directly increased steel prices by more than the trigger prices will. A quota would have resulted ultimately in an even larger rise in the price of imported steel and reduced competition in steel markets ; it would also have undermined incentives for domestic producers to control costs and prices. Under the trigger price system domestic producers will continue to face foreign competition at prices that reflect the costs of effiicent foreign producers. If domestic steel prices are set to meet this competition domestic producers should be able to regain the market share they lost in Progress in Multilateral Trade Negotiations The Administration has been working with foreign governments to reverse the worldwide slip toward more restrictions on imports and restore the trend toward trade liberalization. These efforts are centered in the round of multilateral trade negotiations now being held in Geneva. After being stalled for some time the negotiations made significant progress in with agreement among the major participants on key procedures that will guide the negotiations during A working hypothesis was developed calling for an average reduction of tariffs on industrial products of about percent. Procedures were established for participants to exchange requests for the reduction of agricultural tariffs and of specific industrial and agricultural nontariff barriers to trade. Draft texts aimed at improving international trading rules were prepared for use as the basis for further negotiation. In January countries are exchanging specific offers for reductions of tariff and nontariff barriers. This exchange marks the beginning of the final phase of the negotiations The trade negotiations are being conducted under difficult conditions in the world economy. These same conditions make it essential that agreement on significant liberalization be reached however so that further steps toward protection can be averted the dynamism of world trade can be restored and the potential contribution of trade expansion to overall economic growth can be realized CHAPTER Inflation and Unemployment T HE HISTORY OF INFLATION during the past years has been dominated by two major episodes. In each of them a series of events set off a burst of inflation followed by a period of economic slack during which the rate of price increase subsided only partially. The end result in both instances was a persistently higher rate of inflation. For the last years the underlying rate of inflation has remained in the to ^ -percent range despite very high rates of unemployment Since similar developments have characterized the economies of other industrial nations. Throughout the industrial world economic policy is now confronted with the simultaneous existence of substantial unemployment and strong inflationary momentum It is not difficult to identify the sources of the two inflationary episodes during the past decade nor is it surprising that the resulting inflations were serious given the magnitude of the initiating forces. What does pose major problems for both economic theory and policy is the persistence of inflation : why it keeps its momentum long after the initial shocks have disappeared and in the face of idle plant and unemployed workers Over the next several years even as recovery proceeds some slack will remain in our economy. The central task in dealing with inflation in the period immediately ahead will be to find ways to reduce the persistence of the inflation inherited from earlier years. Looking further ahead a second major task will be to avoid a renewal of inflationary pressures or shocks as we regain a high-employment economy The two tasks are related. Unless we succeed in reducing the current rate of inherited inflation over the next several years while some slack remains in the economy any tendency for price and wage increases to accelerate in later years will raise the inflation rate from an already high base. If that should occur prospects for maintaining a stable rate of economic growth with high employment would be endangered The problem of inflation amidst unemployment is dealt with here in three parts. The first reviews the two inflationary episodes of the past years and emphasizes the distinction between the initiation and the perpetuation of inflation. The second addresses the particular problem of the present and the immediate future : the momentum of inflation inherited from the past In doing so it discusses the forces producing that momentum in the face of economic slack reviews alternative ways of reducing the inflation rate points up the advantages and disadvantages associated with each alternative and outlines a " deceleration standard " for reducing inflation. The third part of the chapter looks farther ahead to the task of preventing the recurrence of renewed inflationary pressures as high employment is approached focusing on the role of structural employment policies to improve the operation of the labor market and thus to reduce the inflationary pressures associated with an economy near capacity. This section also discusses the need for rapid investment growth to avoid inflationary bottlenecks and scarcities as industrial capacity utilization increases A REVIEW OF THE PAST YEARS EPISODE I : EXCESS DEMAND IN THE LATE 1960s The current inflation had its roots in the late 1960s. During this period the economy reached very high levels of employment and resource utilization. The unemployment rate was less than percent in every year from through when it reached percent the lowest rate since the Korean war. The major factor initiating inflation was the traditional one of excess demand. The economic stimulus from expenditures for the Vietnam war was added to an economy already approaching high employment. The rate of inflation in consumer prices rose from less than percent in to over percent in If the Vietnam war had been financed out of increased taxes the economic consequences of the added war expenditures would have been less serious. But the temporary increase in taxes in came well after strong demand pressures had already triggered a significant acceleration in price and wage inflation. Moreover when taxes were raised monetary policy became more expansive for a brief period offsetting some of the contractionary impact of the tax increase The Recession The recession which began in late undid much of the reduction in unemployment that had been achieved over the prior decade as the unemployment rate rose to percent by the end of Yet inflation continued at a rapid pace. The advance of consumer prices did slow but much of this reduction was due to the impact of declining mortgage interest rates on the consumer price index ( CPI ) If mortgage interest is excluded the consumer price index showed little deceleration from percent in to slightly over percent in and the first half of ( Table ) The increase in average hourly earnings in the private nonfarm sector actually accelerated during this period TABLE Changes in consumer prices } all items and selected components [ Percent change ] Component Relative importance December ( percent ) All items Food Energy Mortgage interest Other items Medical care Change from December to December not seasonally adjusted Detail may not add to total due to rounding Gas and electricity fuel oil and coal and gasoline and motor oil Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The inflation would not have persisted during the recession if wages and prices were very sensitive to economic slack. On the basis of the experience of that period and the similar one more recently estimates of the size and duration of the demand restraint and output loss that it takes to slow inflation have been revised sharply upward Wage and Price Controls In reaction to the failure of inflation to abate a wage and price freeze was announced on August and was followed by wage and price controls. The initial price freeze and the subsequent Phase II of controls did reduce the rate of inflation during the final months of and throughout The rise in consumer prices moderated substantially to about percent in the last half of and throughout But the controls had no lasting effect on the rate of inflation. Their relaxation in coincided with the beginning of a series of developments that inaugurated a new round of inflation. And the increase in business profit margins which had been squeezed during the control period contributed to the renewed upsurge in prices EPISODE II : THE ACCELERATION OF INFLATION IN The second inflationary episode stemmed in part from excess demand Between the fourth quarter of and the first quarter of the economy grew very rapidly real gross national product ( GNP ) increased at an annual rate of % percent. Among other reasons for this growth was the expansive economic policy pursued. The high-employment budget moved from a $ 2.7-billion deficit in to an $ 11.8-billion deficit in ; monetary policy was also eased significantly and remained easy through Unemployment dropped sharply in and capacity utilization reached high levels especially in the materials sector. The phased dismantling of controls during coincided with and contributed to the opening of a new episode of inflationary events The major inflationary pressures in and however were not caused by domestic monetary and fiscal policy. The fall of over percent in the value of the U.S. dollar from mid-1971 to mid-1973 helped to cause a rapid rise in exports. Demand for U.S. goods was also increased by the simultaneous economic expansion in all industrial countries. The high operating rates in the rest of the world accentuated the problem of tight domestic capacity as imports were not available to augment domestic supplies. The most obvious result of this expansion was a rapid rise in prices of industrial commodities. On world markets prices of basic industrial commodities other than oil more than doubled between mid-1972 and mid-1974. Prices of intermediate products such as primary metals and chemicals also rose sharply in response to worldwide demand Other special factors were also at work. Food prices surged in and as a consequence of conditions that had been evolving slowly but were brought into prominence by a series of poor world harvests beginning in The steep increase in oil prices put into effect by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) in late caused the energy component of the CPI to rise by nearly percent in alone ; from the end of through it rose by nearly percent Although each of these special events was sufficiently important to exert a marked impact on the overall price level the dominant influence was the rise in fuel and food prices. Its force was not limited to direct effects. The pass-through of cost increases into other prices broadened the inflation and the rise in consumer prices led to efforts by wage earners to recover lost real incomes. The inflation in prices for consumer items other than food energy and mortgage interest accelerated from percent in to percent in and to percent in The rate of increase in hourly earnings remained relatively stable at around to percent until controls were removed in April but then rose sharply to .an annual rate of about percent during the remainder of the year. While the rise played a part in spreading the initial shocks through the rest of the economy it was less than the increase in prices and represented a loss in real wages for workers The experience provided vivid evidence of the potential inflationary effects of factors other than aggregate demand pressures. It was as well an example of the effects of the downward insensitivity of prices and wages. Price increases in one sector exerted upward pressures in others rather than leading to a readjustment of relative prices around a stable overall rate of inflation THE CURRENT SITUATION Inflation has moderated substantially from the 12-percent rate of Improved weather and agricultural production reduced prices of agricultural products at the farm. Despite higher processing costs the rise in retail food prices during was limited to less than percent. Energy prices are no longer rising at the extreme rates of earlier years. The rapid growth in prices of other materials has also moderated O The slowing or reversal of price increases in these sectors together with the severity of the recession did result in a significant moderation of other price increases and wage gains. In and compensation per hour rose less than prices but still climbed sharply. The rate of increase subsequently declined from an annual rate of almost percent in to about percent in but has not receded further After initial moderation in the rate of inflation remains high and relatively stable. The rate of increase of consumer prices fell from to but then rose again in These fluctuations were principally due to erratic variations in food and energy prices. Excluding those two categories consumer prices rose at almost the same to J/i-percent rate in each year from through ( Chart ) Even allowing for delays in the response of wages and prices to underlying changes in demand the failure of prices and wages to decelerate over the past several years starkly illustrates the strength of the forces that support inflation in the face of substantial economic slack THE MOMENTUM OF INFLATION An inflationary momentum becomes built into the structure of the economy in several ways. Expectations of inflation and workers ' desires to maintain their real wages lead to indexing of wage rates to price increases in both a formal and an informal fashion. Workers as well as their employers are concerned with their wages relative to other workers'. As a result a wage increase won in one sector of the economy can generate demands for equivalent increases elsewhere even though economic conditions in individual labor markets may vary significantly. Since an acceleration of inflation is usually uneven in its initial stages the wage structure becomes distorted intensifying the conflict over relative wages. The normal reaction is larger wage gains in lagging sectors rather than smaller increases in leading sectors. This process of adjustment makes it difficult to stop the inflation even after the initiating forces have disappeared Widespread belief that inflation will continue also leads businesses to accede to cost increases in the expectation of being able to pass the costs forward into higher prices. These price increases become the basis for still further rounds of wage increases In this process of ongoing wage and price increases it is fruitless to try to identify a villain. While there are winners and losers some groups do a little better and some a little worse in defending their standard of living the actual changes in the distribution of income between profits and wages have been relatively small lately. The poor performance of real wages in recent years has been the result of poor productivity gains and the higher price of imported oil not of a shift in income away from workers to other Americans. Poor profits have stemmed principally from low capacity utiliza- Chart Price and Wage Trends PERCENT CHANGE END OF YEAR TO END OF YEAR _ CONSUMER PRICES-ALL ITEMSJ/ CONSUMER PRICES-ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD AND ENERGY ^ / COMPENSATION PER HOUR ^ ( PRIVATE NONFARM BUSINESS ) m I H J/CHANGE FROM DECEMBER TO DECEMBER NOT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ^ CHANGE FROM FOURTH QUARTER TO FOURTH QUARTER SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR tion and higher energy costs rather than from the pressure of wages on prices. The principal result of the struggle to defend living standards has been continued inflation Some of the factors that explain the inflexibility of prices and wages in the face of slack demand can be identified. Complex technology specialization and economies of scale have limited price competition in many individual markets. Price reductions are not seen as a means of sustaining revenues and profits during periods of decline in the total market since each firm perceives that its competitors will match any price cuts. Competition tends to concentrate on other strategies than pricing : quality adjustment for example and the introduction of new products. The responsiveness of supply to changing demands is also reduced by the importance of fixed costs in many industries ; decisions to expand capacity or enter into new markets must be based on long-term considerations rather than on more immediate changes in market conditions. The cost of entry into many major industries by new firms is often great enough to allow some pricing discretion by those already there The existence of formal escalator clauses tends both to increase the speed with which an inflation spreads through the economy and to perpetuate the inflation when it becomes established. In only one-fourth of workers covered by major collective bargaining agreements were protected by cost-of-living clauses ; today percent are ( although virtually none of these clauses provide an automatic full escalation of wages to prior inflation ) Many employers whose unions have escalator clauses extend the same protection to their nonunion employees. And employers without such escalators face strong pressures to grant wage rate increases that protect workers against inflation to maintain morale and productivity The structure of labor markets in modern industrial societies differs significantly from simple models of competitive behavior. Workers do not compete freely for all jobs. Some are denied the most attractive opportunities because of discrimination. Unemployment rates show a wide dispersion among different subgroups of the population and the search for jobs by some workers does not fully restrain wage increases of others. Entry into the most attractive job markets is also sometimes limited by rules and practices that have often been successful in preventing increases in overall unemployment from putting downward pressures on rates of increase of wages or professional fees. Many firms because of their interest in maintaining a stable high-quality labor force base wage policy on longer-term considerations. Wage rates are often determined by what is considered equitable and prices are often set on the basis of traditional markups over cost rather than being based on short-run demand and supply conditions in individual labor and product markets These characteristics of wage and price determination have been with us for a long time. Several recent developments however may have made the setting of wages and prices even less flexible. The cost of doing business has been steadily increased in good times and bad by regulations designed to meet objectives such as clean air and water and improved health and safety of consumers and workers. Another factor may have been the substantial growth of the noncompetitive sector of the economy. This sector ( government and nonprofit establishments ) represents about percent of total employment today as against less than percent in Although employment in the regulated industries whose prices are sheltered to a large degree from competitive forces electric and gas utilities communications and most forms of commercial transportation has not grown as rapidly wage and price behavior in this sector also differs importantly from the competitive model. By the government regulated and nonprofit sectors together accounted for percent of total employment Although we can not measure the extent to which most of these factors impede the downward flexibility of wages and prices that flexibility does appear to have been reduced during the postwar period especially in the case of wages. As Table shows deceleration in wages has been less and less evident with each succeeding contraction. The table exaggerates the problem since there were strong exogenous forces driving price and wage increases up in the year preceding the cyclical peak in and even stronger forces driving them up in the recent recession. Nevertheless some longer-term decrease in downward flexibility especially of wages seems evident TABLE Wage and price changes and unemployment rates over the business cycle [ Percent ! Average hourly earnings index manufacturing1 Unemployment rate wage and salary workers in manufacturing Consumer price index Cycle At cyclical peak quarters after trough Change At cyclical peak quarters after trough Change quarters after trough Change 4-quarter average Change from quarters earlier At cyclical peak I Adjusted for ov ertime and interindustry shifts Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics At the same time the acceleration of the inflation rate during the past years can not chiefly be blamed upon an increasing downward rigidity of wages and prices. Rather it appears to result from the relatively greater magnitude and frequency of the inflationary shocks that have occurred during the recent period impinging upon an institutional structure of wage and price setting which for some time has allowed only very limited downward flexibility especially in wage determination OTHER FACTORS AFFECTING THE CURRENT INFLATION Among the factors contributing to the high inflation rates of the last decade are changes in the behavior of labor productivity basic material costs and price-cost margins Productivity There has been only a small improvement in real incomes throughout the economy in recent years. This can be attributed to the slow growth in productivity ( and the large increase in imported oil prices ) rather than to a failure to gain large increases in nominal income. From through private nonfarm productivity expanded by about percent annually ( Chart ) From through it rose by about percent per year. Part of this difference in performance is caused by the incomplete recovery from the recession : productivity tends to grow faster than its longer-run trend when the economy is on the upswing of a cycle and slower during the downswing But correcting for cyclical factors still leaves a difference : percent in the Chart Productivity in the Private Nonfarm Business Economy INDEX = ( RATIO SCALE ) y y y TED RN / y / / / CYCLICALLY ADJUSTED ^ \ < i i i i I I I ! I I I I / / / / \ ff /// ^ ACTUAL * / / I I I I I I i I I I I / T H E CYCLICAL ADJUSTMENT IS BASED ON A REGRESSION OF PRODUCTIVITY ON THE CURRENT A N D LAGGED UNEMPLOYMENT RATE FROM TO SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I earlier period against percent in recent years. This slowdown is one of the most significant economic problems of recent years. Gains in real living standards must come primarily from improved productivity. Without gains in productivity improvement in real incomes for some Americans can come only at the expense of others In the short run rapid productivity growth also helps to contain inflation To the extent that nominal wage gains are determined by the inertia and expectations discussed earlier productivity growth provides a margin between rising money wages and unit labor costs and thus contributes to lower inflation rates. The substantial growth in productivity was a major factor in the stable price environment of the 1950s and 1960s. A continuation of the slower growth in productivity that has prevailed since would imply a very stringent limitation on real income growth. It would also increase the difficulty of achieving moderation in the inflation rate The causes of the apparent decline in the rate of productivity growth are varied and their effects hard to quantify. Some of the decline may result from the gradual adjustment of the economy to higher energy prices as more costly resources are substituted for previously cheap energy inputs But this explanation can not account for the slower growth before There is of course no reason why productivity should follow a constant upward trend. Since its growth represents the combined effects of technological innovations changes in skills and education of the work force improvements in organizational techniques and a host of other factors changing patterns should be expected The change in the demographic composition of the labor force has also been proposed as an explanation of the slow growth of productivity in recent years. The rise in the proportion of women and younger workers has been a factor in the rise of the unemployment rate and it might be natural to attribute some slowing of productivity growth to the same phenomenon. But the facts do not support this conclusion. What is important for the growth of productivity is not the share of a particular group in employment but the growth of that share. Although the percentages of younger workers and of women in total employment have been growing since the percentages were also growing before The percentage of younger workers ( aged to ) grew by percent a year from to and at the same rate since The growth of the percentage of women in total employment has also remained virtually unchanged at percent. Since these increases have been stable they can not have accounted for any significant reduction in the growth rate of productivity A more promising explanation may be the behavior of the capital stock From to the capital-labor force ratio grew at .an annual rate of about percent. Since then it appears to have grown more slowly by about percent a year. If one adjusts for the proportion of capital required to meet pollution abatement and safety regulations the capital-labor ratio would show even less growth. This apparently explains at least some of the slower growth in productivity since The accelerated introduction of governmental regulations dealing with environment health and safety may also have been responsible for some of the slowdown in official measures of productivity growth. To the extent that additional resources are devoted to specific identifiable activities required to meet environmental safety and other social regulations the effects on productivity are at least conceptually measurable. But much of the effect may have come indirectly through increased limitations on the choice of sites and raw materials delays in construction and constraints on production processes. The effect of these is virtually impossible to quantify. Increased regulation has undoubtedly had an impact but its magnitude remains a matter of conjecture. Insofar as these programs result in improvements in public well-being we may simply have taken part of our productivity gains in forms that are not measured in GNP Much of the low recent growth in productivity may come from the effect the extreme instability of the economy since has had on investment. Sustained balanced growth may make a substantial contribution toward restoring a more rapid growth of investment and thus of productivity Profit Margins Firms seemed to absorb part of their cost increases during the late 1960s and the early 1970s rather than passing them on fully to purchasers. Consequently profit margins declined substantially. Profit margins adjusted for the effects of inflation have improved since however and appear to be close to their post-World War II average when allowance is made for capacity utilization. ( See Chapter ) This situation does not characterize all industries of course and some movements in prices relative to costs will take place But as far as the economy as a whole is concerned attempts to increase profit margins by increases in prices relative to costs should not seriously affect inflation in the near future Costs of Materials From the end of the Korean war until the late 1960s the prices of raw materials declined relative to the general price level. This was an important factor in moderating inflation during this period. The decline was due to a variety of factors including a large overhang of excess processing and mining capacity the discovery of large low-cost oil fields abroad expansion of capacity in foreign countries major technological improvements in agriculture and mining ,a more extensive global search for raw materials and a major reduction in overseas transport charges. For example yields per acre of corn in the United States increased by percent from to largely because of improved hybrid seeds better fertilization and pest control and improved cultural practices This downward trend in relative prices of materials came to an abrupt end in In that year alone raw materials prices rose percent. This explosive rise can be attributed to lagging growth of capacity during prior years a series of crop failures in several areas of the world the enormous growth in demand created by the simultaneous economic expansion in the industrial countries the development of speculation and a " shortage mentality " and above all the actions of OPEC. This explosion appears to have ended. Although there is no reason to believe that prices of raw materials will climb as abruptly in the near future as they did in neither should one expect them to decline relative to other prices as they did prior to Government Policies Government policies directly affect the price level. The most obvious examples are increases in sales or payroll taxes since they add to prices and costs. A rise of percentage point in the sales tax rate shows up fairly directly in prices. Changes in payroll taxes have a similar effect by raising labor costs which are then passed on in higher prices. The employer 's share of social insurance contributions ( including social security and unemployment insurance ) has risen from only percent of total employee compensation in to over percent in and to over percent in when higher unemployment insurance and social security taxes take effect The government may also add to prices through other forms of legislation or through regulation. A change in the minimum wage law is an example. Mandating an increase in the wage paid by the employer raises the cost of production and increases prices. Expenditures that are required to meet environmental and safety regulations add to costs. The environmental benefits or added safety may be well worth the resources devoted to them but the rate of inflation is affected. Government regulations may also have an unfavorable effect on prices by restricting competition. When international competition is restricted through tariffs or quotas domestic producers are able to raise their prices. Domestic competition is also restricted by various regulatory agencies that set uniform rates and hamper the entry of new firms. Some of these issues are discussed further in Chapter GROWTH AND INFLATION In the traditional view the cure for inflation is a dose of fiscal and monetary restraint designed to reduce aggregate demand and thereby eliminate the conditions generating the inflation. When inflation is being fed by excess demand tight labor markets and intensive use of industrial capacity elimination of that excess is indeed a prerequisite to controlling inflation and preventing it from accelerating further. Moreover if the rate of increase in wages and prices responded readily to excess supply a reduction in demand sufficient to produce a modest and short-lived amount of economic slack would eliminate the inflation quickly. As we have seen however the essence of the present inflation problem is that the rate of wage and price increase reacts very slowly to idle resources and excess supply. Given this fact an attempt to purge inflation from the system by sharp restrictions on demand would require a long period of very high unemployment and low utilization of capacity Most current estimates of the reaction of inflation to economic conditions indicate that a continuation of the current degree of slack ( an unemployment rate near ^ percent ) would reduce inflation by amounts that at the upper end of the range are no more than one-half percentage point a year. In the absence of future inflationary shocks ( for example a rise in world materials prices ) it would take at least years of the current degree of economic slack to cut the inflation rate from to percent. To achieve the same results in less time would require even higher unemployment rates Not only would this policy entail a prolonged effort it would also be extremely expensive in terms of lost output. Maintaining the current level of economic slack means producing approximately $ billion a year less than the potential output of the economy To cut the current inflation rate in half the lost output would amount to at least $ billion ( at prices ) Moreover to the extent that such a policy kept the rate of investment low any attempt to restore high employment promptly after the slack had disappeared would probably soon encounter inflationary shortages of plant capacity USING THE TAX SYSTEM TO REDUCE THE MOMENTUM OF INFLATION Various proposals have been offered in recent years to utilize changes in taxes to influence wage and price behavior directly. One set of proposals involves an attempt to break the momentum of the current inflation through one-time reductions in sales taxes or employer payroll taxes. Since the persistence of inflation during periods of economic slack stems partly from the sequence in which price increases induce wage increases that induce still further price increases even a one-shot slowdown in the rate of price increase might halt the momentum and start unwinding the spiral The Federal Government has no general sales tax. It does have a series of specific excise taxes. Eliminating those on alcohol and tobacco hardly seems an appropriate measure to combat inflation if only because the initial impact would be so unevenly distributed across the population. Most of the other excise taxes are earmarked for particular purposes such as the highway and airport trust funds. The only sizable excise that remains the tax on telephone service is marked for elimination in fiscal under the President 's proposed tax program State governments are the principal units that levy general sales taxes Conceivably the Federal Government could make grants to the States conditioned on their using the funds to reduce sales taxes. Serious prob- lems of equity and administration must be solved before such an approach could be made to work. Five States have no sales tax. The taxable base varies widely among the States some for example include food while others do not. Unless the grants were permanent their cutoff could lead to a sudden return of sales tax rates to higher levels with the consequent addition to inflation. And even if the grants were continued indefinitely the States could hardly be asked never to raise sales taxes once they had been lowered Payroll taxes are levied by the Federal Government and the receipts flow into several trust funds to pay for various social insurance programs That part of the taxes that is levied on employers is a direct addition to payroll costs and tends to be passed on in the form of higher prices Reducing employer payroll taxes would lead to a one-time reduction in costs and prices. The President has proposed as a modest step in this direction reducing the Federal portion of the unemployment insurance tax from to percent of covered payrolls. This reduction would lower tax liability by $ million per year. But a cut large enough to produce a significant reduction in costs and prices would require a substantial change in national policy with respect to large-scale general revenue financing of the social insurance trust funds. While such a change in national policy might indeed be worth considering it can not be made without lengthy debate and appraisal encompassing far more than its merits as an anti-inflation tool One-time reductions in sales or payroll taxes to combat inflation need careful evaluation with respect not only to their administrative and related aspects but also to their efficacy as anti-inflation measures. Roughly speaking a $ to $ 18-billion permanent reduction in sales taxes or payroll taxes would be needed to reduce the level of costs and prices by percent. Would such a one-time reduction be enough to turn the momentum of inflation downward ? That is would the secondary effects the effect of lower prices in slowing wage increases that in turn lead to still smaller price increases be sufficient to affect the rate of inflation during subsequent periods ? In part the answer would depend on what happened to expectations about future price and wage increases. No answer can be made with confidence however so long as we can not quantify the strength of the various mechanisms that perpetuate inflation Another quite different set of proposals would use taxes as an incentive for workers and business firms to moderate wrage and price increases. In one variant the government would levy a special tax upon wage increases in excess of some standard and in some versions upon increases in pricecost margins of business firms. In another variant instead of levying a tax increase the government would offer a tax reduction to firms and groups of workers whose wage increases were held at or below the standard Given the recent history of inflation the chosen standard would not be expected to result in an immediate return to price stability but would be sufficiently far below recent increases in wages to produce a significant decel- eration in inflation. To continue the deceleration the tax ( or subsidy ) could be repeated at least for a few years with a lower standard each year Significant administrative problems are obviously entailed in any such proposal. How are wage rates ( and fringe benefits ) to be measured ? What about multiyear union contracts with low increases in the first year to avoid the tax or reap the subsidy followed by large increases in the second year ? Important economic questions also arise. Would a tax on the wage increases that are considered excessive simply be passed along by firms with substantial market power and strong unions and thus actually increase inflation ? ( The tax reduction variant would not suffer from this particular problem. ) If carried on for a number of years such measures could place a penalty on needed changes in relative wages and prices and could impede the restoration of equitable wage relationships for those who had been lagging in the adjustment to inflation. If imposed for only year they might not be sufficiently effective to break the momentum of inflation. And from the standpoint of labor and management such measures might be viewed as giving the Internal Revenue Service some of the characteristics of a separate wage and price control agency It is not difficult to find administrative and equity problems and to raise unanswered questions about all these proposals. They are relatively novel and have not been fully evaluated or widely discussed. It would be imprudent to propose introducing any of them on a major scale before subjecting them to a much more complete evaluation and wider discussion with respect to their economic effectiveness administrative feasibility and social equity. On the other hand the momentum of inflation is so strong and the consequences of either allowing it to continue or trying to wring it out with excessively slow economic growth are so serious that they should not be dismissed out of hand. Further economic evaluation and a much broader public debate would be very healthy whatever its outcome A DECELERATION STRATEGY While the forces at work in the economy are not likely to produce an acceleration of inflation in the next year or two neither are they likely to lead to a deceleration. Supplies of labor and industrial capacity will be ample but unemployment and excess capacity will be less than in the past years during which the underlying inflation rate did not diminish significantly. Bringing inflation down gradually in the next several years will clearly require a special effort If inflation is to decelerate reliance can not be placed on sharply lower price increases in one or two markets. The acceleration of inflation has been pervasive across all major sectors of the economy. Significant variations in rates of price increase have occurred among the various sectors reflecting differences in productivity growth rates and underlying cost trends. But all of the major components of the consumer price index have experienced a large rise in the rate of increase since the early 1960s Progress in moderating overall inflation must involve deceleration of wages and prices simultaneously. To bring this process about the President has asked business and labor to undertake voluntarily a program of price and wage deceleration This new program starts from the presumption that significant deceleration should be achieved in each market. Individual industries are asked to aim in at smaller price and wage increases than the average for the past years. The amount of deceleration that can be achieved will vary from situation to situation however because individual industries face different circumstances. The accumulated experience of the recent past high unemployment and sharp inflation has distorted the structure of wages prices and profits compared to what they would have been in a period of price stability. Deceleration must be widespread but allowances must be made for variations in the degree of moderation On the wage side there has been a wide dispersion of wage rate increases in recent years. In those sectors of the economy characterized by large enterprises and union organizations rates of increase in wages and private fringes typically have been in the range of to percent annually with little change since On the other hand the high level of unemployment has had a moderating influence on wage settlements in more fragmented labor markets composed of smaller firms smaller unions and unorganized labor As a consequence there has been a significant widening of wage rate differentials among groups in the labor force These wage differentials would under normal circumstances result in larger wage increases in the more competitive labor markets and a gradual narrowing of these wage differences. But such an outcome would imply a higher overall rate of wage inflation. Thus an equitable effort to moderate the average rate of wage increase must be based on a greater degree of deceleration by those who have received the largest increases in recent years There may be very special situations in which wage gains have lagged so far behind the rest of the economy that deceleration is not possible Some guidance in analyzing recent shifts in the wage structure can be obtained from an examination of historical trends in relative wages. But variations in the wage structure should be expected in response to evolving market conditions. Such changes in the structure will be associated with skill changes locational shifts of firms changes in productivity trends and other factors that affect the competitive position of a specific industry Deceleration in the rate of price inflation will contribute to moderation of the increase in employment costs directly through cost-of-living adjustments in wage contracts and indirectly through its effect on wrage bargains. However more than a passive response is needed to achieve significant deceleration of wage increases On the price side there are similar reasons why a uniform degree of price deceleration is not feasible. Firms that previously had lowered their pricecost margins in response to slack demand must restore them to more normal levels as the economic recovery continues. But in those cases where profits have declined primarily in response to a low level of sales and capacity utilization improvements in profits should come from higher volume rather than increased prices. The degree of price deceleration that is achievable in individual situations also will be affected by variations in raw material prices by costs mandated by government for example changes in payroll taxes minimum wages or regulatory programs and by the magnitude of cost increases incurred under labor and material contracts signed in prior years Adherence to the goal of price deceleration can contribute to improved productivity by intensifying efforts to reduce costs If a program for deceleration of inflation is to succeed it will require strong efforts and cooperation at the level of individual industries. Thus early discussion between government and individual industry and labor groups with respect to specific inflation problems would be an important part of the deceleration effort. On the price side the staff of the Council on Wage and Price Stability will undertake an analysis of the outlook for market conditions and cost trends in those specific situations where difficulties can be anticipated in achieving the deceleration objective over the course of the year. Members of the Administration will participate in informal private discussions with firms or industry groups based upon staff review of the price-cost outlook and major problems of the industry. The discussions would seek to identify problem areas in such matters as costs capacity productivity regulatory measures and government policies and would examine specific actions the parties could take to help in the moderation of price and cost increases. Implicit criteria for selecting industries for such study and discussions would include their broad impact on costs their potential for setting wage or price patterns and the occurrence of other major developments affecting prices or costs Similar informal discussions with union leaders should occur well before the beginning of bargaining. They would focus on a review of past trends in relative wages effects of the previous settlement productivity and other economic conditions. These discussions would provide an opportunity to emphasize the importance of deceleration and improvements in productivity and to review potential barriers to achieving deceleration Developments with regard to food prices are likely to be helpful to the deceleration process. As noted in Chapter the rise of food prices is likely to be considerably smaller in than it was in Also if present indications of no change in world petroleum prices during are borne out the prices paid by consumers for energy will continue to reflect a gradual adjustment of domestic prices to world levels. If a one-half percentage point annual deceleration could be achieved in the rate of price increase for consumer prices excluding food and fuel then the reduction in the inflation rate for the consumer price index as a whole would be larger if food and fuel prices move as expected Table traces the history of changes in broad categories of the consumer price index and in the major components of unit labor costs since The table shows separately the rate of increase in consumer prices for all items other than food and energy since short-run changes in the volatile farm component of the retail food basket and in energy prices are not an indication of longer-term trends TABLE Annual rate of change in selected components of the consumer price index and employment costs [ Percent ] Relative importance December ( percent ) Item to to to Consumer prices Commodities Services _ _ __ Food Energy All items less food and energy _ All items Private nonfarm business Compensationper hour Contribution of : Wages and private fringes Employment taxes Productivity Unit labor costs Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary Note. Changes are measured from December to December for prices and frcm fourth quarter to fourth quarter for employment costs Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers For all items except food and energy the inflation rate was stable at just over percent during and If an average deceleration of one-half a percentage point could be achieved in for this broad category of consumer prices the decline in the rate of inflation for the CPI as a whole could be somewhat larger because of developments in food and energy prices. Food prices in should rise by significantly less than in more than offsetting a possible faster rise in energy prices. Excluding used cars whose prices fell sharply in the degree of achievable deceleration for the consumer commodity group should be roughly similar to that of services Actual rates of price increase would of course vary among major categories as they normally do. Prices of consumer commodities should rise by less than prices of services because of the larger productivity gains Since the degree of deceleration will not be the same in all cases the achievement of one-half percentage point deceleration for the underlying rate of inflation will require that a larger deceleration occur in most situations. Unless that is done the end result will be a deceleration substantially less than the one-half percentage point Determining the degree of deceleration in costs consistent with the assumed deceleration of prices requires consideration of what has happened to profit margins. Profit margins adjusted for capacity utilization are close to the postwar average. Without that adjustment profits are below average. Cyclical deviations in productivity from the long-run trend which are closely related to rates of capacity utilization are typically reflected in variations in profits rather than in prices actual unit labor costs rising relative to prices in recession and falling in recovery. On average standard unit labor costs should decelerate at about the same rate as the underlying rate of inflation since a greater deceleration of prices than costs would reduce profit margins below long-run average levels Payroll taxes for social security and unemployment insurance will increase sharply in and Achieving a one-half percentage point deceleration in unit labor costs will therefore require a larger moderation of increases in wages and private fringe benefits. At the same time however because of the larger than average deceleration in food prices the rise in the overall consumer price index would slow down more than the underlying rate of inflation. As a consequence significant gains in real wages and fringes would be achieved A focus upon the objective of decelerating inflation at the level of individual markets has several advantages. First it is an explicit and easily understood standard for individual price and w7age situations set forth well in advance of any specific decision. It recognizes that basic rates of price increase must vary among markets because of differences in productivity growth and material cost trends. Yet virtually all should be able to achieve some deceleration. This objective does not interfere unduly with normal market functions Individual firms continue to be responsible for their own cost increases rather than being subjected to some vague concept of cost pass-through Finally it provides a conceptual basis as a guide in identifying the specific sectors where efforts to reduce inflation should focus. For regulated industries and governmental operations it would provide a framework for evaluating and coordinating a wide range of government policies that affect prices and costs. On the wage side it recognizes that recent increases have varied substantially among different groups of workers but it seeks to moderate distortions in the wage structure principally by different degrees of deceleration rather than by a speeding up of wage increases in lagging sectors CAPACITY UTILIZATION Reduction of the ongoing rate of inflation during the expected economic slack in the next few years would do much to prolong the recovery. But we must also deal with another challenge ensuring that we do not incur a new round of inflationary pressures as we return to high employment and capacity utilization In shortages of capacity principally in materials-producing industries contributed to the acceleration of inflation. At present capacity relative to output is ample in virtually every industry ; but as unemployment declines between now and output and employment will rise faster than trend. And since the labor force has grown more rapidly than the stock of fixed business capital. Will industrial capacity be sufficient to prevent shortages from setting off a new round of inflation as the economy approaches high employment ? The capacity shortages in developed at the end of a period in which industrial capacity had increased fairly rapidly. Between and the net real stock of fixed business capital excluding pollution abatement equipment grew at percent per year. During the same period the labor force ( minus employment in the government sector ) grew at a 1.9-percent annual rate. Even with this difference between the growth rates of labor and capital in the private sector a number of industries experienced shortages in capacity in By contrast in the period the annual growth rate of fixed capital stock excluding that part devoted to pollution abatement decreased substantially to percent while the private labor supply grew at percent annually. This comparison of growth rates of labor and capital and the observed capacity shortages in are in themselves enough to arouse concern about capacity constraints in or even sooner The capacity shortages in were made more critical however by two factors that are not likely to recur in the next years. First output in virtually all industrial countries reached a peak simultaneously in This meant that substantial pressure was placed on world markets for many different industrial products and raw materials. Shortages in the United States could not be relieved by imports at existing or only slightly increased prices. Second the price rise associated with the simultaneous surge in demand generated speculative building of inventories across a wide range of commodities both here and abroad. This inventory accumulation remained a profitable activity as long as prices rose faster than the sum of storage costs plus the nominal rate of interest. Economic growth is now below trend in all industrial countries. This slow growth and the worldwide persistence of excess capacity in most major industries make a recurrence of worldwide capacity problems unlikely. In steel for example the capacity utilization rate in was percent in the United States percent in Japan and percent in Europe. Currently the average of these rates is less than percent and there is little chance that levels similar to those in will be http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis reached by even under optimistic assumptions about the growth of demand in Europe and Japan. The availability of many basic commodities from foreign sources to supplement domestic output when it approaches capacity reduces the probability of price-raising shortages and speculative inventory accumulation PAST TRENDS IN THE UTILIZATION OF CAPITAL Table summarizes capacity utilization estimates prepared by the Federal Reserve Board for manufacturing and major industrial groupings. In general the current capacity utilization measures indicate sufficient industrial capacity to accommodate above-trend growth in output for at least years TABLE Capacity utilization in manufacturing and materials industries selected periods ( Percent ; seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Period Total Industrial materials Advanced processing Primary processing Total Durable materials Nondurable materials Energy materials : II III IV : II III IV. : II III IV : II IIL IV : II III IV : II III. IV ) i Not available Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Capacity utilization for all manufacturing industries was percent in the fourth quarter of percentage points below the level attained in and nearly percentage points below the peak. Capacity utilization in materials a category that contains mining and utilities as well as unfinished manufacturers was almost percentage points below its previous peak in The interpretation of capacity utilization statistics is complicated however by a number of factors. First no measure of the utilization of capital covers the entire economy. The broadest-based measure obtainable is for the manufacturing sector which in accounted for only about percent of private GNP and percent of the fixed private nonresidential capital stock While it is reasonable to assume that capacity utilization outside of manufacturing is strongly correlated with the manufacturing capacity utilization rate substantial variation between disaggregated measures of capacity utilization does exist. For example between and capacity utilization rose more rapidly than might have been expected because the share of manufacturing output in the total increased. Between and the manufacturing share fell and capacity utilization declined even though GNP remained high relative to potential. Only tentative conclusions about the adequacy of aggregate capital formation can be reached from relatively narrow measures of capacity utilization In industries except those with continuous processes ( like chemicals paper and steel ) the possibility of adding a second or third shift to increase output without adding to the physical capital stock creates additional ambiguity In many sectors of the economy particularly ones producing finished goods production is relatively labor-intensive ; in a given plant output can be increased by adding employment with very little deterioration in productivity In these sectors measured capacity utilization may rise very slowly in relation to output when output is high Advanced-processing Versus Materials-producing Industries The data in Table show a sharp difference between the advancedprocessing industries and the primary-processing and materials industries During the fourth quarter of capacity utilization rates in advancedprocessing industries were only percentage points below those reached in But in capacity shortages were not apparent in such industries nor did price pressures originate in those areas ; indeed utilization rates were substantially lower by about percentage points than they had been in Capacity utilization in primary-processing and materials industries however which was quite high in was well below those levels in late by about points for primary-processing industries and points for materials. Many of these industries created additional capacity in response to the high utilization rates of The 4/2-point difference in capacity utilization for manufacturing as a whole between and late thus understates the extent that capacity is available to accommodate above-trend gains in output in the next several years without generating inflationary shortages. Most advanced-processing industries should be able to add extra shifts to expand capacity without extraordinary price increases Labor Utilization Versus Capital Utilization While the growth in domestic output now in prospect for and and projections of excess capacity in other industrial nations make widespread capacity bottlenecks unlikely in the next years a longer-run imbalance between capital and labor resources remains a question. The relation of unused labor services to unused capital services is illustrated in Chart The capacity gap is the difference between the Federal Reserve Board capacity utilization index and percent the level attained at times when the unemployment rate was close to high employment. The employment gap is the difference between the overall unemployment rate and the high-employment benchmark. During the 1960s very large investment expenditures increased the capital stock substantially. As a consequence in when the labor market became very tight with a negative employment gap the capacity utilization rate remained at or below percent Since then however the employment gap has drifted upward relative to the capacity gap ; for any given unemployment rate the observed capacity utilization rate has increased A related measure of this capital-labor imbalance is the high-employment capacity utilization rate shown in Chart By estimating the average relation between changes in the unemployment rate and changes in the capacity utilization rate one can obtain the capacity utilization that would be achieved in any period if unemployment were at its high-employment Chart Relationship Between Capital and Labor Utilization PERCENTAGE POINTS PERCENTAGE POINTS UNUSED CAPITAL AND LABOR CAPACITY GAP ( Right scale ) J EMPLOYMENT GAP ~ ~ ~ ( Left scale ) i I I I I l l I i I l I l I i l i i I l I l l I I I i I l I I i I i I l i i I I I i I i I i l I I i I I I I i i I I i l PERCENT HIGH-EMPLOYMENT CAPACITY UTILIZATION MATERIALS ^ \ ^ \ / Vi ^ v \ MANUFACTURING I ll ll ml I I I I I I II I I ! I I II l l SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Ini ll I Il I I I I I I l I I I I III ! I benchmark. The concept of high-employment capacity utilization is an attempt to provide a cyclically adjusted measure of the balance between capital and labor resources. As Chart indicates high-employment capacity utilization for manufacturing currently at percent is significantly higher than it has been in the past ; the postwar average is percent For materials data prior to are not available. The high-employment capacity utilization rate did move up between then and After some fluctuations the rate in the fourth quarter of was at about the level. In general the rise in the high-employment capacity utilization rate suggests that there could be pressures on capacity as the economy returns to high employment if business fixed investment does not increase substantially The estimates in Chart also provide some comfort. In the early 1960s the high-employment capacity utilization rate was also high. The prior period of slack demand and underutilized resources had resulted in poor investment performance and the slowing of growth in the capital stock relative to the labor force. But the subsequent period of high investment did succeed in increasing the availability of capacity so that by the second half of the decade the high-employment capacity utilization rate had fallen significantly CAPACITY UTILIZATION THROUGH The fact that measures of existing capacity utilization cover only part of the capital stock and the conceptual problems noted earlier mean that only tentative conclusions about the adequacy of the capital stock can be drawn from available utilization statistics. A rough indication of the rise in manufacturing capacity utilization that may accompany the projected real GNP growth of percent per year between and can be obtained by observing the capacity utilization growth experienced in when real output grew steadily at above-trend rates and real investment grew more rapidly than real output. If the relation between real GNP growth and capacity utilization in is matched in an annual percent growth in real GNP would raise the manufacturing capacity utilization rate by percentage points a year. By the utilization rate would reach percent slightly above but less than the level. In view of the current capacity utilization differences among industries and particularly the current large unused capacity in materials industries such an outcome should be consistent wTith the avoidance of inflation stemming from capacity shortages. If on the other hand investment and capacity growth proceed at a significantly lower rate capacity utilization would rise to levels previously associated with inflation THE LABOR MARKET Monetary and fiscal policies can provide the conditions under which economic growth proceeds fast enough to reduce the overall unemployment rate. Such policies alone however can not reduce unemployment to acceptable levels without a significant risk of accelerating inflation The incidence of unemployment differs widely throughout the population. In both good and bad times youth minorities women and those with less education face a much greater likelihood of being unemployed than white male adults with good education. As a consequence when the overall unemployment rate declines to low levels unemployment among the more favored groups becomes very small labor shortages occur and the rate of wage and price increase accelerates. Yet less favored groups continue to suffer high though diminished unemployment The uneven incidence of unemployment requires that monetary and fiscal policies to deal with aggregate unemployment be accompanied by structural policies to deal directly with the labor market problems of groups with persistently high unemployment THE STRUCTURE OF UNEMPLOYMENT Although unemployment rates have recovered to a great extent from the recession they have not yet reached the levels normally associated with high employment. As is seen in Table all of the unemployment rates by age race and sex were higher in than in and years of low overall unemployment in which labor markets were apparently close to balance. It would thus be wrong to conclude that all of the current high rate of unemployment is frictional or structural ( i.e. that the present unemployment rate could not be lowered through an increase in aggregate demand without increasing the rate of inflation ) There are however a number of structural problems revealed in Table and it is useful to examine each of them in detail Unemployment differentials have been persistently observed in our economy. They exist between blacks and whites teenagers and adults and women and men. Part of the explanation of such differentials has to do with different patterns of turnover skill level labor market attachment TABLE Unemployment rates by race sex and age selected periods [ Percent * ] Black and other : Males years and over Females years and over Teenagers. s III __ Percent of civilian labor force in group specified ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted Data adjusted for change in definitions in Blacks comprise about percent of total black and other in the labor force Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Total White : Males years and over Females years and over Teenagers Group II IV location and other factors that may be quantified. Differentials may also be due to factors such as discrimination that are less quantifiable but also important in understanding the structure of unemployment Youth Unemployment Teenagers comprised only percent of the labor force in the fourth quarter of but they accounted for percent of all unemployment This problem is better understood by examining two separate questions : Why is teenage unemployment different from adult unemployment ? And why is black teenage unemployment much higher than white teenage unemployment ? White teenagers like other groups still suffer from cyclical unemployment but there is less structural unemployment than would appear simply from a comparison of white teenage unemployment rates with those of white adults. During periods of general economic prosperity much of the unemployment of white teenagers results from decisions to leave and reenter the labor force. For most younger teenagers those to years old employment is a secondary ( or tertiary ) activity and jobs are considered only as temporary. For older teenagers there also is much turnover in the trial and error process of finding a long-term career job. A recent study has shown that between and the average number of teenagers who left employment and withdrew from the labor force in any given month ranged for different race-sex groups from to percent of total teenage employment The corresponding figure for males aged to was to percent The higher labor force turnover rates for teenagers are shown in Table where unemployment rates of teenagers and adult males and females are classified according to the reason for unemployment. The proportion of the total teenage labor force that is unemployed because they lost their last job is not much higher than for adults but the fraction unemployed as a result of either leaving their last job or entering or reentering the labor force is a great deal higher than for adults. The data in Table may to some extent understate the relative importance of unemployment among adult females and teenagers associated with job loss. Some of those in the reentrant category may have been discouraged workers who previously dropped out of the labor force after losing their last job TABLE Unemployment rates by reasons for unemployment [ Percent ] Total * Group Total Job losers Job leavers New entrants to the labor force Reentrants _. Percent of civilian labor force Percent of civilian labor force in sex/age group specified Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Vlales years and over2 Females years and over2 Teenagers If labor markets were tighter as in the late 1960s and the duration of job search and therefore the unemployment rate of teenagers would fall. The instability of the teenage labor force however would prevent the rate from falling to a level comparable to that of adults. Thus the white teenage unemployment rate was percent during the boom and averaged percent in the midst of the Vietnam war boom of This is not to say that such search is a necessary characteristic of the teenage labor market. Improved labor market information and job counseling programs for teenagers might reduce search time as well as job turnover The evidence does not rule out the existence of some structural unemployment among white teenagers. But a large part of the differential between white teenagers and adults clearly reflects a high rate of voluntary job mobility prior to settling on a stable career The differential between unemployment rates of black and white teenagers can not however be explained by turnover behavior. The proportion of black teenagers who quit jobs and leave the labor force is only slightly higher than for whites. Instead the evidence suggests that black teenagers ( as well as black adults of both sexes ) have a much more difficult time finding jobs than their white counterparts do. Moreover this relative difficulty in finding employment has apparently increased during the past years Large numbers of black teenagers are very likely not to be in the labor force because they were unable to find jobs within a reasonable period of time. As evidence of that fact the civilian labor force participation rate of black teenagers ( the " black " category refers throughout this chapter to the " black and other " grouping in Bureau of Labor Statistics data ) was only percent in the fourth quarter of compared with percent for white teenagers. A " discouraged wrorker " effect may explain a large part of this difference. Black teenagers have slightly higher school attendance rates than white teenagers a fact that would tend to reduce their labor force participation rate while the much lower average family income for blacks than for whites should increase participation rates among black youth. If these two factors balance each other then the percentage of black teenagers who are actually available for work would equal that of white teenagers and the true rate of black teenage unemployment might approach percent instead of the reported percent. This would represent an additional unemployed persons or an increase in the overall unemployment rate of percentage point An alternative index of the economy 's success in providing jobs for teenagers is the ratio of employment to the teenage population. At the peak of the boom the employment-population ratio was percent for white teenagers and percent for black teenagers. These ratios fell to and percent respectively in the trough of the recession. From to the fourth quarter of the employment-population ratio for white teenagers increased to percent but for black teenagers it continued to fall in and did not increase until returning to percent in the fourth quarter. Thus by this measure white teenagers are doing better than at the peak of the last business cycle but black teenagers are doing no better than before the current upswing began The gaps between black and white teenage unemployment rates and employment-population ratios have been increasing steadily for the past years. Even in at the height of the boom induced by the Vietnam war the black teenage unemployment rate was percent compared with percent for whites. This worsening coincides with what was until a general improvement in adult black unemployment rates relative to those of whites especially for males as well as a general increase in the relative incomes and skill levels of adult blacks Several plausible explanations of why black youth have fared so badly in the labor market during the current upswing have been advanced by economists. A popular hypothesis is that blacks reside in central cities in proportionately greater numbers than whites and that central cities have not shared in the recovery. This however can not explain very much of the failure of the employment-population ratio of black teenagers to increase during the recovery. From to the proportion of black teenagers living in central cities held constant at percent ; for whites the proportion fell from to percent. The employment-population ratio of black teenagers residing in central cities fell by percentage point but for white teenagers in central cities it increased by points. Moreover whereas the employment-population ratio of white teenagers residing in suburbs increased by percentage points the ratio for black teenagers in suburbs fell by point. In nonmetropolitan areas the white teenage employmentpopulation ratio rose by percentage points while the ratio for blacks decreased points. Thus the worsening situation for black teenagers does not appear to be urban-specific. The black unemployment problem is an urban problem but principally because so many blacks live in cities Another explanation of why the black teenage labor market has been deteriorating both relatively and absolutely is the large increase in the potential labor force of black teenage labor relative to other kinds of labor From to the black teenage population grew at an annual rate of percent compared with percent for white teenagers and percent for all adults. To the extent that the wages of teenagers relative to those of adults are fixed through institutional arrangements such as legal minimum wages collective bargaining agreements custom or a tailoring of jobs to a particular mix of worker skills and characteristics an increase in the relative supply of teenagers will lead to an increase in their relative unemployment. Black teenagers would be especially affected because black adults have generally been attached to low-paying low-skill occupations in which they are more likely to compete with teenagers than is the case with white adults This explanation also rests on the proposition that the labor markets for black and white youth are to a large extent separated perhaps because of a geographical separation within particular areas or because of labor market discrimination against black youth The recent worsening of the black teenage labor market both absolutely and relative to the labor market situation of white teenagers is consistent with this explanation. From to the annual rate of growth of the white teenage population was percent while the black teenage population grew at the rate of percent annually. The combination of a slow growth in demand and a rapid growth of supply caused a rise in the unemployment rate and a decline in the employment-population ratio Some economists suggest that the black teenage unemployment rate is high because the unemployed are reluctant to accept available jobs at the relevant prevailing wage levels. According to this view a large increase in the number of teenage jobs at approximately the minimum wage in black communities would have little impact on either employment or unemployment among black teenagers. There is no evidence to warrant acceptance of this hypothesis We can identify some of the reasons for the high and worsening unemployment rates for black youth but we know these reasons do not constitute a full explanation. It is clear however that most of the differential unemployment between black and white youth does not reflect different search and turnover patterns. It is a major structural problem Unemployment of Women One of the more positive facts about the performance of the labor market is that it continues to accommodate the rapid increase in the female labor force that has occurred over the past two decades. In women comprised percent of the adult labor force and percent of adult employment but by the third quarter of these percentages had risen to and respectively. From the third quarter of ( the peak of the previous cycle ) to the fourth quarter of employment of adult women increased by percent compared with a 5-percent increase for men While more women have entered the labor force unemployment differentials between men and women persist. One reason for the sex differential in unemployment rates is that married women with children a significant part of the female labor force have historically been less attached than men to a career outside the home. ( Single women 's labor market behavior and attachment are not markedly different from the record for single men. ) Whether their children are old or young mothers whose husbands are present tend to have much lower participation rates than those without husbands present. But attachment to the labor force is not the sole explanation for the sex differential in unemployment rates. Inflexibility in labor market arrangements that is the relative scarcity of part-time work may also be a factor. So may skill differentials between men and women. Finally the " statistical discrimination " that once associated women with secondary labor market habits while possibly a factor is no longer as important as it once was From to the proportion of women aged to who left the labor force from a job averaged between and percent per month This is much less than the corresponding figures for teenagers mentioned above but much higher than the labor force turnover rates for men to percent. In as shown in Table of the percent of adult women in the civilian labor force who were unemployed three-fifths were unemployed because they had either left their jobs or were entering the labor force ; only a third of the adult male unemployed were in the same category Subject to the qualification made earlier about the nature of unemployment among reentrants the difference in turnover appears to account for most of the difference in total unemployment rates between the sexes Part of the reason why women are less attached to the labor market than men is that husbands commonly have been regarded as the " principal " earners in husband-wife families and wives as the " secondary " earners. In percent of all unemployed persons were wives with husbands present and percent of these were in family units where at least one person was employed full time. For unemployed husbands the figure was only percent. The proportion of unemployed wives in families with at least one full-time earner was percent for whites compared with percent for blacks. The burden of a given level of unemployment is thus greater for black than for white women. The unemployment burden is also made heavier for black females than for whites because black women have historically had significantly higher labor force participation rates than white women ( The gap has been narrowed somewhat since the late 1960s with the rise in white women 's participation. ) Despite this stronger attachment to the labor force black women experience unemployment rates that are over one and one-half times those of white women In general a significant part of the unemployment differential between adult women and men is explained by high labor force turnover as is the case for teenagers. Institutions seem to be changing however in a manner that should reduce this differential in the future. The large increase in the labor force participation rates of younger married women implies that women will have a greater average degree of labor force attachment in the future and this should lower their unemployment rate over time as their turnover rate decreases Unemployment of Adult Males The unemployment rate of adult black men has clearly not recovered from the recession as much as w7ould be expected. Between and their unemployment rate when adjusted for definitional changes averaged percent compared with percent for adult white males a ratio of to After adjustment for cyclical factors ( the black rate is more cyclically sensitive than the white rate ) this ratio declined steadily over time by approximately percentage point from to In the fourth quarter of however the black-white adult male unemployment ratio was instead of the that would be predicted on the basis of trend and cycle. Had this earlier trend continued the adult black male unemployment rate would have been percent in the fourth quarter of instead of its actual value of percent. Not only did the unemployment rate of adult black males increase sharply over the past years but also their civilian labor force participation rate fell by percentage points compared with a drop of only points for white males. This drop itself may have been caused by the increase in relative unemployment rates for black males It is possible that part of the cause of the high unemployment rates of adult blacks is related to the black youth unemployment problem. The fact that black youth face such enormous difficulties in obtaining steady employment may establish a pattern that is difficult to break. Table TABLE Unemployment rates of black and white men by age [ Percent * ] White men Age years years. years years years years years years and over i Percent of civilian labor force in group specified Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics shows the pattern of average unemployment for black and white men by age in The extremely large differential in unemployment rates between blacks and whites in the to age range implies that whites are able to find secure jobs much more easily than blacks. As they get older black males are more likely than whites to be in jobs that are subject to termination UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION How well wre deal with structural aspects of unemployment has important implications for the equity with which the benefits of prosperity are distributed. In addition it will play an important part in determining how far we can go in reducing unemployment without risking a new episode of inflation. Large increases in aggregate demand and production cause a rise in the demand for labor. Initially the resultant job vacancies are filled from the ranks of the unemployed. But as unemployment falls below some point the number of job vacancies begins to exceed the number of qualified job seekers. Firms increasingly try to meet their labor force needs by large wage increases a process that causes the overall rate of wage advance to rise and thus leads to a rise in the rate of inflation The precise details of this process are not fully understood partly because it does not always work the same way. For example the responsiveness of wages to changes in the degree of labor market tightness depends upon how long the inflationary process has been under way and how expectations about future inflation have been affected. There is considerable controversy about how important unions are in initiating and perpetuating wage increases. Some evidence suggests that in the early stages of a new inflationary process union wage increases lag those in the nonunion sector. Despite our ignorance about many specific parts of the process there is no question but that low unemployment rates imply a high degree of labor market tightness and that this eventually results in a strong upward pressure on wages and prices From the point of view of dealing with the relationship between inflation and unemployment there are two major questions : What is the overall rate of unemployment at which wage increases accelerate ? Is this level changing over time ? These questions are difficult because there are several " submarkets " for labor rather than a single market. Job seekers in one market are only partly competitive for vacancies in another. The boundaries of these individual markets are determined by a number of factors : geographic demographic occupational and those arising from discrimination. If some groups have very high unemployment rates but can not be drawn upon to fill certain jobs wage pressures and inflationary problems can begin to arise even when there is high unemployment Three alternative measures of labor market tightness for selected years from to are shown in Table and illustrate the major issues associated with these questions The overall rate of unemployment receives the most public attention because it is often interpreted as a major index of the economy 's performance. The problem with its use as an index of labor market tightness is that during the past years the composition of the labor force has shifted toward those demographic groups that experience the highest labor force turnover and unemployment. For example because of the turnover behavior discussed above a to 12-percent rate of unemployment among teenagers may be roughly equivalent in terms of labor market tightness to a 3-percent rate for adult males. Thus if the share of young persons in the labor force increased the overall unemployment rate associated with a given degree of labor market tightness would also increase. In fact from to the proportion of the civilian labor force under age did increase from to percent. This implies that the overall rate of unemployment corresponding to any degree of labor market tightness is higher now than it was two decades ago TABLE Alternative unemployment rates selected years Period Overall rate Fixed-weight rate Percent Prime-age male rate l Overall less fixed-weight Overall less prime-age male Percentage points : Fourth quarters _ Percent of civilian labor force Data adjusted for change in definitions in Seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics One way to adjust the overall unemployment rate for changes in the demographic composition of the labor force is to use the same set of weights for each group over time. This is reported in Table as the fixed-weight unemployment rate for which it is assumed that the composition of the labor force with respect to seven demographic groups ( teenagers and males and females aged and ) remained identical to the composition in Because of the long-term increase in the relative number of young persons and adult women in the labor force the fixed-weight unemployment rate has fallen relative to the overall rate. Thus if in the fourth quarter of the composition of the labor force were the same as it was in and each group had its unemployment rate of the fourth quarter of the overall unemployment rate would have been rather than percent Adjusting the unemployment rate for changes in the demographic composition of the labor force implies that the value of the overall unemployment rate at which wage changes tend to accelerate has increased by percentage point during the past two decades. On the other hand the shift in the demographic composition of the labor force toward high unemployment groups has slowed and is expected to turn in the other direction in the mid-1980s Another way to adjust the overall unemployment rate is based on the hypothesis that the wage rates of some demographic groups are relatively insensitive to their own unemployment rates. According to this view in its most extreme form unemployment rates of experienced workers with a history of continuous labor market attachment are likely to offer the best explanation of the rates of change of all wage rates. For example because of union bargaining or for reasons of equity firms might adjust wage rates by a uniform percentage for all skill levels even though some of these are in excess supply. Another source of relative wage rigidity is legal minimum wages Because the high-skill short-supply jobs in the economy have historically been held by men between the ages of and the ( so-called ) primeage male unemployment rate has often been used as an index of labor market tightness. As seen in Table however the prime-age male rate is closely correlated with the fixed-weight rate with respect to cyclical changes so it is next to impossible to discern which is the better index of short-run changes in labor market tightness through aggregate analysis Quantifying the inflationary effect of changes in the unemployment rates of various demographic groups is nevertheless extremely important for policy purposes. If prime-age males were the only group that mattered in determining wage inflation programs could be directed toward increasing the employment of other groups without any inflationary consequences Recent research however has shown that over long periods of time the relative wages of different demographic groups have moved in the direction that would be expected on the basis of changes in relative supplies This finding implies that the unemployment of groups other than prime-age males does contribute to overall wage changes but it does not tell us much about the magnitude of the relationship While the prime-age male unemployment rate is closely correlated with the fixed-weight measure for short-run cyclical movements it has behaved differently over the past two decades taken as a whole. Since it has fallen by almost I/2 percentage points relative to the overall unemployment rate while the fixed-weight index has fallen by only about percentage point ( Table ) Use of the prime-age male rate as an index of labor market tightness therefore implies that the overall unemployment rate at which inflation is likely to accelerate has risen by 1J/2 percentage points rather than percentage point over the past years The unemployment rates of some or all demographic groups associated with any given degree of labor market tightness may have increased to some extent because of the growth of income transfer programs. In particular many economists have argued that the more liberal provision of unemployment insurance food stamps and other such programs while achieving the desirable end of mitigating the hardship of unemployment may also have allowed people to search more carefully for the jobs they will accept This would cause vacancies to rise relative to the number of unemployed persons causing greater inflationary pressures at a given rate of overall unemployment. The evidence on the quantitative importance of these programs is mixed and controversial. But the direction of their effect on the unemployment rate at which inflationary pressures emerge is clear A number of forces have been at work over the past several decades to raise the overall unemployment rate at which inflationary pressures begin to appear above the neighborhood of percent that seemed to prevail during the mid-1950s. Because of the complexity of the problem there are no precise answers to the question of where the zone now lies. Demo- graphic changes that reduce the proportion of teenagers in the labor force should begin lowering the inflationary threshold during the early 1980s For institutional reasons the speed with which inflationary problems develop as the threshold is crossed is relatively sluggish. Nevertheless it is clear that achievement of the Administration 's long-run goals for unemployment in and later years can not rely solely upon monetary and fiscal policies. These policies which affect aggregate demand will have to be supplemented by effective employment and training policies targeted to reduce structural unemployment if socially desirable levels of overall unemployment rates are to be reached without the appearance of inflationary pressures in the labor market Measures that are successful in improving the operation of the labor market can reduce the overall unemployment rate at which inflationary pressures arise. The general object of such policies should be to provide a better matching of the unemployed with available job vacancies. In principle this can be accomplished by three major types of actions : training ; finding jobs for groups with very high unemployment ; and improving information and career choices for new entrants into the labor force POLICIES TO REDUCE STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT Reaching a low rate of unemployment without initiating increases in the rate of inflation will require effective structural programs as well as overall monetary and fiscal policy. Programs that increase access to jobs for groups with high unemployment not only serve the interests of economic justice but help us avoid the excessively tight labor markets and inflationary pressures that might otherwise arise in a period of high unemployment Policies designed to alleviate structural unemployment include the following : ( ) Manpower training ; ( ) public service employment ( PSE ) ; ( ) labor market information ; ( ) incentives for private industry to hire the disadvantaged ; and ( ) elimination of restrictive practices in the labor market. The primary focus of labor market policy in the United States over the past several years has been on the first two. We also spend about $ million per year on the U.S. Employment Service an example of the third approach and we have made some limited attempts to institute policies of the fourth kind. Equal employment opportunity programs which are currently in the process of being strengthened and improved are an example of the fifth policy Since the achievement of our long-term economic objectives depends partly on the success of these structural policies it is useful to review the major Federal programs that are in operation the changes that have recently been made in them and the effect that these policies are likely to have Manpower Training Programs A wide range of programs designed to increase the labor market skills of persons who have chronic difficulties in finding or holding jobs has been offered since the early 1960s. During approximately $ billion will be spent on classroom and on-the-job training programs ( Table ) To the extent that training programs can raise the skills of the unemployed so that they correspond more closely to those needed in vacant jobs they should lower the unemployment rate at which excessive labor market tightness begins to appear. Since the benefits of these programs accrue for some time after the training period it is difficult to find out whether they are having their intended impact until the work experience and earnings of trainees have been observed for many years. Scattered evidence based on the programs of the 1960s however suggests that the return on classroom training programs is approximately comparable to returns on other types of investment in our economy. Moreover the training programs do appear to be moderately well targeted to the least skilled participants in the labor force TABLE Estimated Federal outlays and participation in training and employment programs during fiscal year Outlays ( millions of dollars ) Program Total training and employment Personyears ( thousands ) Institutional On-the-job. Training Regular PSE Work experience ( principally youth ) Summer youth Older Americans.. Public service employment ( PSE ) Source : Office of Management and Budget The extent to which these programs do in fact improve the inflationunemployment tradeoff is not known. The observed increases in the earnings of participants in these programs arise from a combination of reduced unemployment and increased productivity but the evidence necessary to determine the importance of each factor is lacking. Under the assumption that half of the benefits to training come in the form of increased employment and the other half from increased productivity an additional $ billion spent each year on training would ignoring population growth lower the unemployment rate for a given degree of labor market tightness by about percentage point after years and slightly more thereafter. Accordingly the scale of training programs would need to be many times greater than it now is before it would have a significant impact on the unemployment rate Moreover it is likely that the average effectiveness of these programs in terms of reducing unemployment would decline as they were expanded to reach a much wider portion of the population Training programs are a good investment but on the basis of present evidence their potential role is modest in relation to the total unemployment problem http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Public Service Employment Since the principal emphasis of manpower policy has shifted from training toward the direct provision of federally funded employment through State and local government. This shift resulted partly from the slack labor markets of most of the 1970s and partly from the lack of definitive evidence concerning the impact of training programs This Administration 's first major economic action on taking office was to propose legislation which the Congress enacted by mid-1977 calling for a substantial expansion of PSE. During fiscal approximately $ billion will be spent on various forms of PSE. Under the enlarged programs an average of million people will be employed over the year a 60-percent increase over the previous year. These jobs are supposedly targeted primarily toward the low-income long-term unemployed and unemployed youth The stated goals of PSE programs have been quite varied : countercyclical stimulus reduction of structural unemployment and fiscal relief for hardpressed local governments. For the present purposes however the second of these objectives is of major interest. Can PSE programs help improve the inflation-unemployment tradeoff ? Two factors are involved in answering this question. First in order to be an effective instrument for mitigating structural unemployment PSE programs must concentrate on individuals who would have special difficulty obtaining employment in the private sector. If for example a city hired accountants or registered nurses with its PSE funds it would only be bidding them away from other jobs. Prior to the recent program expansion adult participants in PSE programs came from approximately the middle of the skill distribution. Relatively few of the structurally unemployed were reached Under the new programs for adults eligibility is being progressively restricted to individuals who have been out of work for of the last weeks and to those with low incomes prior to participating in the program. Taken in combination with the special projects requirement these new eligibility conditions are changing the PSE programs in such a way that they should now serve more of the disadvantaged than formerly. Ignoring loopholes in the law ( for example a local government can hire recent college graduates whom it would have hired anyway and still be within the program regulations ) these eligibility requirements should also help to reduce substitution of PSE funds for regular government revenues In periods of generally high employment PSE programs for youth can more easily be directed toward increasing public employment without tightening the labor market for private employment. This is certainly true for minority youth who suffer extremely high unemployment rates. It may be less true of programs for youth administered in largely white communities for the labor market for most white teenagers appears to work reason- ably well. The proportion of participants in the PSE youth programs who are black or belong to other minority groups is close to percent a showing that favors a positive judgment of these programs A second requirement if PSE programs are to reduce longer-term structural unemployment is that they provide a work experience that prepares participants for subsequent transfer to regular jobs. Programs that satisfy this condition can instill good working habits in their participants and possibly lower structural problems in the long run. PSE jobs must be real tasks rather than make-work activities for it would be difficult to maintain discipline in a particular project if the work had little intrinsic value. This requires that PSE jobs be characterized by adequate supervision and on-the-job training. At present there is little evidence on this point for either adult PSE or for youth wrork experience. As the total number of PSE slots increases during much can be learned about the absorptive capacity of the State and local sector with respect to the provision of meaningful jobs to disadvantaged persons Do PSE programs have a significant effect on the inflation-unemployment tradeoff ? This question is difficult to answer because the various PSE programs in existence have different effects on the rate of unemployment as well as on wage rates Suppose for example that participants in PSE programs w ^ ould otherwise have been in the labor force but unemployed and that the projects would not have been financed from regular State and local sources that is there is no " fiscal substitution. " Unemployment would then be reduced by the number of persons working in PSE jobs. To the extent that those workers come from among the structurally unemployed tightness in the labor market and inflationary pressures would not increase and the improvement in the unemployment-inflation tradeoff would be substantial. If on the other hand the wage on PSE jobs is relatively attractive and the skills required to perform PSE jobs are about average for the work force in general the programs are likely to attract persons who are not structurally unemployed or others who are not in the labor force In general therefore the effect on the unemployment-inflation tradeoff will be favorable if PSE programs are targeted toward persons whose skills are below those of the average person in the labor force and if the wage rates on PSE jobs are not strongly competitive with those paid in the private sector The youth programs especially those in which minorities participate significantly probably offer more possibility of lowering the overall unemployment rate for a given amount of general labor market tightness than those geared toward adults. PSE can be an efficient method of introducing individuals into a structured work environment who would otherwise be passed over by the private sector Recognizing particularly this last potential of PSE the Administration has proposed that a jobs program be made an integral part of the reformed welfare system under the Program for Better Jobs and Income ( PBJI ) The Administration proposal calls for to million PSE jobs designed to provide an alternative to total reliance on cash assistance. Eligibility for these new PSE jobs would be restricted to principal earners in families with children who can not be placed in private sector jobs. The jobs would last for no more than year. The rate of compensation for the jobs under PBJI would generally be no more than percent above the Federal minimum wage but families without sufficient additional income could receive a cash supplement and hence their total income could significantly exceed that which they would receive solely with the cash assistance they might qualify for without a PSE job The PSE component of this new program can do much toward reducing the cycle of poverty by introducing welfare recipients and other poor people into a structured work environment from which they can subsequently advance to steady private sector jobs. One key element in the program is that it proposes to pay wages at or slightly above the Federal minimum If such a program offered higher wages ( as does the current countercyclical PSE program which pays an average wage about percent above the minimum ) the jobs would be attractive to persons with higher skills and greater ability to find private jobs. Many perhaps most participants would come from outside the welfare system and the jobs component of PBJI would lose much of its ability to mitigate poverty Side Effects of Other Programs In addition to these programs that are intended to lower the unemployment rate for a given amount of labor market tightness the government runs several programs that are designed to accomplish other social objectives but have the additional unintended consequence of increasing the unemployment rate. While the other objectives may be desirable it is useful to be aware of their potential effects on unemployment As seen in Table the Federal minimum wage relative to average hourly earnings has fluctuated widely over time but at the points at which the Fair Labor Standards Act ( FLSA ) has been amended the minimum wage has in recent years averaged approximately percent of the average manufacturing wage. The changes in the minimum wage through would roughly maintain this ratio if the average manufacturing wage grew by percent annually. However FLSA coverage has increased substantially especially beginning in the mid-1960s. The major impact of minimum wages is on the employment of teenagers for the market wages of most adults are considerably above the legislated minimum. There is however no conclusive evidence on how much of the youth unemployment problem is directly attributable to FLSA. As pointed out earlier in the chap- TABLE Federal minimum wage and average hourly earnings in manufacturing selected years Minimum wage Year Average hourly earnings in manufacturing l Minimum wage as percent of manufacturing average hourly earnings $ $ Relates to production workers Assumes a percent growth rate Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ter most of the unemployment of white teenagers during periods of prosperity is caused by their high rates of labor force turnover. But it is quite possible that minimum wages are a contributing cause of the black youth unemployment problem The unemployment insurance ( UI ) system has both a real effect and a measured effect on the overall unemployment rate. The real effect occurs because the reduced cost of job search leads to an increase in both the duration and frequency of spells of unemployment. The measured effect occurs because some workers report themselves as unemployed in order to obtain UI benefits when without the benefits they would have dropped out of the labor force. Some form of unemployment insurance is on equity grounds absolutely necessary to mitigate the hardship of involuntary unemployment. Moreover UI increases economic efficiency by making it possible for the unemployed to search for jobs for which they are well suited rather than being forced to take the first job that becomes available But it does tend to increase the overall unemployment rate. In the past two decades liberalizations in coverage benefits and benefit durations have caused the officially measured unemployment rate to increase although an accurate estimate of the magnitude is uncertain. Some of the most notable changes in benefit duration and coverage have occurred in the 1970s Directions for Improvements To reach substantially lower unemployment rates without initiating a new round of inflation structural programs will have to be continually improved. The first priority is better targeting of the programs so that they more effectively improve long-term job opportunities for those groups with the most severe structural unemployment problems. Although the record is far from perfect the training and employment programs for youth have been fairly successful in this regard. Until recently however regular PSE programs for adults have not focused significantly on the structurally unemployed to the extent that they should. As the overall unemployment rate declines employment and training programs should be carefully directed demographically and geographically toward this goal Some demographic groups have high unemployment rates even in periods of generally tight labor markets because many employers seek to hire new employees only from among those applicants with prior experience and a history of job stability. The high cost of labor turnover to business firms and the existence of wage floors or other barriers to hiring the inexperienced are major factors behind this tendency. Accordingly one approach to reducing unemployment is to provide incentives for private employers to hire from among those groups with the most severe incidence of structural unemployment. This approach is sometimes criticized because it would cause a substitution of low-skilled youths for highly skilled adults and thus raise the unemployment rates of adult males. This criticism however ignores the fact that such a program if successful could induce a greater increase in aggregate demand and thus lower the overall unemployment rate. Moreover most occupations composed primarily of highly skilled adults have very low unemployment rates in the first place and tend to adjust very quickly to excess supply This country 's experience with incentive schemes to hire the structurally unemployed is not very extensive although similar programs are quite common in Western Europe. Since five out of every six jobs in the economy are in the private sector a successful labor market policy must rely principally on the private sector to enlarge job opportunities for the structurally unemployed. To this end the Administration is currently designing a set of options for programs under which employers will have incentives to hire persons with severe unemployment difficulties A third priority for the improvement of labor market policy is the collection of better data that will permit an assessment of the extent to which its component programs are actually having a beneficial impact. At present our ability to lower unemployment without adding to inflation is severely hampered by uncertainty about the effectiveness of various approaches Evaluative research is not easy but without such information it is difficult to justify major expansions of incumbent programs. A principal goal of new labor market programs like those provided under the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act of is to find out which approaches are successful. This emphasis should be extended to other programs CHAPTER Major Economic Policy Issues of T N THE NEW ADMINISTRATION INTRODUCED a number * of legislative initiatives whose economic impacts will be far reaching energy agriculture social security and welfare reform. The Administration is now proposing that the Congress consider a series of fundamental tax reforms. In addition there have been a number of proposed reforms to improve the efficiency of our regulatory programs. The present chapter analyzes these programs. Although the details differ the central theme that runs through these programs is the same enhancing the effectiveness of Federal programs and reducing their costs while improving the fairness of our economic system ENERGY DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICY The economic consequences of the oil embargo and the quadrupling of world oil prices by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) have dramatically demonstrated the importance of energy to the U.S. and world economies. In the United States higher prices of imported crude oil prompted major increases in the prices of all domestic fuels aggravated inflationary pressures and contributed to the deepest recession since the Depression. Moreover mounting oil import payments have constituted an enormous drain on domestic incomes causing a severe imbalance in our external deficit Nonetheless U.S. dependence on foreign sources of energy has continued to grow. Oil imports in nearly doubled those of and supplied almost half of domestic petroleum demand. Unless we adopt effective policies to reverse underlying forces still further growth in oil imports is likely over the coming decades How did this situation arise ? Although the answer is by no means simple an important element is that the current economic infrastructure buildings factories machines and automobiles was largely designed for an era of low-cost oil and natural gas. Significant changes in patterns of energy use will occur only when more energy-efficient capital has been installed and as the existing capital stock is replaced. This is a time-consuming process and only modest progress has been made in the last years Of equal importance are Federal tax and regulatory policies that have encouraged low energy prices throughout the postwar era. Apart from the imposition of import quotas energy consumption has been subsidized by tax incentives for energy production that have lowered consumer prices and over different periods by price controls on crude oil and natural gas. Though the various controls have generally mitigated the inflationary impact of the rise in the price of imported oil and prevented domestic producers from realizing additional gains on oil already discovered they have contributed to imbalances between the supply and demand for major sources of energy The disequilibrium has been evidenced in the natural gas market by growing curtailments and in the case of oil by rapidly rising imports Unless these imbalances are soon curbed the United States may face serious economic risks. Though world oil prices have recently been stable because of weak recoveries in most industrial nations and large discoveries in non-OPEC countries growing world demand for oil and gas could strain world productive capacity creating the danger of substantially higher oil prices in the years ahead. The United States can avoid the consequences of higher prices however by gradually converting from oil and gas to more abundant domestic sources of energy nuclear fuel coal solar and perhaps other energy sources. Because long leadtimes are required an early transition would be less costly and would lead to less risk from higher oil prices or sudden supply interruptions in the future ENERGY BEFORE The principal sources of primary energy in the postwar period have been oil and natural gas. In they accounted for percent of total energy consumption while by mid-1973 the fraction had grown to percent After an earlier period of dominance before World War II coal production fell during the postwar period. Electricity produced by these primary fuels grew rapidly owing to economies of scale and advances in technology Both economic growth and the declining relative prices of energy products heightened the demand for energy ( Table ) From to for example the wholesale price of energy fell by percent relative to all finished goods ( though it advanced in the latter part of the period ) Consumers responded by purchasing homes automobiles and appliances that required substantial inputs of energy ; firms substituted energy and capital for labor in constructing buildings and factories and in manufacturing their goods. The entire American way of life from the spread of the suburbs to the popularity of large automobiles has been conditioned by low-cost energy Aside from the imposition of oil import quotas Federal Government policies stimulated energy demands. Percentage depletion allowances in excess of cost reduced all energy prices by lowering producer tax liabilities. Price controls on natural gas sold to interstate pipelines have long held prices below the energy equivalent prices of substitute fuels. In addition government regulation of the motor carrier and air transportation industries promoted TABLE Trends in energy consumption and deflated energy prices Average annual percent change Item to to to Energy consumption : Total Petroleum and natural gas liquids. Natural gas Coal Net electric power generated g ll ! Average producer prices : Crude oil Natural gas. Coal Wholesale prices : AH energy Petroleum products Natural gas _ _ Coal Electric power Consumer prices : All energy Fuel oil and coal Gasoline and motor oil. Natural gas Electricity * Changes for energy consumption and wholesale prices computed from third quarter to third quarter Other changes are from year to year Prices deflated by the wholesale price index for all finished goods Prices deflated by the consumer price index for all items Sources : Department of Energy Department of Labor Federal Power Commission and Edison Electric Institute energy consumption by encouraging excess transportation mileage through artificial route restrictions and prohibitions on price competition. Finally government support favoring highways over mass transit contributed to increased gasoline consumption The absence until recently of significant environmental legislation also encouraged energy consumption. Energy industries tend to produce relatively large environmental side effects whose costs are not reflected in energy prices. Not until the late 1960s did the U.S. Congress begin to take major steps to deal with this problem At the close of therefore the United States found itself locked into a capital stock tailored to low-cost oil and natural gas. Oil demand which had grown at an average annual rate of percent since World War II had outstripped production growth requiring oil imports of nearly million barrels a day. A significant portion of our low-cost oil and natural gas resources had been depleted portending higher costs of discovery and production. The market however provided no signs of a reversal : Americans were accustomed to cheap energy and expected it in the future THE PRICE SHOCK Events during and dramatically altered prior energy price patterns. In November the Arab members of OPEC placed an em- bargo on oil exports to a number of other countries including the United States. Following previous substantial price increases OPEC quadrupled the world oil price to levels far in excess of its costs and cut back production to support the action In the events that followed it is important to distinguish between the effects of the embargo and those produced by the rise in oil import prices The embargo itself lasted only months and generated shortages within the United States in part because petroleum product prices were controlled Gold weather and previous curtailments of natural gas supplies exacerbated the problem. Shortages would have been mitigated without price controls but the resulting high prices would have created substantial windfall profits and added to inflation Whereas the economic consequences of the embargo were limited and confined to a relatively short period the economic costs of adjusting to higher prices of imported oil were enormous and persist to this day. The adjustment has been accompanied by significant advances in the prices of other fuels ( Table ) Both the embargo and the price rise have taught a common lesson however : vulnerability to supply interruptions and price increases can only be reduced through a fundamental reorientation in patterns of energy use DEVELOPMENTS AFTER THE PRICE SHOCK Though the price shock has had important effects around the world the impacts have differed between countries Domestic Prices of all fuels in the United States increased sharply following the rise in oil import prices ( Table ) Except for natural gas prices however rates of price increase generally slowed or in some cases fell in and Though consumers have had only a short time to adapt energy consumption patterns have already evidenced some response to the higher prices The ratio of total energy consumption to real gross national product GNP for example stood percent lower in mid-1977 than in More significantly the ratio dropped as the economy pulled out of its recession an important sign that higher prices had discouraged consumption Nevertheless after falling in and total energy consumption resumed its upward climb in and as real GNP advanced. Consumption of petroleum products in particular rose rapidly in as a result of several factors that outweighed the dampening effects of higher prices. The cold winter in increased heating demands generally and oil demand specifically because many users of natural gas switched to oil when gas supplies were curtailed. Demand for distillate and residual fuel oils in the first months of the year for example was up by million barrels per day compared with the same period in The West Coast drought added especially to residual oil demands by inducing many utilities to turn from hydroelectric power to oil-based generation In contrast energy production has declined since although the responses to higher producer prices have varied between fuels. For example after falling in coal production rose largely because the sharp rise in oil prices encouraged some oil users to switch to coal and because of the rapid growth in electricity production. Environmental restrictions on coal burning under the Clean Air Act however restrained both coal demand and production. Electricity production too continued to advance although at rates below those experienced prior to Sharply increased primary fuel prices raised final electricity prices to consumers and therefore discouraged consumption Production of crude oil and of natural gas on the other hand has fallen from levels. In the case of crude oil though drilling activity responded to a sharp rise between and in the new wellhead price ( Chart ) the average depth of wells drilled fell. Declining output from existing wells more than offset the rise in new discoveries producing a decline in total crude oil production in the lower States between and Chart New Crude Oil Prices and Drilling Activity NUMBER DOLLARS PER BARREL OIL A N D DRY WELLS DRILLED ( Right scale ) REAL NEW CRUDE OIL PRICED ( Left scale ) 1/ NOMINAL PRICE DEFLATED BY WHOLESALE PRICE INDEX FOR FINISHED GOODS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE In the declining trend in national crude oil production was reversed by the September opening of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System ( TAPS ) Alaskan production was slowed however by a fire at a major pump station in July and by difficulties with others which reduced present TAPS capacity from to approximately million barrels per day. The lack of a pipeline linking the West Coast to the Midwest threatened to force shipment of additional volumes of Alaskan oil through the Panama Canal. Such an outcome would raise transportation costs substantially and possibly discourage future increases in deliveries or expansion of TAPS capacity Production of natural gas has followed a similar course declining gradually between and and leveling off through the third quarter of Like oil production gas drilling activity responded to recent price increases in both the interstate and intrastate markets ; declining output of existing wells however had until more than offset new production. The production trend since represents a particularly dramatic reversal : from to natural gas was the fastest growing domestic source of primary energy With energy consumption registering a small increase between and the decline in energy production has created a growing imbalance between production and demand particularly for oil and natural gas. In the case of natural gas the excess of demand over production has remained largely unsatisfied. Until the quadrupling of oil prices the importation of significant quantities of liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) was not economic limiting the import market to contiguous nations Canada and Mexico. As a result natural gas imports have remained less than percent of domestic consumption The inability of domestic and imported natural gas to satisfy demands has resulted in curtailments of natural gas supplies. Since despite a decline in total consumption of natural gas the volume of gas curtailed to users with firm supply contracts has increased by a factor of over The shortage reached a peak owing to the cold weather in the first quarter of when net curtailments to firm users rose to nearly trillion cubic feet or almost percent of total gas consumption Curtailments have grown largely because of the way in which natural gas prices have been controlled. Since prices of natural gas sold to interstate pipelines have been subject to Federal regulation. Natural gas sold to intrastate pipelines however has remained unregulated. During the 1960s when intrastate prices were generally below interstate prices new commitments to interstate pipelines exceeded those to the intrastate market. During the 1970s however intrastate prices increased at a much faster rate despite several increases allowed in the price for new interstate commitments. For example although the interstate price ceiling of $ per thousand cubic feet ( mcf ) for new contracts stood nearly triple its level of new longterm intrastate contract prices ranged between $ and $ per mcf in the major gas-producing States according to a survey made by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The higher intrastate prices have encouraged producers to commit most new gas to the intrastate market creating growing shortages in net consuming regions such as the Northeast At the end user level pricing policies by state regulatory commissions have exacerbated the shortage by encouraging consumption. Faced with gas contracts at a wide range of prices commissions have allowed distribution companies to charge their customers the average of all wellhead contract prices. New higher-cost gas has consequently been " rolled-in " with the average cost of all previously discovered gas. Although rolled-in pricing caused only minor problems when average and marginal gas prices were relatively close today it introduces major distortions in energy pricing Consumers are faced with low average historical costs when new supplies are often substantially more expensive. This distortion could worsen if high-cost gas ( such as LNG or synthetic gas ) is also priced on a rolled-in basis With crude oil unlike gas the excess of demand over domestic supply has been met by a mounting volume of imports. Between and oil import levels rose percent. Import costs increased from nearly $ billion in to about $ billion in Most significantly perhaps oil imports climbed relative to GNP although total oil consumption as a fraction of GNP has remained nearly constant during the last years ( Chart ) Chart Oil Consumption and Imports Relative to Real GNP CONSUMPTION INDEX = ^ / TOTAL CONSUMPTION DOMESTIC PRODUCTION IMPORTS 2/INDEX OF BARRELS/REAL GNP ( DOLLARS ) SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY As with the natural gas shortage. Federal policies have also encouraged the growth of oil consumption and consequently of oil imports. Controls on the prices of crude oil in particular have played instrumental roles in this process. Created in to soften the macroeconomic and distributional impacts of oil price increases the system of oil price controls has evolved over time so that it now covers three categories of oil : ( ) " old oil " defined as base period production ( ) " new oil " defined as oil production above base period levels or oil discovered after May and ( ) oil recovered through tertiary production methods. Higher prices have been allowed for the latter two categories to encourage domestic exploration and production. Price controls do not apply to " stripper wells " ( those producing less than barrels per day ) for the same reason The control system has been administered to meet statutory requirements that the average price of all domestic crude not exceed a " composite " ( or weighted-average ) price. For the first half of the prices of old new and stripper oil averaged $ $ and $ per barrel respectively producing an imputed domestic average of $ per barrel. This average was well below the composite price ceiling of $ and the average landed oil import price of $ By creating different prices for oil of different vintages and sources the control system in the absence of other measures would have placed oil refiners having access to predominantly high-priced crude at a disvantage compared to other refiners. Since November however refiners have generally been placed on the same footing through an entitlements procedure ensuring that each refiner effectively pays only the average cost of both imported and domestic crude. Separate allowances have been made to enable small refiners to remain competitive. Nevertheless by confronting consumers with prices below those the United States must pay for additional oil the control and entitlements system has subsidized oil consumption. With domestic crude production at or near capacity the added consumption has increased the demand for oil imports Federal price regulation of natural gas and environmental restrictions on the burning of coal have also done much to stimulate the growth of oil imports. Specifically rising gas supply curtailments resulting from the way natural gas prices have been regulated have prompted many industrial and utility users to look to alternative fuels. Because of limitations placed on coal burning by many State air quality implementation plans however users who have wished to convert their existing facilities have been restricted to oil. Air quality regulations have also dictated the use of either oil or gas for many new facilities as well The only major policy initiative passed after the embargo that should reduce petroleum consumption was contained in the Energy Policy and Conservation Act ( EPCA ) Passed in EPCA established fuel efficiency standards for automobiles and trucks beginning with models. The act will have a gradual impact on oil consumption as the current generation of automobiles and trucks is replaced by more energy-efficient vehicles International The oil price rise in had major effects on all oil-importing nations some of which are discussed in Chapter As in the United States economic growth slowed considerably or even declined in the major industrial countries ( Table ) Total energy consumption however fell much less rapidly in the United States between and than in any of the listed countries except Japan. Correspondingly though crude oil imports fell elsewhere they rose more than percent in the United States during the period TABLE Growth of GNP energy consumption and oil imports in major industrial countries [ Average annual percent change ] to to Country PIMP Ulir United States.. Canada France West Germany. Japan United Kingdom Energy consumption Crude oil imports PIMP Energy consumption Crude oil imports Sources : Department of Commerce Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and British Petroleum Company Limited Throughout the postwar period many of these countries have used various taxes that have discouraged consumption. For example prior to gasoline excise taxes in Japan France the United Kingdom and Italy stood between cents per gallon ( United Kingdom ) and cents per gallon ( France ) well above the average excise tax of cents per gallon on gasoline in the United States. Since each of these countries has again raised its gasoline tax. By although the average tax had remained unchanged in the United States it ranged between $ and $ in the countries just indicated Two countries that have taken particularly far-ranging actions since have been Sweden and France. In Sweden where foreign sources of energy supply percent of fuel demands a substantial gasoline tax has since been supplemented by a fee on automobiles based on gasoline mileage efficiency. Excise taxes levied on coal heavy and light fuel oil and electricity have been changed. New or expanded government subsidies loans and taxes also provide incentives for uncovering new energy sources as well as innovative energy-efficient processes In France higher prices and increased taxes have been combined with mandatory measures to lower the use of oil from pre-embargo levels in sharp contrast to the rapid growth in such use that France experienced between and In the residential sector these measures have been supplemented by metering requirements for central heating and hot water and by tax credits for installing insulation The policy initiatives and oil import trends in these industrial countries contrast sharply with energy developments in the United States since To some degree differences in economic and cultural conditions have accounted for the variations in both energy policies and oil imports ; policy actions taken in one country are not necessarily appropriate for others Nevertheless it is significant that the steps taken by several major industrial nations have emphasized measures discouraging consumption by allowing prices to reflect social costs. Until the National Energy Plan ( NEP ) efforts in the United States have tended to do just the opposite THE NATIONAL ENERGY PLAN Upon assuming office the new Administration faced the dual concerns of rapidly rising oil imports and growing natural gas shortages. Both posed risks of future supply interruptions. The high level of oil imports also threatened the independence of U.S. foreign policy and imposed a substantial drain on the U.S. economy. Over the longer run the Nation faced the need to begin the transition from oil and gas toward more abundant energy resources. The new Administration recognized the critical importance of a comprehensive energy policy that would address these concerns and in April proposed to the Congress a National Energy Plan Economic Principles To achieve both its short- and long-run energy objectives the energy plan relies principally on mechanisms that bring prices and social costs of energy together. Social costs represent the sum of private costs ( energy production costs and the cost of oil imports ) and the costs of important side effects ( environmental damage and the risks to national security and to future economic activity posed by energy imports ) Although the high price of oil imports exceeds the costs of production in the OPEC countries it nevertheless represents the social cost to the United States of acquiring additional supplies. At the same time each component of the plan balances the important principle of efficient use of energy with the goals of fairness sustained economic growth reduced inflation and a clean environment Raising energy prices to reflect costs more closely should have significant effects and these will grow over time. In the short run energy consumption is largely determined by the utilization of existing energy-using devices machines vehicles and buildings. Short-run movements in energy prices are therefore likely to have only limited effects on energy consumption. After a short lapse of time the effects grow as users respond to higher prices by adjusting the current capital stock installing for exam- pie insulation or electrical management devices. As the existing capital stock is gradually redesigned and replaced and as the higher prices induce changes in consumption patterns and lifestyles even greater changes should be seen in energy usage patterns Since the policies proposed in the NEP are designed to affect energy use over an extended period the long-run response of energy consumption to higher prices is of particular interest. There is now a large body of econometric and engineering evidence indicating very substantial responses of energy demand to changes in price over time. An oversimplified but revealing way of demonstrating the long-run response is to show for a single year consumption differences across countries that have had wide and long-standing differences in the levels of energy prices. If differences in the energy price levels have persisted for some time the consumption variations ( controlling for variations in incomes ) should reveal long-run responses Availability of data allowed such an experiment for petroleum use in transportation in ( Chart ) Chart Cross-Country Comparison of Motor Gasoline Demand in LEGEND A Au B C D F Fr I It Japan Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sw Swi T UK US Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom United States WG Finland France Greece Ireland Italy J N No P S Australia Austria Belgium-Luxembourg Canada Denmark West Germany G rr s # WG w UK UJ ( J u L s i A RATIO OF TRANSPORTATION MOTOR GASOLINE D E M A N D TO REAL GDP ( T H O U S A N D BTU/1975 US $ ) SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION A N D DEVELOPMENT O Recent studies have shown that the greatest international difference in ratios of energy to total output is due to variations in transportation use Though the cross-country comparison here can not reflect differences in highway and mass transit availabilities between countries in cultural factors or in other tax policies the marked variations in transportation patterns are particularly striking. Countries that charged their consumers the highest prices for motor gasoline showed the lowest transportation petroleum use relative to their national income. In the United States and Canada on the other hand where gasoline prices were less than percent of levels elsewhere the intensity of oil consumption was approximately double that of the other countries. These results are particularly significant because the variation in prices between these countries is largely due to differences in gasoline tax levels thereby indicating that differences in consumption primarily reflect demand rather than supply responses. Finally though uncorrected for other salient differences between countries these responses of transportation petroleum demand to price changes are indicative of the potential long-run effects of more rational energy prices The NEP also recognizes the role played by prices in producers ' decisions Under current law domestic oil and natural gas prices are controlled at levels well below the prices of either imported oil or intrastate gas. While the plan recognizes the importance of encouraging exploration it also recognizes the central importance of raising prices only for new production. Increasing prices for existing production to levels artificially inflated by a cartel would primarily transfer very large sums from consumers to resource owners without generating significant additional supplies Specific Proposals The NEP contains seven principal elements : Crude oil pricing. To eliminate both the subsidy of imported oil and the administrative difficulties of the entitlements system the NEP calls for a wellhead or a crude oil equalization tax ( COET ) to be phased in over years. By each barrel of controlled oil would be taxed at the difference between the import price and its controlled price. Domestic and import prices would be equalized and the need for the cumbersome entitlements system would vanish In addition through administrative actions certain categories of oil would receive higher prices to encourage exploration and development. " Brand new oil " ( that is oil discovered after April in wells meeting certain geographical and depth criteria ) would receive the world price adjusted thereafter for increases in the general price level. This represents a 20-percent increase over the present new oil price. Oil recovered through new tertiary recovery would be decontrolled as is now the case for stripper well production Coupled with the wellhead tax these new incentives raise purchase prices of all domestic oil to world levels that is to the cost to the Nation of meeting added oil demands. The receipts from the COET estimated to range between $ billion and $ billion by would be rebated to consumers on a per capita basis. Rebates would restore the loss in consumer purchasing power caused by the tax At the user level the plan adds a tax on industrial and utility use of oil beginning in for industrial users and in for utilities. Over a 5-year period the tax would increase petroleum costs by up to $ per barrel for industrial and $ for utility use. The user tax is designed to increase the user price of oil to reflect the social costs posed by the risk of continued high levels of imports and is targeted to the users most easily able to conserve and convert to other fuels Natural gas pricing. Because the market is so far from equilibrium the problems of natural gas have been among the most difficult to solve. One commonly suggested solution would decontrol the prices of all new gas Though such a step would eventually clear the natural gas market it would make available relatively small quantities of additional gas at the cost of substantial inflation and inequity. The inflationary impact of decontrol could be especially severe under the current system of rolled-in pricing The decontrolled prices of new gas would be averaged with much lower cost production allowing the prices of unregulated gas to rise well above the oil price equivalent The natural gas pricing provisions of the NEP address the major problems geographic supply imbalances insufficient producer incentives and excessive natural gas consumption without imposing severe inflationary consequences or generating inequitable transfers of income. Thus the plan proposes an increase in the current price allowed for new interstate commitments and replacement of the present system of " vintaging " new contracts with a single price for all new gas discovered after April Regional imbalances between gas supply and demand would be corrected by a price ceiling applicable to both the interstate and intrastate markets Two proposals at the user level would further improve the efficiency of natural gas pricing. First the present rolled-in pricing structure would be replaced by a system designed to economize on natural gas use. Specifically all utilities distributing natural gas would be required to pass on the costs of more expensive replacement gas to low priority ( largely industrial ) users many of whom currently face the lowest tariffs. Over time this would encourage conversions from gas by those most able to respond to the price change The end user pricing reforms would be supplemented by a tax on the industrial and utility use of natural gas. Like the user tax on oil the gas user tax would be implemented in for industrial users and in for utilities and phased in gradually. The price of gas to industrial users would eventually be raised to the equivalent price of oil. Together with the other natural gas proposals the gas user tax would over the long run substantially reduce curtailments by raising prices of natural gas to levels that reflect the opportunity costs of gas use Coal conversion. Provisions in the NEP that increase the prices of oil and gas will encourage a search for alternative fuels. Though the low cost and relative abundance of coal make it a particularly attractive alternative the continued vulnerability of the United States to oil price increases and supply interruptions suggests that further acceleration of the coal conversion process would be in the national interest Toward that end the NEP proposes two important measures. To supplement the taxes on oil and gas use the plan proposes that firms be eligible for either an additional 10-percent investment tax credit for conversion expenditures or a rebate of any user taxes paid up to the amount of any expenditures incurred for conversion to coal or other fuels. Under proposed regulations the burning of oil and gas in all major new utility and industrial boilers would be prohibited with some environmental exceptions. Authority would also exist to prohibit the burning of oil or gas in non-boiler facilities or in existing facilities with coal-burning capabilities. The plan proposes Federal monitoring of the coal transportation system to ensure that it will accommodate the expected growth in coal production and use Conservation. A major feature of the plan is its fuel conservation package which includes a blend of taxes tax incentives and regulatory requirements. The principal tax measure in addition to those discussed above proposes a graduated " gas guzzler " tax on new automobiles with fuel efficiencies below the fleet average levels required under EPCA. Significant tax incentives include tax credits for home and building insulation and a large credit for solar heating and cooling equipment. Finally the plan encourages cogeneration and district heating and proposes the establishment of mandatory minimum energy efficiency standards for major appliances Utility rate reform. The NEP proposes a series of initiatives to confront electricity users with prices that reflect incremental costs of production more closely than has been true under current modes of regulation. For example promotional declining block rates and other rates that do not reflect marginal costs could be phased out. Such rates are particularly inappropriate now that electricity in many areas is no longer produced under conditions of declining costs Under the NEP utilities would be required either to offer daily off-peak rates to customers willing to pay metering costs or to provide a direct load management system. In addition they would be required to offer lower rates for interruptible service. Finally master metering which removes incentives to conserve would be prohibited in new structures Nuclear power policy. Though the plan envisions growing reliance on nuclear power advanced nuclear technologies that are uneconomic or pose significant risks of nuclear proliferation are deemphasized. In particular the Administration in proposed to cancel the commitment to the construction of the Clinch River Breeder Reactor Demonstration Project and indef- initely defer the reprocessing of nuclear fuel a necessary part of a commercial breeder system. In part these decisions were based on the revised economic outlook slower growth of electricity demand and higher expected capital costs for the breeder. In addition the Administration was determined to push forward with plans to develop a second-generation power reactor that would have a smaller risk of proliferation Common to all nuclear technologies are the problems of safe long-term waste disposal. The plan emphasizes the importance of safe waste disposal which is receiving more top management attention and larger budgets than previously Oil supply interruption insurance. To the extent that the above elements of the NEP successfully discourage oil consumption the United States will be less vulnerable to possible future oil supply interruptions. Nevertheless even under the most favorable circumstances the United States is expected to continue importing oil. To provide added insurance therefore the plan proposes the creation of a Strategic Petroleum Reserve ( SPR ) which received its first oil shipments in July Current policy calls for storage of million barrels by the end of enough oil to cover a 4-month interruption of million barrels a day By the end of the year the House-Senate Energy Conference Committee reached compromise agreements on three of the principal elements of the plan. The agreements included coal conversion regulations much like those proposed in the NEP but with a greater number of exemptions utility reforms that State regulatory commissions would be required to consider but not to adopt and requirements that utilities " audit " buildings to determine their energy conservation potential ( but not to finance the installation of insulation as the NEP had proposed ) Also approved was a system of grants and loans for energy conservation and solar energy The other elements of the plan including the oil and natural gas pricing provisions and the proposed energy taxes await further consideration and final action by the committee. Passage of this legislation is critically important if the United States is to lay the foundation for secure economic growth over the coming years Projected Impact of the NEP Though long-run projections are difficult to make the Department of Energy ( DOE ) projects that passage of the NEP as originally proposed would reduce oil imports by approximately million barrels per day by compared to the effects of current policy. Natural gas pricing provisions are projected to reallocate natural gas to high priority uses and to stimulate additional production through higher prices. The incentives for conversion to coal and the equalization of intrastate and interstate prices are expected over the long run to reduce curtailments substantially In addition the coal conversion program and rationalization of pricing in alternative fuel markets are projected to increase the use of coal by by approximately million tons over projected levels without the plan ( the equivalent of over million barrels of oil per day ) The short-run effect of the plan on the aggregate demand for goods and services is expected to be quite small because it has been designed to change the prices of energy relative to other products without changing the overall level of demand for goods and services. Energy taxes for example are largely offset by both tax rebates and new expenditures to prevent reductions of consumer purchasing power. As a result the plan is expected to change aggregate demand in the short run by no more than a few tenths of a percent in either direction. Over the long run because the plan will improve economic efficiency by rationalizing patterns of use in the energy sector it should produce a more rapid growth in potential output The major foreseeable economic consequences of the program will follow from the effect of the increased prices for petroleum and petroleum products and for natural gas. The annual rate of inflation in and is expected to be to percent higher with the program than without it In the subsequent years the inflationary impact of the program is projected to subside to between and percent OTHER ENERGY POLICIES Policies aside from the NEP concentrated principally on supply measures Long-term prospects for gas supply were substantially improved by Presidential and congressional approval of the Alaska Natural Gas Pipeline Expected to be operational in the pipeline will cross both Alaska and Canada ( following the " Alcan " route ) before connecting with the interstate pipeline system in the United States. At capacity it will transport trillion cubic feet per year and supply approximately percent of total U.S gas consumption Though imports of natural gas are now relatively small substantial additions could be made by Mexican imports and new liquefied natural gas projects. Pending before the Economic Regulatory Administration ( ERA ) of the Department of Energy at the close of the year were several proposals that if eventually approved could permit importation of over billion cubic feet per day by ERA must decide on a multitude of issues reliability independence siting safety accident liability and pricing 'before giving its final approval The pricing issue in particular raises the important question whether the present method of rolling-in new gas prices will continue or whether another method will be found of moving to a system where users face more realistic prices for higher-cost gas. Because continuation of rolled-in pricing would confront consumers with prices below the costs of replacing the gas they consume policy makers face a challenge in arriving at feasible and economically efficient policies for pricing LNG in the future FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL POLICY Since the end of the 1920s the United States has undertaken a variety of programs directed at mitigating problems in agriculture. For much of this time the major problem has been chronically low returns to the resources employed in agriculture. The problem was evident in declining relative prices and in the lower incomes of farm people compared with those of nonfarm people. The pattern of low returns was recently interrupted for a brief period from to during which prices and incomes were substantially higher. Since then however prices and rates of return have declined sharply and the policy concerns of earlier years returned in THE POLICY PROBLEM From the mid-1950s until the agricultural sector was plagued with chronic surpluses. During that period productive potential substantially exceeded consumption. The adoption of new technology and the substitution of machinery fertilizer pesticides and energy for human labor produced major increases in farm productivity yet prices were not allowed to fall to clear markets. The exodus from farming the increasing size of farms and the net population outflow from rural areas that had begun much earlier accelerated. Only in recent years have these forces subsided The government has employed a variety of policy instruments in efforts to maintain farm incomes at socially acceptable levels. Such instruments have included supply control through production restrictions ( such as acreage set-asides ) direct income transfers and a government-provided market of last resort to support commodity prices Beginning in the situation in agriculture began to change. A number of forces were gradually evolving in the world economy and acting to create a better balance between demand and supply for the output of American farms. Rapid growth in worldwide population and income together with a growing sensitivity to hunger and malnutrition in many parts of the world were leading to increased demands for U.S. agricultural output The shift of some centrally planned economies from being food exporters to being net food importers worked in the same direction. The supply of U.S farm output meanwhile was rising less rapidly. Yield increases fell behind the impressive gains of the 1960s. Accompanying these long-run developments were several events of the early 1970s that also resulted in abrupt changes in the supply-demand balance for food. These included major realignments of foreign exchange rates poor crop harvests due to adverse weather and changes in the policies of major countries especially the Soviet Union toward responding to food shortages As a result from to the agricultural sector enjoyed nearly unparalleled prosperity with record volumes of exports pushing commodity prices to new highs. But this economic boom was not without side effects Domestic food costs increased sharply and such concerns led to the imposition of export embargoes that strained long-standing trading relations. The domestic livestock industry endured one of the most unprofitable periods in its history land prices were bid up substantially and debt for farmland purchases was incurred on the basis of unsustainable conditions By the end of however conditions in the farm sector had again become similar to those of the pre-1972 era. U.S. farmers had harvested their third consecutive bumper crop and grain stocks were rebuilt significantly from the low levels reached in Production expenses continued to increase while commodity prices were falling and the volume of farm debt soared. The crop commodity price index had declined percent from the peak in and large government price support activity was in prospect. Aggregate real net farm income was approaching the levels of the 1960s. The unrest among producers was manifest in the widely publicized farmers ' strike that started in late With the apparent return of the farm income problem the deeper question remains whether there has been a fundamental shift in the patterns of price and utilization in agriculture. There is no doubt that with only a few successive years of favorable weather the U.S. agricultural machine has the capacity to create again the " surpluses " with which agriculture has so long been associated. It is not clear whether the current period is only a short-term reaction to low worldwide incomes and abnormally good weather or evidence of a return to chronic conditions of oversupply. As noted below some signs indicate serious global risks of a return to high prices given the margin of stocks over consumption Thus while the familiar problem of low incomes in agriculture had returned in and its end was not in sight the context was new and still unfamiliar. American farmers are now increasingly dependent on volatile world markets while both producers and consumers are more vulnerable to wide price fluctuations and renewed inflationary pressures INCOMES IN AGRICULTURE It is no longer possible to generalize meaningfully about the economic status of the agricultural sector. Farms are not uniform ; a wide diversity of types and sizes of farms exists in every region of the country. Furthermore the economic health of the farm sector must be distinguished from the economic well-being of the farm people. The commercialization of farming and the emergence of dependence on both farm and nonfarm sources of income have altered the meaning of comparisons based on aggregate measures of agricultural income Real net farm income in reached the highest level since World War II. Though down sharply from that peak in it remained well above the average of the previous decade. Gross income has since declined further with recent large crops and falling prices. Combined with escalating production expenses this reduced the real net income from farming in to the lowest level of this decade ( Table ) TABLE Real income and returns to agriculture Rate of return on equity capital Year Total net farm income * Capital gains With capital gains included Billions of dollars With capital gains excluded Off-farm income ( billions of dollars ) Percent 1L7 average Deflated by the consumer price index Calculated as the change in physical asset value less net investment plus the change in net financial liability where each component is first deflated by the consumer price index Off-farm income includes all income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Preliminary Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce The level of aggregate real income must be viewed in a historical context Claimants to farm income have become fewer each year. Today the number of Americans who earn their living from farming is about half the figure two decades ago and they no longer perform many of the production services once carried out on the farm. Moreover the distribution of total earnings is heavily skewed to the largest farms. In percent of realized net farm income was earned by percent of the farms An aspect of the returns to farming that is often overlooked is capital gains. Asset values in real terms were relatively stable during the 1960s but they increased markedly in with buoyant expectations of future earnings. Though the pace has slowed since the increase in real capital gains has continued averaging $ billion annually in this decade. However these gains accrued largely to owner-operators and landlords not to the tenants who utilize almost half of the total farm land If the expectations generated during are discounted resource earnings to equity capital through do not appear abnormally low relative to historical experience in agriculture ( Table ) The real rate of return to farmers ' equity capital from to averaged percent annually before income taxes but including capital gains. Excluding capital gains the rate of return averaged percent. The farm sector rates of return for the 1970s are not far from rates in the nonfarm economy. For example the average annual rate of return to nonfinancial corporate capital for was percent. Slight definitional differences preclude strict comparison however. It should be recognized that the aggregate data conceal a wide variation among farm operators ; extreme hardship is being experienced in many individual cases particularly in Another component of the economic well-being of the farm population is off-farm income. The real income of farm people from nonfarm sources continues to increase over time and accounts for an increasing proportion of the total income of the farm population ( Table ) Nonfarm income accounted for three-fifths of total income to the sector in TABLE Real income per farm and per capita disposable personal income of farm population as percent of nonfarm Total income per farm ( dollars ) i Period average average Income from farming as percent of farm operators ' total income Per capita disposable personal income farm population as percent of nonfarm population ^ Net farm income excluding inventory change plus off-farm income of farm households deflated by the consumer price index Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor Income estimates per farm provide a rough measure of the relative economic well-being of farm households compared with their nonfarm counterparts ( Table ) The comparison is not completely apt however because of differences in the cost of living and in the number of persons per household as well as differences in amenities between farm and nonfarm living. Although the per capita disposable income of farm households has long been below that of nonfarm households there has been a slow but steady convergence of incomes in farming to those of the rest of the work force. In income of farm households actually reached and temporarily exceeded that of nonfarm households but since then the ratio of farm to nonfarm incomes has fallen sharply Because they are so numerous agricultural producers are " price takers/5 and are especially vulnerable to the adverse impacts of uneven rates of change in prices. During a period of inflation led by food prices producers initially benefit from large runups in prices of raw farm products but the increased earnings are generally capitalized into land prices. The owners of such assets enjoy a gain in real wealth but total rates of return fall back to historical levels. Moreover the return of more nearly balanced supply and demand conditions brings commodity prices down again and farm incomes fall while debt incurred during the boom remains INSTABILITY OF PRICES AND INCOMES The average annual export volume of U.S. agricultural products for was one and one-half times greater than the annual average for the 1960s. Average export earnings in the same period reflected a nearly threefold increase over the annual average for a decade earlier. This increased access to world markets has been beneficial not only to agriculture but also to the Nation 's economy. The increased export earnings have contributed to a more favorable trade balance helping to offset the large external deficit However this increasing reliance on foreign markets poses new problems for U.S. farmers and consumers as well as for the domestic economy more generally Markets for agricultural products have long been subject to variability in domestic production and consumption. In recent years however they have become increasingly vulnerable to the random fluctuations of weather throughout the world and to changes in consumption or in the policies of other trading nations. Moreover many nations attempt to insulate their internal food prices from world supply and demand fluctuations. To the extent that they are successful a disproportionate share of the short-run TABLE Trends and variability in real national income components 77rl Component Average annual change Index of variability Average annual change Index of variability Percent National income Compensation of employees Nonfarm proprietors ' income Rental income of persons Corporate profits Net interest Farm income : With Government payments Without Government payments Per capita personal income : Total population Farm population From farm sources These estimates were calculated from regressions of the natural logarithms of the various deflated components of national income on a linear time trend. The deflator was the consumer price index. The average annual change refers to the coefficients of time and the index of variability refers to the standard errors of the regressions. Data for are preliminary Source : Council of Economic Advisers based on data from Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce and Department of Labor adjustment to changing market conditions is forced upon market-oriented countries such as the United States and on developing countries with food deficits These sources of instability are reflected in the increased variability of farm income in recent years. Variability in farm income during the 1970s was about four times greater than in the 1960s ( Table ) In fact during income from farming was by far the most volatile of the major components of national income. This increased variability is also manifested in the per capita incomes of the farm population. Although the variability is considerably reduced when one includes income of the farm population from nonfarm sources the total is still much more volatile than the per capita income for the population as a whole. On the other hand the average rate of growth of per capita farm income from all sources has outpaced the growth of per capita personal income during both periods Instability in agricultural product prices has a significant impact on the entire domestic economy. Sharply increasing prices of raw farm products Chart World Wheat and Coarse Grains : Export Prices and Ratio of Stocks to Consumption I E t B o I 1966/1967 * # X ULJ I i I | I I RATIO OF ENDING STOCKS TO CONSUMPTION NOTE : DATA RELATE TO MARKETING YEAR ENDING IN YEAR SHOWN AND EXCLUDE THE U.S.S.R SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE soon lead to increases in food prices that affect all consumers but most severely those near the bottom of the income distribution The instability of food prices was clear during the last few years when low worldwide stocks of grain and poor harvests led to sharp increases in domestic food prices. From to the ratio of world stocks to world consumption excluding the U.S.S.R. fell from percent to the to 14-percent range. Prices more than doubled ( Chart ) World stocks were increasing by as the second consecutive large global crop was harvested World stocks of grain will have to increase along with continued growth of world population and income to provide a cushion against another food crisis. The stocks-consumption ratio in was ,at a level of percent. A third successive large crop for the world would result in a ratio in the more comfortable to 20-percent range and an average crop would provide some buildup in stocks. On the other hand a very poor world crop which has .about a in probability of occurring or two consecutive moderately poor crops could again reduce the ratio of ending stocks to consumption to the to 14-percent range and cause sharp price increases. The recent large fluctuations demonstrate the importance of developing ample world food reserves PRICE AND INCOME MEASURES It is generally recognized that farm commodity programs through the years have impaired economic efficiency by regulations preventing the production resource use pricing and trade that could flow from unbuffered markets. Once inaugurated programs have seldom achieved the intended result ; and it has often been politically difficult to reform or terminate them even when their economic inefficiencies are recognized From their beginnings and for three decades afterward farm programs tended to be inflexible restrictive oriented toward individual commodities and poorly adapted to prevailing market conditions. Beginning in the mid-sixties some reform was introduced and the legislation continued this recent trend in agricultural and food legislation. It is a further step in the process of bringing policies and programs in closer accord with the economic realities of a modern farm sector operating in a worldwide context The most heavily used policy tool for improving farm income has been market price support for individual commodities. This has been accomplished primarily through Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) nonrecourse loans under which the commodity is pledged as collateral. Historically the support level known as the loan rate was generally inflexible and pegged to " parity " prices. Because of rapid technological change in farming parity and therefore support prices were generally above marketclearing levels encouraging uneconomic output discouraging consumption and thereby aggravating the surplus problem. This situation in turn gen- erated political pressures from the farm sector to curtail output. Quotas allotments and other measures for production control were then applied to individual commodities. With no coordination across commodities supplydemand imbalances soon arose in other commodities Because of slow but significant changes in farming these policies became increasingly inappropriate. It became uneconomic for a major exporting country to strengthen farm income by high support prices because the demand for U.S. exports was more price sensitive than domestic consumption. With inflexible U.S. price supports above market-clearing levels competitors could gain an increasing share of the world market and as a consequence the United States became the residual supplier in world markets. In addition to the economic losses of inefficient resource allocation the large transfer payments to the farm sector had become burdensome and political pressures to reduce the transfers became greater The first steps toward reform to make farm programs more responsive to market conditions were taken in the mid-sixties. As a supplement to the CCC price support loans small " price support payments " were also provided for certain commodities produced under allotments or quotas. This represented the first move toward divorcing price support from income support and toward the use of different measures to attain these dual goals More significant changes in the traditional tools were later effected. The individual commodity approach to production control was discarded in favor of restraining production capacity generally. Price support eligibility was contingent only upon producers ' idling a specified proportion of their cropland. Except for quota crops ( rice sugar peanuts tobacco and extra long staple cotton ) producers were free to plant whatever they wished on the remaining acres Farm program subsidies have traditionally been based on volume of production. As a result the relatively few large producers with greater volume tended to receive a greater share of total program benefits than the more numerous smaller farmers. To the extent that this occurred the programs implicitly contributed to a widening disparity of income distribution in agriculture. Partly in recognition of this fact a $ limit on the amount of payments which a producer could receive under the major commodity programs was imposed for the first time in Legislation in continued the movement toward fewer program restrictions and greater reliance on market signals to guide producers ' decision making. An important step was taken in the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of when by including a target price-deficiency payment system income support was fully separated from price support Following the concept first proposed in the late 1940s as the Brannan Plan income transfers were provided to producers in addition to the price support loans. These income transfers vary inversely with the market price. No payments are made if the market price is at or above the target price ; but if the market price is below the target price support payments are based upon the differential. The payment limitation was reduced to $ in the act Economic conditions after when increased world demand caused prices to be well above the price and income support levels allowed the commodity programs legislated in the act to be essentially inoperative No production restrictions on the major commodities were employed during However as U.S. and world stocks returned to more normal levels prices declined and there were growing political pressures in this country for increased government price and income support POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN When the Carter Administration took office in it faced the reemerging farm income problem the potential instability problem and the expiration of major legislation affecting agriculture and food. In addition other policy proposals including establishment of grain reserves and examination of the organization and funding for agricultural research were advanced. The challenge thus facing the new Administration was to work with the Congress in developing legislation that would meet the incomes objective but reduce economic efficiency as little as possible. For the first time in over a decade the Administration authored a comprehensive food and agricultural bill and presented it for consideration by the Congress. The congressional action resulted in passage of the omnibus Food and Agricultural Act of ( Public Law ) The act further modifies and extends the available policy tools providing for flexible price-support levels increased reliance on direct income support abolition of allotments and a managed grain reserve Price Support The act contains price supports at levels that afford price protection to farmers yet are low enough not to interfere with markets except in years of excessive stocks. The price support programs therefore provide an interim financing arrangement whereby producers may even out their cash flow but eventually return their products to the market. One important change in the act included largely in recognition of the increased importance of world markets is downward flexibility in the support prices for the major commodities. Whenever season average prices are within percent of the loan level and the price support interferes with the competitiveness of U.S. products in world markets the loan level may be reduced by amounts up to percent per year ( with absolute minimum loan levels specified ) Income Support * Divorcing price support from income support in farm commodity programs allows income distribution objectives to be pursued with less economic distortion than if price supports alone are used as a means of bolstering farm income. If minimal supports do not interfere substantially with the functioning of the market then production and use may be largely unaf- fee ted. In this case the only noteworthy cost of the programs to society would be direct income transfers Parity the long-used concept for determining needed income support for agriculture was discarded for the major crops in the act because technical flaws failure to account for productivity changes is a major one made it inappropriate for modern conditions. Instead the act adopted a " cost of production " concept for target price escalation. Lack of adequate cost data at that time forced the use of a broad-based index of prices for agricultural inputs but individual commodity cost estimates have been developed in the intervening years The act completed the move to cost of production using individual commodity cost as the basis for the target prices. However just as with parity this approach also has serious limitations. One is that the average cost of production is not a measure of equilibrium price since it reflects only supply and not product demand conditions. Further an inherent potential for an artificial target price spiral exists in the cost of production approach if fixed asset ( primarily land ) costs are included. Producers earning high returns at a given target price level will bid up the price of land. Since the land price increase is reflected in the cost of production the target prices are raised accordingly and the spiral continues. The act bases the initial ( ) target prices on a proportion of total cost Adjustment of the target prices in the next years will reflect only variable machinery and overhead costs the land and management components are excluded thus largely avoiding the price spiral problem Acreage Allotments As has been noted prior to the act the criterion for determining the compliance required of producers and for disbursing benefits was the acreage allotment. In principle the allotments reflected each producer 's historical share of national production of the crop the shares being assigned on the basis of production patterns prevailing in a particular historical period which for some crops was as long as years ago. The rights to produce and market the crops became valuable assets in effect representing a financial grant from government to the owner merely because in the past a particular crop happened to have been grown on the farm. Program benefits over the years were thus largely capitalized into land values. Because payments were conditioned on existing use patterns these acreage allotments impeded a rapid geographic shift in production patterns. During the period when the allotment system lay fallow production shifted significantly to those farms and regions of the country where the particular crops could be produced most efficiently During development of the act the Administration proposed abolishing the antiquated allotment system. Compliance and benefits based on the old allotment system would have been inequitable and would have drastically lessened the efficiency of the programs in achieving their objec- tives. Overall economic losses would have been substantial if farmers had returned to the old production patterns in order to receive program benefits rather than planting those crops that they could produce most efficiently The Congress adopted the Administration 's proposal to abolish allotments and base the programs upon a " current plantings " concept. Under this approach farmers can make decisions regarding current year production on the basis of costs and anticipated market prices. Any compliance requirement ( such as the acreage set-asides for the wheat and feed grain crops ) and price and income support are then based on decisions that are reflected in current year plantings. While still not a perfect program tool the current plantings concept offers hope of avoiding rigidities in production patterns and in the associated losses of economic efficiency and it removes much of the inequity of the allotment system The concept may however create a new source of resource misallocation if producers respond to the target prices in those years when they are substantially above market prices. Basing income support on current plantings could lead to production distortions an uneconomic product mix rapidly increasing support levels and a need for stringent production controls to avoid unacceptably large Treasury outlays for the support programs. The act thus improves the efficiency of farm programs but does not fully resolve the fundamental dilemma : how to provide income protection to farmers in a way that is equitable yet does not lead to uneconomic production decisions Stabilization Measures Domestic Grain Reserves The establishment of a domestic grain reserve began to receive serious consideration soon after the experience with sudden shortages Numerous proposals for reserves entailing various forms sizes and operating rules had been advanced but support for reserve schemes was mixed. Farmers who associated the large government-held stocks of past years with low commodity prices were at first opposed ; but as grain prices continued to decline the opposition from many gradually diminished. Consumer advocates on the other hand remembering the post-1972 increases in food prices generally favored a reserve system The Administration announced in April the formation of a small food grain reserve of million metric tons of wheat and rice from the crop. The act then mandated such a reserve specifying minimum and maximum quantities and also authorized a feed grain reserve. In late August the Administration announced its intentions to enlarge the reserve to to million metric tons of food and feed grains This reserve system is to be owned and held to a large extent by farmers Rules for its operation are explicit thus precluding stock releases not motivated by economic considerations. A set of release prices has been established and grain enters the reserve at the loan level. The government will share the cost of holding the reserve O The reserve of to million metric tons has three major components : million metric tons of wheat and rice ; to million metric tons of feed grains ; and an international emergency wheat reserve of million metric tons The exact size of the reserve within the range given will depend upon the amount of grain acquired by CCC through the nonrecourse loan program The first two components totaling to million metric tons ( the producer-held portion of the reserve ) are being established through extended loans by the C C C Upon expiration of the regular price support loan producers may enter into a contract with the government to hold the grain for to years. Storage payments are provided until the first price trigger ( percent of the loan level for wheat and percent for corn ) is reached If the second price release point ( percent for wheat percent for corn ) is reached repayment of the loans may then be required The Administration is submitting proposed legislation to the Congress in to authorize establishment of the government-owned International Emergency Wheat Reserve of million metric tons. The legislation stipulates that the reserve is to be used for humanitarian purposes in meeting contingency food needs or as part of any U.S. commitment to an international reserves scheme that may be negotiated A domestic grain reserve can be operated in accord with a price-support program. Stocks will be insulated from the market when prices are low and released back into the market when supplies are short. The planned reserve should : ( ) provide a beneficial price effect to farmers when the reserve is established ; ( ) not " overhang " the market at low price levels as in past years by virtue of the contract release prices and CCC release prices ; ( ) provide buffer stock protection against severe market disruption ; and ( ) provide a reasonably wide price corridor containing the long-run price comfortably away from either ceiling or floor which allows price to perform its allocative function REGULATORY REFORM In a mixed market economy like that of the United States government regulations of the marketplace sometimes play a vital role in meeting social goals curbing abuses or mitigating the hardships that would flow from the unconstrained play of economic forces. Economic regulatory programs for example control entry of firms into particular lines of business set prices they may charge and sometimes specify the standards of service the firms can offer. Under certain circumstances the regulations can be useful in regulating natural monopolies or providing income support. Social regulatory programs on the other hand are designed to correct a variety of undesirable side effects in our economy that relate to safety health and the environment effects that markets left to themselves often ignore. Whereas economic regulatory programs typically govern the conditions of doing business in one or more industries social regulations frequently dictate some of the operating conditions required of a wide range of industries The scope of economic activity covered by Federal regulation has widened as programs have grown and the number of explicitly recognized social goals has increased. Today the economic significance of regulatory activities of the Federal Government approaches that of direct tax and expenditure decisions. But while detailed and critical attention is given to budgetary action regulatory efforts are poorly coordinated with other economic or social objectives. Moreover difficulties in the design of many programs frustrate attempts to attain the very goals for which the programs were formed ECONOMIC REGULATION Regulatory programs that govern entry and pricing in individual lines of business were primarily designed to supplement or replace market mechanisms. As new areas were observed where the market outcome was judged unsatisfactory the scope of Federal economic regulation expanded. Major industries that are now regulated include agriculture airline and surface transportation banking communications and energy At the same time growth of the economy and technological progress have eroded many former natural monopolies converted infant industries into mature ones and created conditions conducive to reliable competitive services. Though economic conditions in some industries may continue to require some degree of regulation rapid changes in others suggest that a greater role for market forces may be desirable Current Problems An important reason for reexamining the rationale for economic regulation is that in many industries the rules are ill suited to present economic conditions. In some instances early goals that prompted regulatory action have been rendered obsolete by new economic conditions but the regulations that promoted those early goals continue in force. In other cases the original goals were contradictory and at least one of them has been abandoned. Pursuit of almost all the goals has required that a growing number of activities be subject to regulation The history of airline regulation illustrates the growth of a regulatory structure from origins bearing little resemblance to current institutions Federal regulation of passenger fares under the Air Mail Act of was introduced chiefly to prevent airlines from lowering passenger fares and receiving larger subsidy payments for airmail carriage. Economic regulations mandated by this act were expanded under later legislation that still governs the airline industry despite the fact that airmail charges provide minimal subsidies to airlines and constitute a very small proportion of total airline revenues Surface transportation demonstrates how pursuit of a goal has expanded the scope of regulation. Early regulation of railroads had the dual aim of providing services at fair prices and stabilizing railroad profits When oil pipelines trucks and water traffic threatened the solvency of railroads these competitors were made subject to regulation in an attempt to maintain the railroads ' profitability. Today all these and intercity bus transportation as well are regulated The continuation of regulation in markets that would otherwise be competitive has only deflected competition not prevented it. In the airline industry for example service competition particularly frequency of service but also such in-flight amenities as food drinks leather seats and movies has replaced the price competition that regulation preempted The prohibition on the payment of interest on demand deposits has induced individuals and businesses to limit the amount of funds held in this form. From the standpoint of society as a whole this is an unproductive activity. It has also spawned the development of new business practices ( some of which are discussed in Chapter ) that are imperfect substitutes for interest-bearing demand deposits. These include telephone transfer systems that allow funds held for transactions purposes to be kept in interest-bearing deposits until the last possible moment and the introduction of interest-bearing negotiable orders of withdrawal or NOW accounts usable in virtually the same ways as checking accounts by both banks and nonbank financial institutions in a number of states. The prohibition on interest payments on demand deposits has therefore largely been circumvented in indirect ways that are often inefficient Continued regulation has also imposed costs by delaying the introduction of new technology and services. Examples include the slow rate at which cable TV and railroad-truck piggybacking services have been introduced the slow rate of expansion of radio services in particular markets because of licensing requirements and the years of delay in the Civil Aeronautics Board 's ( CAB ) approval of low-fare international standby service Movement away from regulation in any industry imposes costs on some who were previously protected. For example though expanded competition in the trucking industry may increase economic efficiency and bring lower prices it also would impose capital losses on truckers who purchased operating certificates from other truckers Administration Effort The problems inherent in the present regulatory structure the uncertainties posed by the complexities of many of the regulated industries and the importance of avoiding unnecessary hardships prompted the Administration to take an active role in in promoting regulatory reforms to improve the present system The Administration strongly supported domestic airline reform initiatives currently before the Congress that promise a smooth transition to a less regulated environment. At the center of the initiatives is relaxation of controls over entry and pricing although control of entry would be phased out over several years to allow existing firms to adjust. In the unlikely event that a community would lose service entirely under the new regulations a transitional subsidy for such service could be provided Increased competition in the domestic airlines industry should benefit consumers by a lowering of fares similar to the dramatic declines in international air fares. The Civil Aeronautics Board and foreign governments have authorized a much wider range of services that involve fewer amenities before and during flights in exchange for appreciably lower fares. These actions have made foreign travel available to many people who were formerly unable to afford it. For example the lowest available individual fare from New York to London was $ Under newly authorized standby plans the same trip can be made for $ about two-thirds of the former cost At home the results of easing entry in the intrastate airline markets in Texas and California have shown that significantly lower prices can be obtained without service disruptions The Administration also proposed changes rationalizing regulatory programs governing agriculture and energy as discussed earlier in this chapter Allowing expanded competition in other regulated industries where there are no significant scale economies or where the original rationale for regulation no longer prevails should offer similar consumer benefits and help to control inflation. The Administration has begun to examine intensively the current regulatory controls over the motor carrier industry and other economic regulatory programs are slated for future study SOCIAL REGULATION Social regulation of the market place has arisen in response to pervasive problems that have affected nearly all Americans at work and at home In one of every workers in private industry suffered from an accident or illness related to the job ; workers lost their lives from such causes. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated that over million workdays were lost in the private sector in because of nonfatal occupational illness or accidents ; and in the mining and construction trades workers on the average lost more than one workday per year because of accidents and illness occasioned by the job. Because of the uncertain links between occupational hazards and illness data that are readily available may well understate the problems Environmental problems are even more pervasive. Air pollution produced by numerous industrial processes and the operation of transportation vehicles has been clearly linked to many different illnesses. Adverse water quality has also proved to be dangerous. A recent study made by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) found the water of cities to contain chemicals that are known to cause cancer in animals. To these known problems must be added the rapid growth in the use of pesticides and possibly toxic chemicals which continues to outstrip current knowledge about their long-run effects Markets do not respond well to these problems primarily because only a very small fraction of any benefits from abatement efforts accrues to those who produce side effects air or water pollution for example. Incentives to take actions or collect information leading to environmental or safety improvements are therefore lacking. Until more positive steps are taken environmental safety or health risks will be needlessly high If society wishes to mitigate this situation government actions are required. The government has focused on many of the problems for only a very short time. Although the Food and Drug Administration was formed in and pesticides have been regulated since the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) was formed in the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) in and the Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ) in In addition many of the substantive laws that these agencies administer have been in effect only as long as the agencies or for an even shorter time Despite their newness these regulatory programs are likely to expand with our growing knowledge of the social problems involved as has happened with the older social regulatory programs. One example of this growth can be seen in Federal pesticide regulation which was begun to protect farmers from fraudulent claims by salesmen. In Congress passed the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act ( FIFRA ) to meet new concern about direct poisoning by requiring the registration of such products. FIFRA was amended in and after the discovery of environmental dangers in DDT and other pesticides that were developed in the 1940s and 1950s. The new amendments provided new authority to license users of pesticides The same growing awareness of problems and expanded scope of programs have occurred in many other areas. As production techniques and products have become more complex society has demanded protection against whatever hazards to health safety and the environment may accompany the benefits from the changes During the short time since their inception the social regulations have improved the conditions affecting the environment health and safety of Americans. For example while the Nation 's efforts to control water pollution are behind schedule and face some difficult problems numerous bodies of water have been demonstrably improved. Because of mandated municipal and industrial waste treatment aquatic life and recreational amenities have reappeared and foul odors and visibly dirty water have disappeared in a number of the Nation 's waterways Similarly marked progress has been achieved in reducing air pollution Data collected by EPA and the Council on Environmental Quality ( GEQ ) at locations around the country show significant improvements in ambient air quality between and The number of these locations that failed to meet national ambient air quality standards for sulfur dioxide fell by percent for carbon monoxide levels by percent and for particulates by percent. Nevertheless in all areas progress is often slower than expected because the social regulatory process has difficulty keeping pace with the rapidly expanding number of products and processes that pose possible hazards to society The social regulatory programs have produced clear benefits to society in the short time they have existed. But their costs have also been substantial larger than were originally anticipated. The national interest requires not only that we achieve the goals of social regulation but that we do so at minimum cost. Two broad sets of factors are important in determining the cost of our social regulations : the level of our ultimate goals and the pace at which we try to achieve them ; and the design of the regulatory mechanism The Pace of Regulation The level at which society sets its goals is an important factor in determining the cost of achieving those goals. Over the next few years however costs will be largely determined by the pace at which we pursue our goals. There is a major tradeoff to be faced between the pace at which the goals are attained and the costs of their attainment. Ideally we should set the pace of moving toward our objectives at the point where any step-up would add more to costs than to the social benefits. In practice we have only limited and imprecise information on the benefits of many social programs although we know considerably more about how changes in pace affect costs. In many cases more rapid implementation is quite costly. For example the Council on Wage and Price Stability studied the water pollution effluent guidelines for the iron and steel industry proposed by EPA in It found that a relaxation of the standard for water pollution control in this industry with no change in the more stringent standard would permit savings in capital costs of $ million. We can not measure the dollar value of the gains from earlier achievement and compare them with those costs. But in making regulatory decisions on the speed of attaining standards we should explicitly make a qualitative judgment about whether the gains from earlier attainment are worth the costs The pace at which regulatory goals must be met may also indirectly affect costs. Deadlines that are excessively short combined with detailed prescriptions of technological solutions can discourage firms from searching for less well-proved but ultimately more efficient approaches. Alterations in initial technological solutions become costly and meet with resistance. On the other hand regulatory authorities must cope with the natural inclination of those who are regulated to overemphasize the costs entailed in rapid progress toward meeting the standards. No mechanical formula can guide decisions in this area. A constant awareness of the relation between pace and costs in decisions about individual cases should nevertheless help to reduce the overall costs of regulation The Design of the Regulations The degree of detail with which regulations are specified is one of the most important elements affecting costs. Excessively detailed and inflexible specifications can increase costs by making it impossible for producers to adopt the least expensive route to meet regulatory goals. The study by the Council on Wage and Price Stability of the proposed guidelines to reduce effluents in the iron and steel industry for example found that the incremental costs the standard imposed for removing one unit of pollutant differed widely for each of a number of processes in a single plant. One process for making integrated seamless piping and tubing required annual incremental expenditures of $ to remove the last ton of total suspended solids ; in hot forming processes with scarfing the last ton to be removed had an incremental annual cost of only $ Applying the guidelines throughout the plant instead of process by process would allow pollution reductions to be concentrated on processes having lower incremental abatement costs. The same level of abatement could thus be reached at much lower costs A difficult problem of regulatory design concerns the extent to which old and new sources of pollution should be governed by different standards Some differentials are appropriate since the incremental costs of meeting a given standard for emissions tend to be lower when the necessary measures are being incorporated in new rather than old facilities. But regulations can inadvertently add to the economic costs of an industry by applying excessively large differentials to new processes compared with existing ones. If the differential is too large firms deciding between continuing production in older facilities or converting to new ones may be biased against the new ones. Since investment in new and expanded facilities strongly affects the rate at which productivity grows overly large differences in standards can slow productivity gains and raise costs Costs can also be appreciably affected by whether the regulatory agency adopts technical or performance standards. A technical standard specifies the equipment or process that producers must adopt such as a particular engineering approach to reduce coke oven emissions or a specific treatment to remove industrial wastes from discharged water. A performance standard sets the expected outcome in terms of such things as allowable emissions or quality of discharges but leaves the choice of method up to the firm. Technical standards give producers little flexibility or incentive to search for less costly approaches ; instead they must rely on the technological decisions of the regulatory agency. Performance standards provide greater freedom for firms to serve their own interest in increasing their profits by finding less costly approaches. The efficacy of performance standards how.ever is sometimes limited by shortcomings in monitoring techniques. Such standards are only feasible if performance can be monitored with reasonable reliability and costs Regulations and Incentives Running through the earlier discussion of regulatory design was the theme of flexibility. To the extent that firms can satisfy requirements by meeting environmental health and safety standards the choice of techniques being left to them the national costs of regulation will tend to be reduced since each firm wishes to reduce its own costs An even broader application of this concept lies in the use of market incentives as a substitute for or supplement to particular regulatory structures. Regulations are commands to firms and individuals from government enforced by civil or in some cases criminal penalties to undertake particular actions : meeting a specific performance or technical standard related to environment health or safety by a particular date. An alternative approach would modify the monetary incentives of the market place to give each firm an interest in achieving specified standards. Various incentives can be considered : a fee system that imposed a charge on each pound of pollutant discharge or on the rate of injuries to workers in industrial plants for example or government auctioning of permits to emit a fixed quantity of pollutants within a locality or along a river Basically market incentives impose prices upon unwanted outcomes Firms find that creating such outcomes is costly and will seek ways to reduce them. In the process decisions on how to correct unwanted side effects and the pace of corrections are decentralized Both the advantages and the problems associated with various incentiveoriented approaches have been extensively discussed elsewhere. For many reasons these approaches are now used only to a very limited extent. Our Nation has approached the problems of environment health and safety chiefly through reliance on detailed regulation. A body of law and precedent has thus been established and administrative mechanisms created on the basis of this approach The advantages of incentive-oriented approaches seem in this light to lie in supplementing and gradually modifying the regulatory approach rather than seeking a wholesale substitution of one system for the other. An example of a supplemental use of the incentive-oriented approach is the structure of penalties for violating the automobile fuel efficiency standards These penalties follow the principle that the size of the fine should correspond to the costs imposed on society when a firm violates a standard. In this case the fine on fuel-inefficient automobiles is related to the social costs of the extra gasoline that will be required to operate them New Directions in Social Regulation The Administration is now exploring ways to achieve a better mix of economic and regulatory incentives in several different areas In occupational health and safety the Administration has formed an interagency task force to search for better means of achieving goals of the Occupational Safety and Health Act. The task force has been asked to examine the use of economic incentives particularly to promote worker safety The interagency Resource Conservation Committee is currently studying the feasibility and desirability of mandatory deposits on beverage containers to reduce litter. It also is investigating whether fee systems could cut down the amount of solid waste The major use of economic incentives in our current regulatory framework is to enforce standards set by legislative or regulatory bodies. Incentives take the form of fines or penalties for violations of regulations. The most effective are those in which the size of the fine and the frequency of inspection are such that firms will comply before the inspector arrives The present penalty structures do not always have this result. Fines for violations of air and water quality standards have generally been small compared with the costs that the violations impose on society. Under these conditions the penalties can serve their purpose only with frequent enforcement. Yet the number of inspectors can not keep pace with the growth in the regulations. With generally low penalties and infrequent monitoring regulatory agencies have turned to such drastic remedies as threatening plant or mine shutdowns to enforce the rules Use of penalty fees based on levels of emissions could supplement the present arsenal of enforcement techniques and at the same time improve the efficiency of the regulatory system. For example properly designed fees would make processes and commodities entailing severe pollution or serious hazards more expensive discouraging their use relative to cleaner or safer processes. They would also encourage rather than stifle the discovery of more effective technologies for curbing socially undesirable side effects Equally important fees allow firms more flexibility to plan for the future in a way that threats of more drastic action do not The potential advantages of fees in inducing compliance with regulations suggest that they should receive greater attention by policy makers than they have done in the past. Administration efforts last year in this direction included a proposed noncompliance fee for industrial point sources. The current standards of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act are based on the installation of discharge-reducing equipment but the incentives to maintain that equipment in working order are weak. A noncompliance fee on the other hand based on the amount by which actual discharges exceed allowed amounts would give firms a strong inducement to operate the machinery properly. In a similar effort the Administration initiated a study of economic incentives to control nitrogen oxides as provided for in the amendments to the Clean Air Act Review and Evaluation of the Regulatory Process The economic effects of social regulations have rapidly grown more important during recent years as their number and scope have increased Regulatory decisions not only determine the speed at which the Nation advances toward important achievements in environmental protection health and safety ; they also substantially affect costs of production patterns of investment flows of capital and locational decisions. Indeed as noted earlier the effects of these decisions on the economy now merit as much notice as the effects of Federal budgetary decisions Improving Federal performance in the regulatory area to minimize the various costs of achieving our social goals requires improvements in the design and structure of regulations as well as in the way they are arrived at and evaluated. The first necessity is a careful analysis and review of the economic issues in the individual regulations especially the cost-effectiveness of various alternatives. Second a system must be developed through which the total effect of regulations on social objectives and on the economy can be brought together and assessed To improve the economic analysis and review of individual regulations the Administration has instituted a program that will allow the President 's advisers to review the consequences to the economy of major proposed regulations. The program requires the preparation of a Regulatory Analysis ( RA ) for each major regulatory proposal. A review group will examine a limited number of such analyses each year to ensure that full attention is given to all feasible alternatives before a regulation is issued. Peer review of the regulatory agencies ' decisions should improve the effectiveness and economic efficiency of the final regulations It is not enough however to deal solely with individual regulations Regulatory requirements from different agencies have sometimes conflicted with each other and particular industries firms or communities are confronted with a series of regulatory requirements imposed by different Federal agencies. No one of these may pose serious problems but taken together they may have serious economic consequences : increasing costs or requiring large capital outlays in a short time. There is now no mechanism to assess these combined effects and take them into account in regulatory decisions. On a larger scale there is no institutional framework within the Federal Government analogous to the budget for Federal spending programs in which the total costs of regulations are brought together to permit the evaluation of economic impacts setting of priorities and the like Several steps are planned or already being taken to develop a careful and appropriate means of reviewing the comprehensive effects of the regulatory process. Last year the heads of the four regulatory agencies concerned with toxic chemicals the Environmental Protection Agency the Occupational Safety and Health Administration the Food and Drug Administration and the Consumer Product Safety Commission formed working groups that meet regularly to seek a consistent approach to regulation. Early this year the President will issue an Executive Order that directs Federal regulatory agencies twice a year to give public notice of the major planned regulations. Members of the public and senior government officials will thus be able to make orderly preparations for participating in the development and analysis of the proposed regulations Finally the President has directed his advisers to explore means by which the overall effects of Federal regulations can be regularly reviewed and judged within the executive branch. Particular attention must be paid to availability of data and to the legal and institutional characteristics of regulatory programs. In view of the importance of regulatory programs however improving the Government 's ability to understand both their economic and their social effects is a crucial need TAX REDUCTION AND REFORM The Administration 's tax proposals are designed to aid continued economic recovery and achieve important tax reforms. The tax relief that these proposals provide is tied closely to the tax reform elements of the package. In general the reform measures increase the amount of income subject to taxation by eliminating various forms of deductions and exclusions. The attendant tax increases are more than offset by lower tax rates The net result for calendar year will be a reduction in Federal tax liabilities of about $ billion. Individual tax liabilities will decline by $ billion the net effect of $ billion of gross tax reductions and $ billion of revenue-raising reform. Business tax reforms are expected to raise revenues by $ billion. These reforms are offset by cuts in the corporate income tax and liberalization of the investment tax credit worth $ billion thus providing a net corporate tax cut of $ billion. Special tax reductions of over $ billion are proposed on excise taxes for telephone services and Federal unemployment insurance taxes in order to reduce prices for consumers and costs for businesses. Chapter contains a discussion of the fiscal policy issues associated with these tax reductions MAJOR INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX CHANGES The most fundamental change proposed in the individual income tax is the replacement of the $ personal exemption and the general tax credit with a single per capita tax credit of $ This change is accompanied by an across-the-board reduction in tax rates. The new system of personal credits will replace the current confusing combination of a personal exemption and a credit of $ per dependent or percent of the first $ of taxable income and thus simplify tax returns. Moreover since the tax rate reduction is proportionately larger in low- and middle-income brackets progressivity of the tax system will be increased. The system of personal credits also alters the way taxes change with family size. Unlike the current deductions for exemptions under which families in high brackets gain more from an additional dependent than those in low brackets the new credit will provide the same benefit for an additional dependent at all income levels For a taxpayer with three dependents the personal credit will be worth $ regardless of the income of the family Additional personal tax reductions may be enacted as part of the Administration 's energy plan. Under the Administration 's crude oil equalization tax ( COET ) proposal of April the net proceeds are rebated on a per capita basis to protect consumers ' real incomes and to avoid a new source of restraint on economic activity. If the final energy bill allows only for a rebate in as provided in the House version the Administration intends to send to Congress a supplemental message recommending that the proposed individual tax reduction be increased by the amount of the net proceeds of the COET The tax reform package restructures the system of itemized deductions Deductions for medical care and casualty losses would be allowed only for extraordinary expenses combined medical payments and uninsured casualty losses in excess of percent of adjusted gross income. Medical and casualty expenditures should properly be deductible only when they are unusually large and have a significant impact on the taxpayer 's ability to pay The deductions for medical care were originally intended to meet this standard but the changing relation between medical costs and income has resulted in the deductibilty of amounts that can no longer be considered extraordinary. Moreover the current casualty loss provision is a form of costless coinsurance that particularly benefits taxpayers in high tax brackets The new extraordinary expense provision will restore the law to its original intent and simplify tax computations for many middle-income taxpayers Itemized deductions for State and local sales gasoline and miscellaneous taxes are eliminated. Since these deductions are very closely related to income a rate reduction may be substituted for them with very little equity loss In any case deductions for gasoline taxes are contrary to our energy goals Several reform proposals are directed toward reducing the use of tax shelters and eliminating other means by which high-income individuals avoid their fair share of tax. The minimum tax first enacted in will be strengthened. Under current law many tax preferences are subject to the minimum tax of percent but preference income may be reduced by $ or one-half of ordinary tax liability whichever is greater before the minimum tax is applied. The proposed elimination of the optional offset of one-half of ordinary tax liability will increase the ability of the minimum tax to reach sheltered incomes of high-income taxpayers. In addition the preferential tax rate of percent on the first $ of capital gains will be abolished Real estate depreciation practices will also be reformed by generally limiting depreciation deductions to straight line rather than accelerated methods These and other related proposals will be directed toward broadening the provisions of the Tax Reform Act of that were intended to create a more equitable tax structure The Administration 's tax package also introduces for the first time a provision for the taxation of unemployment insurance benefits received by highincome families. Unemployment benefits would be taxable for single individuals with total income including unemployment insurance benefits above $ and for married couples with income above $ For each dollar of income above the threshold cents of the taxpayer 's unemployment compensation would be taxable. The current system provides an unwarranted tax advantage for high-income households in which one family member receives unemployment compensation. Since unemployment compensation is intended to replace lost earnings it should be taxed in the same way as earnings. At the same time the high threshold for taxation assures that benefits will not be taxed when a family 's income is low MAJOR BUSINESS TAX CHANGES As discussed in Chapter the most important proposal designed specifically to aid businesses is the 4-percentage point reduction in the corporation tax rate. As an additional incentive for investment the package also contains proposals to increase the limit on investment tax credits from percent to percent of tax liability and to extend the credit to industrial and utility structures as well as equipment. It is further proposed that the current 10-percent level be made permanent instead of reverting to percent in These changes in the investment tax credit will reduce the cost of new investment and make future tax treatment less uncertain thereby creating incentives for additional capital formation. Because investment in industrial structures has grown much more slowly than investment in equipment since the move toward equal treatment of structures and equipment should be particularly beneficial. As a means of promoting investment in urban areas rehabilitation expenses for qualified structures will be eligible for the tax credit Business tax reforms include the repeal of business deductions for a large class of expenses covering such items as yachts club dues tickets to the theater and sporting events and the difference between first-class and coach airfare. The deduction for business meals would be reduced from percent to percent. In many cases these expenditures are a form of tax exempt compensation that provides little or no business benefit. Elimination of these deductions will be a highly visible improvement in tax equity and wall ultimately improve overall economic efficiency Financial institutions now have a favored tax status that is greatly in need of revision. Deductions that commercial banks mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations are permitted to make for deposits into bad debt reserves are considerably higher than the amount necessary to cover actual losses ; credit unions are totally exempt from income taxes. The proposed reforms will reduce excessive deductions for bad debt reserves and will tax credit unions in the same manner as mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations The tax reforms of international business include phasing out preferential tax treatment for domestic international sales corporations ( DISCs ) over a 3-year period and also gradually eliminating the deferral of taxes on profits of domestically controlled foreign corporations. A DISC is a subsidiary set up to receive export-related income ; current law allows a DISC to defer tax on half its income. This tax preference enacted in the waning days of the fixed exchange rate system in was originally intended to encourage increased exports. But since most of the benefits accrue to corporations that would export in any case the small export benefits generated by DISCs are extremely costly. A recent Treasury study estimated that the tax preference for DISCs contributed only $ billion to $ billion to U.S. exports in at a cost of $ billion. Such a special tax preference is particularly wasteful in a world with flexible exchange rates. Its overall effect on the trade balance will eventually be offset by induced exchange rate changes The only lasting effect is an increase in production by industries that can take advantage of the DISC tax preference and a reduction in the output of all other industries Disallowing the deferral of taxes on income of U.S. controlled foreign corporations will equalize the tax treatment of domestic and overseas branches of U.S. businesses. It will allow the repeal of the complex legislation controlling tax havens and reduce the incentive to distort the allocation of profits between parent companies and their subsidiaries TAX TREATMENT OF MUNICIPAL BONDS The Administration 's tax package also proposes a fundamental change in the treatment of debt instruments issued by State and local governments Under the taxable bond option State and local governments will be given the choice of issuing either taxable bonds that will receive an interest subsidy from the Federal Government or conventional tax exempt bonds. The subsidy rate on taxable interest percent in and and percent thereafter will lower the borrowing costs of State and local governments Currently issuers of tax exempt bonds pay to percent less interest than that on comparable taxable bonds. The taxable bond option will increase this difference to percent in The larger difference between the yields of taxable and tax exempt bonds will reduce the value of this tax preference to wealthy holders of the tax exempt issues DISTRIBUTIONAL ASPECTS OF INCOME AND SOCIAL SECURITY TAX CHANGES The tax reform package has been designed to improve the distribution of the individual income tax burden. The three major elements the personal credit the revised rate structure and the reduction in itemized deductions significantly increase the progressivity of the individual income tax structure. The effect of these three changes is illustrated in Table which shows tax reductions for a family of four at several levels of adjusted gross income. Under current law a four-person family claiming only the standard TABLE Income tax liability for one-earner four-person families { Dollars except as noted ] Present law tax * Adjusted gross income Proposed tax Change in tax as percent of before-tax income Change in tax Assumes the greater of the standard deduction or deductible expenses equal to percent of income Assumes the greater of the standard deduction or deductible expenses equal to percent of income Source : Department of the Treasury deduction begins paying income tax when its income rises above $ per year. With the proposed changes the same family would pay no tax if its yearly income was $ or less. The greatest relative reductions occur in the low-income brackets. For a four-person family earning $ income tax liability falls percent from $ to $ a year. A family of four earning $ annually would have its taxes cut from $ to $ or percent Table illustrates the combined effects that the tax reform package and the recently enacted changes in social security taxes will exert on aggregate tax liabilities by income class. Tlje combined effect is progressive as shown by the final column of the table. Taxpayers with expanded incomes below $ who earn approximately percent of income will receive percent of the net tax reduction. This calculation ignores the progressivity of TABLE Estimated tax changes resulting from tax reform proposals and social security amendments ( Billions of dollars except as noted ] Expanded income class ( thousands of dollars ) Tax liability under current law : individual income taxes and social security taxes1 Amount and over Total Percent distribution Tax liability under proposed individual income tax and social security tax Individual and social security tax changes Total tax change Tax reform Social security2 Amount Percent distribution Employees ' share of social security taxes calculated assuming former wage ceiling for ( $ ) and former tax rate ( percent ) Employers ' share of social security tax not included Employees ' share calculated assuming current wage ceiling for ( $ ) and tax rate ( percent ) Employers ' share of social security tax not included Note. Calculations based on levels of income and tax law Source : Department of the Treasury social security benefits and the income distribution effect of business tax changes. At least as important as this gain in progressivity however is the progress toward other goals that the Administration 's tax program will help to achieve : tax reform tax simplification solvency for the social security system stimulation of aggregate demand incentives for investment and maintenance of the economic expansion INCOME MAINTENANCE The publicly financed income maintenance system in the United States is composed of two essential elements : social insurance programs that provide partial replacement of earnings lost because of retirement disability or temporary unemployment ; and public assistance or welfare programs for those unable to earn their own living that is the aged the blind the permanently disabled and dependent children whose parents are unable to support them. The social insurance programs principally social security and unemployment compensation are financed on a pay-as-you-go basis with earmarked payroll taxes. While these programs are not funded on strictly actuarial principles and certain of their benefits have the characteristics of public assistance they have traditionally been viewed by the public as insurance systems. Apart from limitations on earnings recipients are not subjected to an income test as a condition of payment and benefits are generally considered to be an earned right and carry no stigma of public charity. Public assistance programs on the other hand are financed out of general revenues. The benefits are income-tested and hence generally available only to the low-income population Total expenditures for income maintenance have risen from about percent of GNP in to nearly percent in fiscal The social insurance programs account for about three-fourths of this total and social security is by far the largest single program. The Federal Government finances nearly all the expenditures for social insurance and about two-thirds of those for public assistance Two important changes in the income maintenance system were enacted during The Food and Agriculture Act of made certain structural modifications to the food stamp program and the Social Security Amendments of assured the continued financial viability of the social security system. In addition the Administration proposed a major new initiative the Program for Better Jobs and Income to consolidate and rationalize the several disparate components of the welfare system THE FEDERAL WELFARE SYSTEM The principal public assistance programs created by the Social Security Act of were aid to families with dependent children aid to the blind and old age assistance. Since then these programs have been expanded and new ones have been enacted. Following is a brief summary of the major Federal welfare programs in existence today ( Table ) O TABLE Government income maintenance programs Fiscal year Program Date enacted Form of aid Source of funds Beneflt payments ( billions of dollars ) Beneficiaries ( millions ) Social insurance : Old age and survivors insurance.. Medicare Unemployment insurance Disability insurance Workmen 's compensation Veterans ' compensation Railroad retirement Black lung Cash In-kind Cash Cash Cash Cash Cash Cash _ Federal Federal Federal-State Federal Federal-State.. Federal Federal Federal Public assistance : Medicaid Aid to families with dependent children Supplemental security income Food stamp program Child nutrition Veterans ' pensions Housing assistance Basic opportunity grants General assistance Earned income tax credit <2> In-kind Federal-State Cash Cash In-kind In-kind Cash In-kind Cash Cash Cash Federal-State Federal-State Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal _ State Federal Eligible to receive benefits as of July Varies by State Sources : Department of Agriculture Department o f Health Education and Welfare Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Aid to Families with Dependent Children Aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) is a joint FederalState program that provides cash assistance to families with children under years of age needing support because of the death prolonged absence or incapacity of one or both parents. At the States ' option and provided certain conditions are met assistance may also be made available to families where both parents are present but the father is unemployed ( AFDC-UF ) As of States and the District of Columbia operated such programs ; the total number of participating families averaged about per month during fiscal AFDC payment standards for basic needs are determined separately by each State ; in July the largest payments for a family of four ranged from $ a year in Mississippi to $ in Hawaii Benefits are reduced by cents for each dollar of monthly earnings over $ and after liberal deductions for work expenses. Certain recipients of AFDC are required to register with the work incentive ( WIN ) program and must accept suitable offers of employment or training. The Federal Government finances about percent of total AFDC expenditures ; the remainder is paid for by the States and a few localities Supplemental Security Income Supplemental security income ( SSI ) is a Federal program that furnishes cash assistance to the aged blind and disabled. SSI was created in to replace the existing joint Federal-State programs providing assistance to these groups. Basic annual SSI payments are about $ for an individual and about $ for a couple ; benefits are reduced by cents for each dollar of earnings in excess of $ a month. The basic SSI benefit is uniform across the country and entirely paid for by the Federal Government ; many States however continue to provide supplementary support to SSI recipients Food Stamps The food stamp program provides the needy with a monthly allotment of coupons that can be used only to purchase food. This program is the only form of public assistance that is universally available to all low-income individuals regardless of their family or employment status. The maximum allotment of food stamps for a family of four with no other income was $ in and this is reduced by cents for each dollar of net income received. With certain exceptions able-bodied adult recipients of food stamps are required to register for work and must accept suitable offers of employment. The Federal Government bears the entire cost of food stamp benefits and shares administrative expenses with the States Medicaid Medicaid is a Federal-State program that provides free medical services to the low-income population. Individuals are categorically eligible for medicaid benefits if they also participate in AFDC or SSI or in States with programs for the " medically indigent " if they meet an income test. In States without programs for the medically indigent once individuals become ineligible for public assistance they also lose all medical benefits. Benefits vary significantly among the States ranging from an estimated average in of $ per family in Mississippi to $ in New York. The Federal share of medicaid payments is always at least percent but may be substantially higher in States with low per capita income Housing Assistance A variety of Federal programs provide housing assistance to low-income families including low-rent public housing interest rate subsidies for home ownership and rental subsidies. The newest and most active program was created in by an amendment to the Housing Act of ( section ) This program provides subsidies to families who occupy new or existing rental units and whose incomes are less than percent of the median income for the area at the time of application. Of the families that meet the income test those that belong to specified categorical groups or meet certain other criteria actually participate in the program. About percent of the families potentially eligible in on the basis of their incomes were estimated to have received section assistance. In general participating families pay percent of their gross income in rent to eligible landlords and the Federal Government makes up the difference between this amount and the local area " fair market rent/ as established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Because of large geographic differentials in housing costs section subsidies vary significantly among the States and may reach several thousand dollars in some areas Earned Income Tax Credit The earned income tax credit ( EITC ) was enacted by the Tax Reduction Act of principally to ease the burden of rising payroll taxes on low-income taxpayers. The EITC is available only to families with at least one dependent child or a disabled adult claimed as an exemption. The credit is equal to percent of the first $ of earnings and it is reduced by percent of the difference between total income and $ Hence the EITC reaches a maximum of $ and it phases out completely for those with incomes above $ If the amount of the credit exceeds total tax liabilities the difference is refunded to the eligible family provided it files a tax return PROBLEMS WITH THE PRESENT WELFARE SYSTEM Adequacy Some critics of the welfare system contend that it provides inadequate support while others believe it is too generous. The official poverty income level was defined by the U.S. Census Bureau to average $ for a nonfarm family of four in Though this concept suffers from certain difficulties in definition and measurement it is the most widely accepted indicator of minimum income adequacy in the United States. According to estimates of the Congressional Budget Office some million families would have had incomes below the poverty level in fiscal if no income transfer programs had been in existence ( Table ) If cash benefits of both the social insurance and the public assistance programs are added to other sources of income the number of families with incomes below the poverty level is reduced by about percent to million. If in-kind transfers ( for example food stamps medicaid housing assistance ) are also counted as income and taxes are netted out the decline in the number of poor families is even more striking. Under this comprehensive definition of income million families remained below the poverty line in Inclusion of in-kind benefits in the measure of income is controversial and almost certainly overstates the value of such transfers to recipients Recipients have been found to value cash more highly than in-kind benefits because it affords relatively greater freedom of choice in the disposition of their income. Medical benefits are a particularly controversial item because of the difficulties in allocating them to the low-income population and because their inclusion seems to imply that the more illness people suffer the better off they are. Nevertheless those who are entitled to receive free medical assistance are undoubtedly made better off as a result and it would be inappropriate to ignore such benefits in a comprehensive measure of TABLE Families below the poverty level before and after the effects of income maintenance programs and taxes fiscal year 1976x Families below the poverty level based on income Before taxes and after cash and in-kind transfers3 Kind of family Before taxes and before transfers Before taxes and after cash transfers2 Excluding medical benefits Including medical benefits After taxes and after cash and in-kind transfers4 Excluding medical benefits Including medical benefits All families : Number ( millions ) Percent of all families _ Single-person families : Number ( millions ) Percent of single-person families Multiple-person families : Number ( millions ) _ Percent of multiple-person families Data based on Current Population Survey with adjustments to reflect underreporting of income and changes in the characteristics of the population between the survey year ( calendar year ) and fiscal year Cash transfers include payments under government-financed social insurance and public assistance programs In-kind transfers include food stamps child nutrition assistance housing assistance medicare and medicaid Taxes include Federal personal income and employee payroll taxes and State income taxes Source : Congressional Budget Office income. Table presents changes in the number of families below the poverty level when medical benefits are included in income and when they are not. Exclusion of medicaid and medicare increased the total number of families below the poverty line in by an estimated million On balance regardless of whether in-kind transfers are included in income the present income maintenance system significantly improves the distribution of income that would otherwise exist. Nevertheless further progress is still necessary before poverty in the United States is completely eradicated Equity Even among those who consider benefit levels to be adequate it is generally agreed that a serious fault of the present welfare system is the different treatment it accords to people with similar needs. Benefit levels vary widely among States and among different demographic and family groups. Geographic differentials arise primarily because benefits under the two major public assistance programs AFDC and medicaid are essentially controlled by the States. As a result sharp disparities in benefit levels exist between the poorer rural States and the wealthier more urban areas. These differences are mitigated somewhat by the existence of the Federal food stamp program which adds substantially to AFDC benefit levels in low-income States. Nevertheless Table shows that in a single-parent family of four with no earnings could obtain combined welfare benefits in New York City that were more than 2J/2 times larger than those available to the same family in Mississippi. This disparity is much greater than can be explained by regional differentials in the cost-of-living. Such disparities in the distribution of benefits are inequitable in and of themselves and create incentives for migration from low-benefit to high-benefit States The variety of public assistance programs and the ways in which they categorize recipients also result in differential treatment of families and demogiaphic groups. Since AFDC payments are restricted to families in which the father is absent ( or in States unemployed ) the income of a two-parent family of four with one parent working full time at the minimum wage was TABLE Comparison of public assistance benefit levels with alternative income standards family of four Level ( dollars ) Item Median four-person family income.. __ _ Bureau of Labor Statistics low-income budget __ New York City family with AFDC food stamps medicaid _ Illinois family with AFDC food stamps medicaid _ Family earning full-time minimum wage plus food stamps and earned income tax credit Official poverty line Texas family with AFDC food stamps medicaid Mississippi family with AFDC food stamps medicaid Two-parent family with food stamps only ( all States ) _ Note. Data relate generally to mid-1976 Sources : Department of Ccmmerce Department of Health Education and Welfare and Department of Labor only slightly above the poverty level in even after supplementation through food stamps and the EITC. In contrast in many States a mother with three children can receive welfare benefits that are well above the poverty line ( Table ) Moreover if the two-parent family of four has no earnings and resides in a State without an AFDC-UF program it is eligible only for food stamps unless the father should desert the family. Needless to say such disparities are highly inequitable discourage work effort and create incentives for disintegration of families The welfare system also discriminates against childless couples and single individuals who are not aged. Federal income support for these groups is limited to food stamps worth a maximum of $ per year per individual Hence the level of public assistance for many poor people is clearly inadequate. Finally access to certain in-kind programs is restricted by categorical eligibility requirements ( medicaid ) or by limited supplies ( section housing allowances and day care ) and inequities therefore arise. Since the cash value of in-kind assistance can amount to several thousand dollars the resulting differences in benefits can be very large Work Incentives The current welfare system discourages work in several ways. First inadequate employment and training opportunities for the poor severely limit their chances to enter the work force and become fully productive members of society. Second as already noted in many States earnings from a minimum wage job plus food stamps amount to less than the welfare benefits available to a family of equal size where no one works. Third both the medicaid and AFDG programs have severe " notches " creating situations where a small increase in earnings can cause recipients to lose their benefits entirely and thus to be worse off as a result of their extra work. Finally since all the welfare programs are income tested an extra dollar of earnings ( after deductions for work-related expenses ) yields less than a dollar of net income. This loss in benefits per dollar of additional earnings is called the benefit reduction rate or marginal tax rate and the higher this rate is the smaller the reward for working. No single program has a benefit reduction rate on earned income that exceeds percent. But for poor people who participate in more than one program the benefit reduction rates of all the programs cumulate to yield a much higher total rate. In addition workers must pay social security taxes on the first dollar of earnings and eventually Federal ( and perhaps State ) income taxes as well. The net result in some cases can be marginal tax rates that exceed percent so that disincentives to work are strong Administrative Inefficiency and Complexity The welfare system is both inefficient and exceedingly complex. Administrative expenses account for large portions of the total budgets for the various programs and error rates are high. Because the system is slow to respond to the needs of recipients they become frustrated and their rates of participation may decline as a result. In addition administration of the welfare system is split among several units of government and the programs operate with a variety of different benefit structures accounting periods filing unit definitions and work requirements Fiscal Burdens The Federal Government currently pays about two-thirds of total * welfare costs the remainder being spread over State and local governments principally in the AFDC and medicaid programs. However a small number of States and localities ( mainly in the North and Northeast ) bear a heavy share of this burden a development that has contributed to their precarious budgetary situations. The variation in benefit levels that exists has also encouraged migration of poor people to areas where the payments are highest This in turn has led to a further deterioration of the financial condition of these governmental units. Of course these differences in welfare expenditures implicitly reflect the particular preferences of States and localities regarding the level of income support they wish to provide. Nevertheless if a system of income maintenance for the poor is viewed as a truly national responsibility the burden of supporting it should be equitably distributed among the States on the basis of ability to pay Policy Control and Responsiveness As noted above control over the income maintenance system is fragmented and many low-income persons do not receive satisfactory coverage As a result the Nation does not have a tool to deal with the effects of other national policies on the distribution of income. For example the proposed tax on crude oil contained in the National Energy Plan would by raising prices of energy have a significant impact on real incomes of the poor. Yet there exists no simple and efficient mechanism to neutralize these adverse effects. While little thought has been given to this shortcoming in our income security system it may be the one that causes the most hardship to the poor CHANGES IN THE FOOD STAMP PROGRAM The Administration proposed significant changes in the food stamp program as a first step toward reform and rationalization of the welfare system. The Congress adopted most of the proposals and extended the program for years in the Food and Agriculture Act of The changes included in the act are generally designed to achieve a more efficient operation of the food stamp program to permit more individuals who are genuinely poor to participate in the program and to reduce the availability of food stamps to those with higher incomes. Eligibility for food stamps is defined more clearly in the act than previously and participation is limited to those households whose income net of certain deductions is below the poverty level. In addition the system of deductions used to arrive at net income is simplified. The most significant reform in the legislation was the elimination of the purchase requirement. This feature of the old program required recipients to pay cash for their food stamp allotments The net benefit or " bonus value " was the difference between the face value of the stamps and their purchase price. Under the new law the basic allotment is simply equivalent to the bonus value. Because recipients no longer have to buy their food stamps for a given total income including food stamps the amount of their disposable cash income will increase and the amount of coupons exchangeable only for food will decline THE PROGRAM FOR BETTER JOBS AND INCOME The Administration 's Program for Better Jobs and Income ( PBJI ) is a job-oriented proposal designed to replace the existing welfare system with a comprehensive approach to income security for the low-income population. The new program would provide jobs and employment services for those who are able to work income supplementation and strong work incentives for those who work but whose incomes are inadequate to support their families and cash assistance for those who can not work because of age disability or family circumstance. If enacted the program would become fully operational in fiscal The major features of PBJI are described below Employment Opportunities A central element of the proposed PBJI is to be an expanded effort to find jobs in the private and regular public sectors for low-income persons who are able to work. Prime sponsors under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ( CETA ) State employment service agencies and community based organizations are expected to play important roles in assuring that a full array of employment and training services is made available to these individuals. When principal wage earners in low-income families with children can not find regular employment PBJI would provide up to million full- and part-time special public service jobs and training slots. The new public service job program is carefully structured to avoid disruptive effects on the private economy. Applicants would be required to engage in an intensive 5-week search for regular employment before becoming eligible for a special public service job. The jobs themselves would be temporary and participants must continue to search for a regular job To minimize adverse effects on private labor markets and ensure that jobs in the private sector are more attractive than the special public service jobs the basic wage rate would be kept at or slightly above the minimum wage. Moreover holders of these jobs would not be eligible for the earned income tax credit. Finally it is intended that the job and training opportunities in this new program would provide useful skills and work experience to the participants thus making them better able to obtain employment in the regular economy. Additional discussion of the public service employment component of PBJI is contained in Chapter of this Report Cash Assistance and Work Incentives SSI food stamps and the Federal share of AFDC would be consolidated into a single Federal system of cash assistance. The Federal benefit structure would be divided into two tiers : an upper tier for those not expected to work ( i.e. the aged blind disabled and single-parent families with children under years ) and a lower tier for those who are expected to work ( two-parent families single-parent families with older children single individuals and childless couples ) Families in the second category could move to the upper tier if neither parent could find work after weeks of search. If a job were found but refused the family would remain on the lower tier. Adults in single-parent families where the youngest child is between and years of age would be expected to work during school hours. They would initially receive the upper-tier benefit but if they refused an appropriate part-time job they would receive the lower-tier benefit On the upper tier the basic Federal benefit in dollars would be $ for an aged blind or disabled individual and $ for both a single-parent family of four and a two-parent family of four if after a period of intensive job search the family head was unable to find a regular job The level of benefits for a family of four is approximately percent of the projected poverty threshold in ; it exceeds the value of food stamps plus the Federal share of AFDC in all but one State. The four-person family on the upper tier would cease to be eligible for benefits when earned income reached $ On the lower tier the basic benefit would be $ for a single individual and $ for a two-parent family of four. Single individuals would become ineligible for cash assistance at incomes above $ while working families of four would become ineligible at incomes above $ The two-tier benefit structure is designed to encourage work and ensure that the focus of aid to needy families is on employment not welfare dependency. The minimum income guarantee on the lower tier provides strong incentives to work while successful implementation of the employment aspects of the program would assure that the incomes of families in these categories need not remain at such low levels. Adults in families in the expected-to-work category would be given lower cash benefits if they do not work or if they refuse an appropriate job offer. Once a job is taken the first $ of earnings would be disregarded in calculating their Federal benefit ; that is recipients would face a zero marginal tax rate on those earnings. Thereafter benefits are reduced by no more than cents for each additional dollar earned above $ or by no more than cents for each additional dollar in States that supplement the basic benefit level For those who are not expected to work there would be no earnings disregard and benefit reduction rates could range from percent to percent depending on the benefit reduction rates applied by States that supplement the Federal benefit. Single-parent families with young children would be permitted a special deduction to pay for child care In addition to the incentives built into the cash benefit structure the earned income tax credit would be expanded to increase the rewards for working and to achieve better integration of the welfare system and the personal income tax structure. For a family of four the existing 10-percent credit on earnings up to $ would be supplemented by an additional 5-percent credit on earned income between $ and $ approximately the point at which such a family would become liable for Federal income taxes as a result of the proposed tax reform measures discussed in this chapter. The credit would then decline by percent of the excess of actual income over $ Hence the new EITC would reach a maximum of about $ and phase out entirely at an income of about $ for a family of four. As already noted those working in the special public service jobs would not be eligible for the E I T C This exclusion creates an incentive for holders of the special public service jobs to search for work in the private or regular public sector Existing eligibility criteria for medicaid are to be preserved temporarily by PBJL While the medicaid notch would therefore remain as a disincentive to work the forthcoming national health insurance proposals are expected to address this issue To summarize the Program for Better Jobs and Income is designed to provide employment opportunities and strong incentives for those who can work and adequate cash assistance to those who can not find a job or are otherwise unable to work. Consolidation of the three public assistance programs into a uniform Federal system would improve administrative efficiency and create a structure where error and fraud are less likely. Federal income support would be extended for the first time to all needy two-parent families single individuals and childless couples thereby eliminating a major inequity in the current system and reducing the incentives for families to separate. By instituting a Federal floor under the incomes of the poor benefit disparities among the States would be substantially diminished. Finally the provision of cash supplements would be fully integrated with employment and training programs State Supplementation and Fiscal Relief While an important long-run dbjective of welfare reform is to create a uniform system of benefits it can not be achieved overnight. Raising all benefits to the levels in the high-benefit States would be too costly and lowering all benefits to the levels in the low-benefit States would cause severe hardship. Hence there is a strong case for allowing States to supplement the basic Federal benefit. To provide fiscal relief for States and localities while encouraging a more uniform national system the Federal Government would share in the cost of supplementation. The new program provides that under certain conditions the Federal Government would pay percent of the cost of supplementing the benefits of a family of four between $ and $ and percent of the cost of supplementing from $ to the poverty line. The conditions are that the supplements must employ the new Federal eligibility standards and that the benefit reduction rate after supplementation must not exceed percent for those expected to work and percent for those not expected to work. Federal sharing in the cost of such matching supplements would help States maintain existing benefits while encouraging them to move toward a structure that embodies the goals of the new Federal program It is estimated that State and local governments would realize savings of about $ billion on their welfare expenditures if the Program for Better Jobs and Income were fully operative this year. The States that have traditionally had the highest welfare expenditures California Illinois Massachusetts Michigan New York and Pennsylvania would realize savings of more than percent on their outlays Distributional Implications The three main components of PBJI employment opportunities cash assistance and expansion of the EITC would have different effects on the distribution of income. Because disparities in benefit levels among States and demographic groups would be reduced over two-thirds of the cash assistance benefits would go to families with incomes below $ The public service jobs and training programs would provide a higher fraction of benefits to families farther up the income distribution because these jobs are available to primary earners in families with children. Nonetheless about half of the wages paid to holders of special public service jobs would go to families with income under $ The expansion of the earned income tax credit would provide benefits to families well up in the income distribution. In fact the maximum benefit for a family of four is reached when annual earnings are $ The purpose of this component however is not to provide basic income support but to alleviate the burden of payroll taxes and generally improve work incentives for low- and middle-income families. It is estimated that all three components combined would reduce the number of families with incomes below the poverty line by about million THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM Four separate programs together comprise the social security system : old age and survivors insurance ( OASI ) disability insurance ( DI ) hospital insurance ( HI ) and supplementary medical insurance ( SMI ) OASI and DI are cash benefit programs that replace earnings lost because of retirement disability or death ; HI and SMI which are also known as medicare provide payments for medical services to the elderly and to disabled workers. OASI DI and HI are financed by specific payroll taxes levied on employees their employers and the self-employed. For the combined social security tax rate ( OASDHI rate ) is percent and is applied against earnings of covered workers up to a maximum of $ About percent of all wage and salary earners are currently covered by social security and therefore subject to mandatory payroll taxes. The major exceptions are Federal Government employees about percent of State and local government employees and some employees of nonprofit institutions Approximately million workers contributed to the system in and total OASDHI tax revenues were $ billion. Participation in the SMI program is voluntary ; benefits are financed partly through premiums paid by current beneficiaries and partly out of general revenues Benefits under the OASDI programs are calculated according to a procedure that takes into account the average lifetime earnings age and other characteristics of recipients. The benefit formula is progressive and produces proportionately smaller benefits as earnings rise. That is while highwage workers receive larger dollar benefits than low-wage workers benefits as a percentage of preretirement earnings decline as a worker 's average wage increases. For example the " replacement rate " ( first-year benefit as a percentage of earnings in the year before retirement ) of a 65-year-old male retiree wrho has a dependent spouse and always earned one-half the median wage for males was percent in ; the replacement rate for a similar retiree who always earned the maximum wage subject to social security taxes was only percent. Benefits under the two medical insurance programs are not tied to earnings histories but provide reimbursement for medical expenses incurred. Table shows the distribution of social security benefits and recipients among the four programs TABLE Social security benefit payments and beneficiaries Number of beneficiaries ( millions ) Program Total social security. Old age and survivors insurance ( OASI ) Reti red workers Dependents and survivors Other Disability insurance ( Dl ) Medicare ( HI and SMI ) Benefits paid in fiscal year OASI and Dl beneficiaries as of September For medicare entry represents number eligible to receive benefits as of July Not applicable Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare The Social Security Financing Problem In recent years the OASDI trust funds have been faced with serious short- and long-run financial problems. Assets in these two trust funds as a percentage of annual outlays have fallen steadily from slightly over percent in to percent at the end of Moreover since current expenditures have exceeded receipts so that the level of assets has actually declined. It was estimated that without remedial action Dl trust fund assets would be exhausted by and assets in the OASI fund depleted by or Since benefits can only be paid out of the trust funds depletion would have required new legislation to prevent OASDI recipients from receiving less than the full amount of benefits to which they were entitled Several factors explain the recent decline in OASDI trust fund balances First since the benefits for people already retired have been automatically indexed to changes in consumer prices and as a result have increased sharply and regularly because of the recent high rates of inflation Second because of high unemployment and the slow growth in real wages since payroll tax receipts have not grown as rapidly as benefit payments. Third since the late 1960s the number of beneficiaries in the disability insurance program has consistently been higher than expected. Finally an unintended consequence of the provision in the Social Security Amendments of that adjusts benefit schedules automatically for inflation has been to cause the initial benefits of newly retiring workers to rise somewhat more rapidly than wages. As a result initial benefit levels grew by about percent more than preretirement wages between and Over the longer term the cash benefit programs were even more seriously underfinanced. Under the intermediate set of assumptions in the report of the Social Security Trustees average OASDI expenditures over the next years were estimated to exceed projected payroll taxes by an amount equivalent to about percent of taxable earnings. This outcome would have required a tripling of current OASDI tax rates by the year to finance benefits provided under the old law Roughly half of the long-range deficit in the OASDI programs was due to the interaction between high rates of inflation and a technical flaw in the benefit formula under which future retirees received a double adjustment for cost-of-living increases. Benefits were first increased as higher prices produced higher lifetime earnings. and therefore higher benefits at retirement and again as the formula used to compute benefits was also adjusted upward to account for inflation. As noted above this double-indexing procedure was made automatic in ; it not only raised the level of new benefits faster than the growth in average wages but caused the relation between future benefits and preretirement earnings to vary erratically depending on the relative movements of wages and prices. Under plausible assumptions about projected rates of wage and price inflation doubleindexing would eventually have caused benefits to exceed preretirement wages for some workers The other half of the 75-year deficit was due to a combination of the future consequences of the short-run deficit continued increases in the incidence of disability and the sharp projected expansion of the retired population relative to the working population after the year Today there are about persons aged or over for every persons aged through In under the trustees ' assumptions there will be about persons aged and over for every persons aged through This dramatic change is a result of the combined effects of the decline in the fertility rate ( the average number of births a woman can expect to have over her lifetime ) and the fact that those born during the post-World War II baby boom will begin retiring after Social Security Amendments of The Social Security Amendments of were designed primarily to prevent the assets of OASDI trust funds from being depleted in the next few years and to eliminate most of the long-range deficit. Since the Congress has always believed that the social security system should be fully financed by earmarked payroll taxes substantial increases in OASDHI taxes were necessary. The major features of the new legislation are outlined below While little could be done to offset the effects of the shifting age distribution of the population the provision in the old law that double-indexed benefits for future retirees was corrected. Under the new law the procedures that automatically adjust benefits of current and future retirees for inflation are separated or " decoupled. " This change has the effect of eliminating the extreme sensitivity of projected benefit levels to assumptions about inflation and real wage growth. The new system would stabilize initial benefit levels for a 65-year-old retiree who always earned the average wage at about percent of earnings in the year prior to retirement regardless of the behavior of wages and prices. As a result the long-run deficit is cut by about one-half TABLE Tax rates for social security trust funds old and new laws calendar years [ Percent ] Social Security Amendments of Prior law Calendar year Total OASI Total Dl OASI Dl HI Employer and employee each and after I. i1.275 Self-employed persons and after Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare 9.'90 To prevent the assets of the DI trust fund from being exhausted the new law provides for a reallocation of current-law tax rates among the trust funds in To cover the deficits caused by demographic changes and the recent recession and inflation social security tax rates on employers and employees are to be raised above those in the old law beginning in ( Table ) In addition beginning in the OASDI rate for the selfemployed is to be adjusted to restore its original relationship of one and one-half times the OASDI rate for employees. Finally the taxable wage base for employers employees and the self-employed is to be increased above the levels provided in the old law beginning in ( Table ) The new legislation maintains the parity principle whereby employers and employees pay taxes on the same amount of earnings In under the new law a worker with earnings at the taxable maximum of $ would pay social security taxes of $ while a worker earning the projected average wage in covered employment ( about $ ) would pay $ Altogether the higher tax rates and wage bases are expected to yield $ billion in new social security tax revenues in the years between and As noted in Chapter these increases are an important component of the fiscal restraint on the economy that may have to be offset by tax reductions if we are to achieve our long-term economic goals TABLE Social security contribution and benefit base old and new laws calendar years Contribution and benefit base l Calendar year Prior law $ _ Social Security Amendments of $ i After under the old law and after under the new law based on path of wages projected in the Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare Several changes were also made in the OASDI benefit structure : an increase in the amount of earnings allowed to retirees aged and over before their benefits are reduced ; an increase in the bonus for postponing retirement beyond age ; and a freezing of the regular minimum benefit for future beneficiaries at its January level. The bill also provides for a one-time $ 187-million payment to State and local governments in fiscal to help relieve the cost of their public assistance programs Some longer-term issues were not addressed by the legislation for example the differential treatment of one- and two-earner households in the benefit structure and the interaction between the cash benefit programs and private retirement systems. But the Social Security Amendments of nonetheless did remove the threat that the cash benefit programs would actually run out of funds ; they corrected an obvious flaw in the benefit computation formula ; and they reduced the average deficit over the next years from percent to an estimated l/<x percent of payroll O Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December M R PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Cordially CHARLES L. SCHULTZE Chairman LYLE E. GRAMLEY WILLIAM D. NORDHAUS Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during The membership of the Council of Economic Advisers changed entirely in January when the Garter Administration took office. Charles L Schultze became Chairman of the Council on January replacing Alan Greenspan who returned to Townsend-Greenspan New York. Mr Schultze had been a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington D.C Lyle E. Gramley and William D. Nordhaus became Members on March succeeding Burton G. Malkiel who returned to Princeton University. Mr. Gramley came to the Council from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Mr. Nordhaus is on leave of absence from Yale University where he is Professor of Economics and a member of the Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough. Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart.. Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken.. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon. Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken-.. Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan. Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Position Oath of office date Augusts Augusts November May Augusts May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member. Member Member _ Chairman Member Member. Member Member Chairman. _ Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Member. Chairman Member Member Chairman. Member Member Member Member Chairman Member. Member Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The principal directive of the Employment Act is that the Federal Government " use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations for the purpose of creating and maintaining conditions to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " To this end the Council of Economic Advisers analyzes economic problems and interprets trends and changes in the economy in order to help the President develop and evaluate national economic policies. The Council prepares regular reports on current economic conditions in the United States and abroad and prepares forecasts of future economic developments The Council also performs an advisory role within the Executive Office of the President and participates in interagency groups that analyze economic problems and develop programs to address them During the Council and its staff contributed to the study of a wide variety of economic issues. An important part of the Council 's work during the year was to analyze current developments in business activity and evaluate alternative macroeconomic policies in keeping with the President 's efforts continually to assess his decisions on taxation and expenditures within the context of long-run budgetary and economic requirements. The Council participated in the development of such Administration initiatives as welfare reform tax reform social security financing proposals the National Energy Plan agricultural legislation minimum wage legislation and urban policy proposals and played a major role in the development of the Administration 's international economic policies The Council in cooperation with other Government agencies became actively involved in many different regulatory reform issues. The Regulatory Analysis Program authorized by the President in called upon the Council to establish and chair an interagency group to review analyses prepared by regulatory agencies of the economic consequences of major regulatory proposals. This review is intended to assure that the costs of regulatory proposals have been considered including the costs of all alternative methods of regulation so that the least-cost approach to regulation may be found and applied Early each year the President submits the Economic Report of the President to the Congress as required by the Employment Act. The Council assumes major responsibility for the preparation of the Report which together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers reviews the progress of the economy during the preceding year and outlines the Administration 's policies and programs The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers is a member of the Economic Policy Group ( EPG ) and of its Executive Committee and Steering Committee. The EPG was formed in January to direct the formulation and coordination of economic policy. The Steering Committee meets weekly to address current issues of economic policy The Chairman of the Council also heads the U.S. delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Council Members and staff economists meet with various working parties of the committee and attend other meetings of the OECD during the year The review and analysis of the overall performance of the economy is conducted and coordinated through interagency working groups comprising representatives from the Council the Treasury the Office of Management and Budget and the Departments of Commerce and Labor. At regular intervals representatives of these agencies chaired by the Council meet to evaluate recent economic performance and formulate economic forecasts The analysis and projections developed at these sessions are finally reviewed and cleared through the Chairman of the Council for presentation to and consideration by the Economic Policy Group and the President The Joint Economic Committee of the Congress ( JEC ) like the Council was created by the Employment Act of to make a continuing study of matters relating to the economy and to submit its own report and recommendations to the Congress. During the Chairman and Members of the Council appeared twice before the JEC and once before its Subcommittee on International Economics. The Chairman and Council Members also presented testimony before the House Budget Committee ; the House Appropriations Committee ; the House Ways and Means Committee and its Subcommittee on Trade ; the House Committee on Banking Finance and Urban Affairs and its Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization ; the House Ad Hoc Committee on Energy ; the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation and its Subcommittee on Investigations and Review ; the House Appropriations Committee 's Subcommittee on Treasury Postal Services and General Governmental Affairs ; the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce and its Subcommittee on Energy and Power ; the Senate Budget Committee ; the Senate Finance Committee ; the Senate Appropriations Committee ; the Senate Commerce Committee and its Subcommittee on Aviation ; and the Senate Committee on Banking Housing and Urban Affairs PUBLIC INFORMATION The annual Economic Report of the President and the Annual Report of the Council are the principal publications through which the public is informed of the Council 's work and views. These publications are also an important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration 's overall economic policy both domestic and international. Distribution of Reports in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for preparing Economic Indicators a monthly publication prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office and issued by the Joint Economic Committee. Economic Indicators has a monthly distribution of approximately copies Information is also provided to members of the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Chairman the Members and the senior staff economists. Each year the Council answers numerous requests from the press and provides information in response to inquiries from individual citizens. In addition the Council and staff receive frequent visits from business academic and other groups and individuals ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed through direct consultation with the President and through written reports on economic developments and on particular programs and proposals. The Chairman represents the Council at meetings of the Cabinet and in many other formal and informal contacts with Government officials COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council including direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of meetings and assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement in many activities In practice the small size of the Council 's staff permits the Chairman and Council Members to work as a team in most circumstances. There is however an informal division of subject matter between them. Mr. Gramley assumed primary responsibility in for macroeconomic analysis including the preparation of economic forecasts. Mr. Nordhaus is primarily responsible for international economic analysis and for microeconomic analysis including such policy areas as energy agriculture labor markets social welfare and regulated industries PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of the Special Assistant to the Chairman senior staff economists staff economists statistician and junior staff economists. Members of the professional staff were responsible for economic analysis and policy recommendations in major subject areas involving the Council 's interests and responsibilities The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : Peter G. Gould Special Assistant to the Chairman Senior Staff Economists Roger E. Brinner Peter K. Clark Nina W. Cornell George E. Johnson Susan J. Lepper David C. Munro J. B. Penn Jeffrey R. Shafer William L. Springer David A. Wyss Business Conditions Analysis Econometrics and Forecasting Macro- and Microeconomic Analysis Econometrics Trade and Aggregate Supply Regulated Industries Transportation Environmental and Health and Safety Issues Labor Policy Human Resources Welfare and Health Issues Monetary Policy Financial Institutions Capital Markets Housing and State and Local Finances Business Conditions Analysis Econometrics and Forecasting Agriculture and Food Policy International Finance and Trade Fiscal Policy Public Finance Income Distribution Human Resources Welfare and Health Issues Macro- and Microeconomic Analysis Econometrics and Prices and Wages Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Arthur E. Blakemore Robert E. Litan Michael S. Golden Howard K. Gruenspecht Richard I. Kolsky Richard A. Koss Julianne M. Malveaux Martha M. Parry Senior Statistician Staff Economists Labor Markets Energy Analysis and Policy Science and Technology and Natural Resources Junior Staff Economists Agriculture and Food Policy Econometrics and Forecasting Regulation Monetary Developments and Industry Analysis Regulation Energy Policy and Industry Analysis Econometrics and Forecasting Labor Markets and Monetary Developments International Economics Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician is in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. In Mrs. Furlong replaced Frances M. James who retired after years of service as Senior Statistician for the Council. Mrs Furlong has primary responsibility for managing the Council 's statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of the statistical appendix to the Economic Report. She also oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro and Earnestine Reid assist Mrs. Furlong George C. Eads ( The Rand Corporation ) Murray F. Foss ( National Bureau of Economic Research ) and John B. Shoven ( Stanford University ) served as consultants to the Council In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. SteinhofT. Also called on for special assistance in connection with the Report was Dorothy L. Reid a former member of the Council staff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office provides administrative support for the Council. Nancy F. Skidmore Administrative Officer prepares and analyzes the budget and provides general administrative services. Duplicating mail and messenger services were the responsibility of James W. Gatling and Frank C. Norman. Elizabeth A. Kaminski serves as Staff Assistant to the Council Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Patricia A. Lee Linda A. Reilly Florence T. Torrison and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were M Catherine Fibich Bessie M. Lafakis Joyce A. Pilkerton Bettye T. Siegel Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M. Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff members are drawn primarily from universities and research institutions. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year were Barry P. Bosworth ( Council on Wage and Price Stability ) Barry R. Chiswick ( Hoover Institution Stanford University ) John M. Davis Jr. ( Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ) Bruce L. Gardner ( Texas A&M University ) Helen B. Junz ( Department of the Treasury ) Michael D. McCarthy ( Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates Inc. ) John J. Siegfried ( Vanderbilt University ) John B. Taylor ( Columbia University ) and Philip K. Verleger Jr. ( Department of the Treasury ) Doral S. Cooper staff economist resigned to accept a position with the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician of the Council retired in after having served on the staff since More than any other person she was responsible for establishing and maintaining a standard of rigorous accuracy in the data used by the Council and published in the Council 's Annual Report and monthly Economic Indicators. A generation of economists who have been members of the Council of Economic Advisers have been indebted to her for wise guidance in the exercise of their duties. All future Councils although they will not have the privilege of working with her will nevertheless be the beneficiaries of the tradition she left behind Junior economists who resigned in were Richard E. Browning ( Georgetown University ) Timothy H. Quinn ( University of California Los Angeles ) Barbara A. Smith ( Mathematica Policy Research Inc. ) Paul G. Westcott ( Department of Agriculture ) and Benjamin Zycher ( University of California Los Angeles ) Retired during the year were Dorothy Bagovich statistical assistant and Dorothy L. Green secretary. Margaret A Bocek secretary resigned from the Council staff Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l. Gross national product B-2. Gross national product in dollars B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross domestic product B-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars B-6. Gross national product by major type of product B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-9. Gross national product by sector B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business B-l2. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business B-l Personal consumption expenditures B-14. Gross private domestic investment B-l5. Inventories and final sales of business B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars B-l7. Relation of gross national product and national income B-18. Relation of national income and personal income B-19. National income by type of income B-20. Sources of personal income B-21. Disposition of personal income B-22. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars B-23. Gross saving and investment B-24. Saving by individuals B-25. Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-26. Population by age groups B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-29. Selected employment and unemployment data B-30. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic B-31. Unemployment by duration B-32. Unemployment by reason B-33. Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-37. Productivity and related data private business economy B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy O Page PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 Page Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services Consumer price indexes for commodity groups seasonally adjusted Consumer price indexes for service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups PRICES : B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-59 B-60 B B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 B-67 Money stock measures Commercial bank loans and investments Liquid asset holdings private domestic nonfinancial investors Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves Aggregate reserves and deposits member banks Bond yields and interest rates Instalment credit extensions and liquidations Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder B-69. Net public and private debt GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-71. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years B-72. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years B-73. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts B-74. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-75. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national incoms and product accounts B-76. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-77. Interest-bearing public debt by kind of obligation GOVERNMENT FINANCE Continued B-78. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-79. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt held by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-80. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-81. Corporate profits by industry B-82. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-83. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-85. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group B-86. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-87. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-88. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-89. Common stock prices and yields B-90. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-91. Income of farm people and farmers B-92. Farm production indexes B-93. Farm population employment and productivity B-94. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices B-95. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-96. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-97. U.S. international transactions B-98. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use categories B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-100. International investment position of the United States at year-end B-101. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December B-102. International reserves and B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and B-104. World trade balance and current account balances and B-105. Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-106. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product B-108. Exchange rates Page General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : * Preliminary _ Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE T A B L E B-l. Gross national product IBillicns of dollars except as ncted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Net exports of goods and services Personal Gross con- private sump- dotion mestic Net ImExex- investpend- ment exports ports ports itures Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total State and National Non- local de- i defense fense Percent change from preceding period gross national product II III IV : II III IV P ._ : II III IV v This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " ' Changes are based on unrou nded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Gross national product Year or quarter Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total '49.8 P : II III IV : II III IV * _ : II III IV v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment continued Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Fixed investment continued Residential Year or quarter Total Non- Farm farm struc- structures tures Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Percent change from preceding period gross national product1 v : II III..IV : II III..IV.... : II III... IV p _ '.2 l Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investmentl Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national uct Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment v _ : II.. : II III IV : II III... IV. " " " IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment * continued Fixed investment continued Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services i Residential ProExducers ' ports durable equipment Percent change from pr seeding peri ) d2 Government purchases of goods and services Gross domestic prodGross uct national product implicit price deflator Gross domestic product implicit price deflator Imports Total Federal State and local : __ II III IV : II III IV : II III Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures i,3.1 v IVP__._ Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures of gross national product and gross domestic product [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Index numbers = Year or quarter Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross domestic product Gross national product FixedFixedFixedImplicit weighted Implicit weighted Implicit weighted price price index price price index price price index deflator deflator ( ( detlator ( weights ) weights ) weights ) Gross domestic product Chain price index FixedImplicit weighted price price index deflator ( weights ) Chain price index l ! v : II.- III.. IV... : II.- III.. IV... : ll.__ III.. IV p i Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexes shown here. Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Year Agriculture Gross fores- Contry strucnaand tion tional product fisheries Manufacturing Total TransGovportaerntion Whole- Finance insurment comsale ance Servand All Non- muni- and Duand ices govern- other i rable durable cation retail real ment and trade estate goods goods enterindus- indus- utiliprises ties tries tries " i Mining rest of world and residual ( GNP in dollars measured as the sum of final products less GNP in dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry ) Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A E L E E-6. Gross natioral product by major type of product % [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual ratesl Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Total Final sales Nondi rable goc ds Dur< ble goo ds Total Inventory change Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output Final Inventory sales change " 1972__ v : l__ II.. III. IV. : L II... III.. IV.. : LILIII. IV v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual ratesl Goods Total Year or quar- ter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Durable goods Total Final Inventory sales change Services Structures Auto output Final Inven- Final Inventory tory sales change sales change I960. 1,'274.7 f ) I ] v ~ : if " III.. IV.. : II III IV. : IL_ III. IV v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Government Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total Expenditures Surplus or PerPerdeficit Equals'. sonal sonal Tax Less : Less : Equals : Less : Total conna- ' and PurInter- exclud- sump- saving non- Trans- Equals : Total Trans- chases tional or fers fers ing in- tion est indistax interinterof exNet terest paid excome reest goods pendi- est repaid pendiand and ceipts and and and ceipts tures and transtures prodor ac- subsubservfers a transuct accruals sidies * sidies * ices fers counts Net receipts '.B v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Busines j International Net exports of goods Excess and services of Net net Gross Excess transtransGross pri- of earn- fers and fers revate ings or interand tained doest of inEquals : interLess : earn- mestic vest- paid to ExNet est Imings * invest- ment forports ports exor of ment5 ( ) eigners ports net ex6 ( ) ports ( ) Year or quarter p__ Total income or receipts Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expenditure i '8 Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Interest paid by consumers to business and net personal transfer payments to foreigners Government transfer payments to persons and foreigners net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements s See Table B-14 Net transfers to foreigners by persons and government and interest paid by government to foreigners Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) less net foreign investment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-9. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Business Gross Year or quarter national product Total Total Nonfarm l Government StatisFarm tical discrepancy Households and institutions Total Federal State and local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross domestic product * 3b6. 59L1 : II III IV : II III IV : II III I960 P i Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises * Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here See Table B-l for percent changes in gross national product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business House- Total Total Nonfarm i Farm and Resid- instiual utions Total _ v : II III IV : II III IV : II.. III IVP Government3 Federal Rest of the world State and local Percent change from preceding period gross domestic product * _ b2.3 _ i Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises * The difference between gross product in dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of gross product by industry Compensation of government employees * Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B-2 for percent changes in gross national product in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Year or quarter Capital consumption allowances with capi- Total tal conumption adjustment Net domestic product Domestic income Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ComIndiProfits before tax penrect sation busiof Profits after tax ness Total emProfits tax ploy- Total Total tax etc. i Undisees iabilDivi'ty Total dends tributed profits S C p. : l-_II.. III. IV Inventory valuation adjustment Capital Net con- intersump- est tion adjustment ? g ! -l ! ! i ^ : II IIL. : III.. IV.. Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -j T A B L E B-12. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) I Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Total cost and profit2 Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc. CompenNet sation inof terest employees Current dollars dollars _. _ 1967__ Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Output Compenper sation hour of per all em- hour of ployees all em ( ployees dollars ) ( dollars ) Total Profits Profits tax after lability tax * : II.. III. IV. : II III IV. : II III 1948__ _ 1950__ _ _ p Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-13. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goodsl Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods1 Year or quarter Services i Household operationl o Q T3 o J = o <D Id CO E o " o DO Q- E " c a S T3 o ID tz O c Lu " o O e> CO o o u_ c co O I " o <u LU c i4 : II III.. IV.... : II III..-. : II III 1977P Total includes " other " category not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross private domestic investment ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in business inventories \ " ixed in vest ment Year or quarter Gross private domestic invest- Total ment Residential Nonresidential Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonfarm structures Nonfarm ProFarm ducers ' Total durstruc- able tures equipment Nonfarm v : II III IV * : II III... IV : II III... IV 1S5.5 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ! TABLE B Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories Nonfarm Year and quarter Total Farm Total Fourth quarter : Final sales Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Nonfarm v : I I L II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV v End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories1 Nonfarm Year and quarter Final sales Total Total Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Nonfarm Other Fourth quarter : I960. ^ : I.. II. III IV. : I.. IV. : I II III IV v End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-17. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income ? ? I I I L v _____ __ : | | III IV : II III IV : II III IV v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis >5 TABLE B-18. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Corporate profits with National inventory income valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Plus : Net interest Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements Government transfer payments to persons Personal interest income Equals : Dividends Business transfer Personal payincome ments _ _ _ " : b.2 J957 2L9 : L._ II._ III. IV. : L._ II._ ML IV. : I.. II._ III. IV * * ; Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employee i Farm National income ^ Year or quarter Total SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages and ries salaries Total Total Nonfarm Capital conInsumpcome ' tion adjustment Total Income Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adadjustjustment ment v : II III..IV : II III... IV : II III. IV v See footnotes at end of table __ | TABLE B-19. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental i ncome of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Capital Net Inven- con- intersump- est tory tion valuation adjustUndisment Divi- tributed adjustdends profits ment Profits before tax Capital conRental income sumpTotal tion of persons adjustment Profits after tax Total Total Total Profits tax lability Total P : II III IV. : II III IV. : II._ III IV v " ! -L7 ! National income is the total net inco income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allo nd allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-17 k Tohlo D_17 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workmen 's compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment * Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements1 Personal income Year or quarter Total Commodityproducing industries Total Manufacturing GovernDistrib- Service ment and utive indus- indus- governtries ment tries enterprises Other labor income1 Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm * : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV p See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B-20. Sources of personal income Continued ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of per- Transfer payments with Year or capital Divi- Personal interest quarter con- dends income Total sumption adjustment Government survivors disability unemployand health insurance ment insurance benefits benefits Veterans benefits Government employee retirement benefits Old age Less : Personal contriAid to butions families for with de- Other social pendent insurchildren ance ( AFDC ) g Nonfarm personal income I960... 1976____ : L 1977P.._ II Ill IV : II ill IV : Ill IVr M.I The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-19 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and agricultural net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Disposition cf personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Personal income Year or quarter Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPerInterest sonal Equals : Personal paid by transfer sonal conconsaving paysump- sumers ments to tion to forexpend- busi- eigners ness itures ( net ) Personal outlays Total Consumption expenditures Personal saving : II.. III.. IV.. : l _ II.. III.. IV.__ : I IL.. III.. IV P v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Total ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) dollars Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Population ( thousands ) * dollars fi | : II III I V : II III I V L 215,38C L I L * _ _ : II III IVP _ _ i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are average for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B-23. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross investment Government surplus or deficit ( ) national Capital income and product grants accounts received by the Total United Gross State States PerFed ( net ) and sonal busi- Total ness eral local saving savingi Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total Gross private Net domes- foreign tic in- investvestment ment Statistical discrepancy l l v : I II.. III...IV... : II III... IV... : I L IIL... IV v-- Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net * In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States ( net ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E " R-24. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Net investment in Securities Currency SavCorpoand ings Gov- rate CorpoTotal deernacmand rate counts ment and deequisecu- forposits eign ties * rities a bonds J ! 4.G : l.._ II._ III. IV._ : l.._ II. III InsurNon- Mortance corgage Non- Conand debt Consumer porate on sumer Other pen- farm dusion homes rables busi- non- credit debt * ness farm reassets homes serves ( ) Less : Net increase in debt i \ -O.0 a : Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-25. Number and money income { in dollars ) oj'families and unrelated individuals by race of head White Total Black and other races Percent with incomes Total number ( milions ) Total numMedian Be- Below ber Median Be- Below pov- ( mil- income low povincome low erty erty $ level lions ) $ level Total number ( millions ) Year FAMILIES _ Percent with incomes $ _ Below $ Below poverty level Below $ $ Percent with incomes Median income Below poverty level $ Below $ * Below poverty level Below $ Below poverty level ? ? .l UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS 1S62 1S63 1S65 1S66 ' $ 3'041 ._ U2 ! U2.5 il4.6 ill ill.O iH.2 _ $ $ ! fi ? ? Q Revised using population controls based on the census. Such controls are not available by race Based on revised methodology procedures Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflects different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family head and farm-nonfarm residence. The poverty threshold is updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-26. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over ? 1977__ _ Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population * Employment Armed Forcesi Total Total Nonagricultural Agricultural Unemployment Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian labor force ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian labor force participation rate Total Males Females Percent i Thousands of persons years of age and over _ I9603.... 1965....__ ____ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population ^ Employment Armed Forcesi Total Total Agricultural Nqnagricultural Unemployment Unemployment rate [ percent of civilian labor force ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian labor force participation rate Total Males Females Percent : Jan.._ Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug s e Nov... Dec.. ! : Jan... Feb... Mar... Apr May... June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. o c ? ! : : : Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to popu \ ation and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Overall categories of the labor force other than those noted were not appreciably affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-27 through B-32 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment Unemployment Females Males Year or month Total Total 1949._. years years and over Total years Males Females Total years Total years Total years and years and years and over over over 1956._ I960 L.581 L. 1968___ : Jan_ Feb._ Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ Sept Oct. Nov. Dec iSee footnote Table B-27 Note.-See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics m TABLE B-29. Selected employment and unemployment data ( Percent1 ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment rate By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Males years and over : Employment as percent of population By selected groups emales years and over Experienced wage Household and salary heads workers Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers * Total " ~ 5.T Married men ? ' White Black and other : Jan Feb_ Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ _ _ May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov _ Dec Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March s Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October s Civilian employment as percent of total noninstitutional population Note See footnote and Note Table B-27 Sou rce : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other White Females Males " emales Males Year or month Total Total years and over Total years years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over years : Jan Feb Mar Apr... May... June.. Aug Sept... Oct Nov... Dec.. l : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May. June.. July July Aug Sept... Oct Nov. Dec.. i Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ! ] Total unemployment Year or month Duration of unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons yean of age and over '574 C : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May. __ June ._ ._ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ._ _ ._ _.._ _ Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Unemployment by reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ' ] Total unemployment Year or month Job losers Job leavers Reentrants New entrants Thousands of persons years of age and over Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Percent of civilian labor force 1977-Jan Feb Mar July Aug Oct Nov Dec Apr May June Sept Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured unemployment ( weekly average ^ Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ^ * Initial claims Exhaustions ' Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) s Weekly average ; thousands Thousands p. v. nsured unemployment * * * : Jan__ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Octp. NOVP_ Dec p. * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemploymentcompensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) and SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only iPrograms include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial clai lusiamo muuuc rucnu r \ n,du claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration T A B L E B Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Government Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local ; * See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ! Year or month Total wage and salary workers : Jan._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May__ June. Manufacturin g Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Government Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining tract construction July. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. ; : Jan.. Feb._ Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov p Decp July. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov.. Dec.. Federal State and local Note. Data in Tables B-34 Ihrough B-36 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-27 through B-32 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off and which are based on a sample of the working-age population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries ( For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ) Average weekly hours Year or month Total private Manunonag- facturriculing tural1 Contract construction Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Whole- Total sale private Manunonfacturand agriing retail cultrade tural i Con- Wholetract sale conand struc- retail tion trade Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural J Index = Current dollars dollars Percent change from a year earlier4 Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ v : Jan. Feb. MarApr- May June : Jan_._ Feb... Mar... Apr May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.- Oct.__ Nov p. Dec * July Aug Nov... Dec.._ Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index * Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places Note See Note,Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural i Current dollars Manufacturing dollars Contract construction Wholesale and retail trade Current dollars dollars Current dollars $ $ $ $ $ v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June l.S l.S July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec l.C : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June l.C July Aug Sept Oct A NOVP Dec p Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index > Based on unadjusted data Note. See Note Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B-37. Productivity and related data private business economy ^ [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output Year or quarter Hours of all persons2 Output per hour of all persons Compensation per hour3 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator4 NonNonNonNonNonPrivate farm Private farm Private farm Private farm Private farm busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- business ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness ness sector sector sector sector secto r sector sector sector sector sector sector Nonfarm business sector v : II III IV Private business : II III IV : II III IVP Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance z.id private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Hours of all persons ^ Output * Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Private Non- Private Nonfarm farm busibusi- busibusiness ness ness ness sector sector sector sector Private business sector Compensation per hours Non- Private Nonfarm farm busibusi- business ness ness sector sector sector Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * NonNonPrivate farm Private farm busibusi- busibusiness ness ness ness sector sector sector sector i.l _ 3'. 1977P : II III IV : III IV : II III IVP Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production includ ing hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Estimates based primarily on establishment data 'Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ( O PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE E-39. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P9.3 proportion : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May_ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov P Dec * Preliminary ; annual by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-40. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Total industrial production Year or month proportion.. Consumer goods i Total Total Automotive products Materials Equipment Home goods Total Intermediate products Total Durable goods Business Nondurable goods : J a n Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July._ Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July_ Aug__ Sept. Oct. Nov p Dec p * Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-41. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Year or month Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Primary metals Fabricated metal products Nonelectrical machinery Electrical machinery Total Motor vehicles and parts Lumber and products Apparel products Print- Chemicals ing and and pubprodlishing ucts Foods Total Iron and steel proportion I960. : J a n Feb... Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept._ Oct___ Nov. Dec.. : Jan.._ Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. NOVP Dec p Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-42. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Commerce series2 FRB series Year or quarter Total Primary manu- procfacessing turing Advanced processing Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Primaryprocessed goods Wharton series Advancedprocessed goods Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods _.__ : I II. III IV : I IL_ III IV : I IV... : I ll_-_ III.. IV... : I IL._ III.. IV.. : l _ _ II.. III.. IV p For description of the series see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers " The Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization : A Ten Year Perspective " Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section American Statistical Association Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Wharton School of Finance T A B L E B-43. New construction activity ( Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings1 Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction1 Total a New housing units Total Total Commercial Industrial Federal Other * State and local l New series _ _ See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B N e w construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings i Total Nonresidential buildings and other construction i New Total > hnuc nousing ino units Public construction Total Commercial ' Industrial Total r6Q- eral State and local Other ' July... Aug.... Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July... Aug Sept..Oct Nov... : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June * Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to I960 included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B New- housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New housing units started Private and public Private New private housing units authorized2 Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Type of structure Total One unit to units 1959_ I960. 19701971_ * units or more Total One unit to units units or more > Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan.. Feb.. MarApr.- May. June. lf July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June \ \ If6.0 July. Aug. Sept Oct. NOVP Dec * Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; for ; for ; and prior to Not available separately beginning January Note. Only the series on private and public nonfarm housing units started is available prior to See " Economic Report " for this earlier series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census l TABLE B-45.- Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Nonmanufacturing Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Railroad Air Other Public utilities Mining Communication Commercial and other : I : I II III..- IV 3___ : I : Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals nonprofit institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE E-46. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or mcnth Sales t InvenRatio tories Inventories Sales Sales Inventories Ratio Inventories Ratio i " ! 124,i,395 " " ; '-1,674 LO4 L. J LO6 ; " " " ; ' " ; L47 ; l'. ; * ' : Jan.. Feb__ Mar.. Apr.. May. June. ] " i 3O6i ~ \ mi.. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov__ Dec__ : Jan. Feb__ Mar.. Apr__ May. June. Nov Sales July Aug Sept Oct Ratio s _ _ _ Dec * Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end ot month to sales for month Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inv entories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-47. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments1 Inventories2 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies FinWork ished in process goods Nondurable goods industries Total Materials and supplies FinWork ished in process goods " r 102i ' ; [ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May..__ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan ___ Feb Mar Apr May..__ June July Aug Sept_.__ Oct Nov 31.r ! Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Note. Data are as published by Bureau of the Census but for detail for durable goods inventories does not add to totals. Correction will be published later by Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-48. Manufacturers1 new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ! New orders i Unfilled ordersshipments ratio s Unfilled orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods industries nondefense Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov : Jan Feb. Mar_ Apr. May. June July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov Dec Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December * Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-49. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Housing Year or month All items Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Reading Other and Medical Personal goods recreacare care and tion services ^ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1P4.8 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct __ Nov Dec _ Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-50. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = Services Commodities Year or month All items Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable All Non- services Rent durable Special indexes Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June 1S6.3 July... Aug Sept_._ Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-51. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Total i : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec New cars I " Total Used cars Household durables Apparel commodities ( ) o Nondurables less food and apparel Services less rent Total Household Transportaservtion ices servless ices rent ~ ~ 71.T Medical care services Other Also includes the " other durables " group Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commodity groups seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers ! I " seasonally adjusted ] Commodities less food All Year and month commodities Durable commodities Nondurables less food Food Total Total i Household durables Apparel Gasocom- line and modmotor ities oil Fuel oil and coal New Used cars cars Total i May. " June. 13&5 * * 13L6 July Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. in A : Jan.. Feb, Mar. May. " June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug_ Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb_ Mar.. i Includes certain groups not shown separately Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes JOT service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted For urban wage earners and clerical workers ( = seasonally adjusted ] Services Selected expenditure classes Services less rent Year and month All Mil services Rent Total i Household services less rent Transportation services Medical care services Fuel and utilities Household furnishings and operation Apparel and upkeep Transportation : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.._ : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr._ May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.._ Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.._ Nov.. Dec- : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.__ May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct-Nov.. Dec.. * Also includes the " other services " group Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE B-54. Percent changes in consumer price indexes major groups [ Percent change ] Year or month Dec to Dec * Commodities less food Food All items Year to year Dec to Dec * Dec to Dec * Year to year Year to year Services Dec to Dec. i Year to year I960 A Change from preceding month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar.._ Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct..._ Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr.. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month All commodities Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides Fuels skins and leather related Chemicals and products and alliedi products related and products power * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1P5 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ ___ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-55. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups J929-77 Continued = ] Industrial commodities Continued FurniPulp Metals Machin- ture and NonmeRubber Lumber paper and and tallic and ery and house- mineral and metal wood plastic equipallied hold products products products products ment durables products Year or month Transportation equipment : MiscelMotor laneous vehicles products and equipment2 : Jan Feb _ Mr a Apr May June __ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ _ : Jan __ Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to or months earlier than the index month ' Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings [ = Intermediate material $ supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Materials and components for manufacturing Materials and com ) onents For For For Com- or connonfood durable durable ponents struction manu- manu- manufactur- factur- facturing ing ing Materials Year or month Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Fuel _.__ I960 ___ Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _- __ _ _.. _ _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug _ _ Sept Oct Nov Dec ._ Total Total See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes T A B L E B-56. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing and by special groupings Continued [ = Finished goods Special grouping s ( Consume r finished goods Year or month Manufactured goods Excluding foods Total Total Total Nondurable goods Durable goods Foods Producer finished goods Total Durable Crude materials Intermediate materials SUD- plies and components : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. June July. Aug Sept Oct.. Nov Dec.. July Aug.. Oct Nov Dec * Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies > Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-57. Wholesale price indexes for selected groupings seasonally adjusted \ [ = seasonally adjusted ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Manufactured goods Finished goods rude mateials nitermediate materials upplies and components Consumer finished goods Year and month ProcFarm essed Total prod- foods ucts and feeds Excluding foods Total Foods NonTotal dur- Durable able goods goods roducer inished Total goods : Jan Feb Mar Apr M a y June Durable July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May_.. June May " " " June May " June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar July... Aug.--Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar July Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec i Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-58. Percent changes in wholesale price indexes major groups IPercent change ! Year or month Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year to year Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.i 4.C g ^ ! * Year to year Producer finished goods Dec to Dec.i All except food Foods Year to year Year to year Consumer finished goods Dec to Dec.i Dec to Dec. Total finished goods Industrial commodities '3 Change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Seasonally adjusted SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adadadjusted justed ad- justed justed justed adjusted justed justed justed justed l ! \ l 'A ! ] '.9 : Jan Feb Mar Apr.... May... June * '.3 July... Aug.. '.5 '.8 L3 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics r.o ~ '.2 l'.8 Nov... Dec.. Sfcr ~ ! July Au * Sept___ Octt Nov Dec June fc : '.2 ! l MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE T A B L E B Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ! Components and related items Overall measures Mi ( Currency plus demand deposits ) Year and month : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec. Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Deep.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p M2 ( Mi plus ( M M3 plus time deposits deposits at nonat combank mercial thrift banks instituther than arge CDs ) tions ) Deposits at commercial banks Curency l Time and savings Demand Total 5<0.3 Large CDs * Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ) Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve Banks and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government. Effective June excludes balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) Negotiable time certificates of deposit ( CDs ) issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks savings capital at savings and loan associations and credit union shares Deposits at all commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-60. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans Total loans and investments * End of year or month Total : June : June e U.S. Government securities Investments Commercial and industrial Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusted s P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ._ July * .Aug Sept * Oct * NOVP Dec * > Data are for last Wednesday of month or year ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic bank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods < Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( then about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank ( then about $ billion ) are included in other securities rather than in loans * Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes ( then about $ billion ) are classified as other securities rather than as loans Beginning August reflects new definition of affiliates included and different grcup of reporting banks. Amount of total loans sold was reduced by $ billion Loan ^ classifications reduced these loans by $ billion in December Note. Data may not be strictly comparable because of bank mergers liquidations loan ^ classifications etc Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-61. Liquid asset holdings private domestic nonfinancial investors [ Month by average outstandings ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Total liquid assets Year and month Total Currency i Demand deposits i Commercial banksi U.S. Treasury securities Nonbank Savthrift ings institu- bonds tions Negotiable certificates Shortof determ market- posit5 able securities * Other private money market instruments fl : Dec : Dec : Dec I 48'3 : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec.. : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Deep : Jan Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ 2C8.6 __ Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. _ Dec * Money stock components ( see Table B-59 ) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors As published in money stock statistics Series E and H savings bonds other savings bonds and savings notes held by individuals Short-term marketable U.S. Treasury securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings e Commercial paper bankers ' acceptances Federal funds security repurchase agreements and money market mutual fund shares held outside banks and other financial institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-62. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Item U.S. Government Treasury issues. Agency issues and mortgages Foreign n'.o Total funds raised Corporate equities Debt instruments Demand deposits and currency. Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions Private domestic nonfinancial sectors. Corporate equities Debt instruments. Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-62. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item III III Treasury securities. U.S. Government Total funds raised Agency issues and mortgages " .O Foreign Corporate equities Debt instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign funds At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance.. U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time an d savings accounts At commercial b a n k s At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves. [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : * : : : 1959I9601961 : : ' : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec U.S Government securities July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ? : Dec : D e c : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ Member bank borrowings Member bank reserves Other Total Required Excess Seasonal Total U,822 ) Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed s Beginning November includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed t o waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Beginning allowable deficiencies included are ( beginning with first statement week of quarter ) : first quarter $ million ; second quarter $ million ; third quarter $ million ; fourth quarter $ million. Beginning allowable deficiencies included are : first quarter $ million and second quarter $ million. Transition period e nded after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-64. Aggregate reserves and deposits member banks [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ) Member bank reservesi Member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements2 Year and month Total Nonborrowed Required Total Time and savings Demand Private U.S. Government : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : * : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec v Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec v _ Member bank reserves series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M Deposits subject to reserve requirements include total time and savings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-65. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasyear Taxable ury issues bonds bills i Corporate bonds ( Moody 's> Aaa Baa High- Average grade rate on Prime communic- shortmerterm ipal cial bank bonds paper ( Stand- loans ard & to busi- months ness Poor 's ) Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York * Federal funds rates Newhome mortgage yields ( FHLBB ) ( ) 1966.._ See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes i on TABLE B-65. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Year or month 3-month Treasyear ury issues bills i : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1977-Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Taxable bonds Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on shortterm bank loans to business Prime commercial paper months Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York * Federal funds rates Newhome mortyields ( FHLBB ) 7H-7K ] /-& % % -6J4 ^ ^ -5K ^ ^ 5J * -5H ill J/-5 * / ^ 5K-534 ! A ty ~ % Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December Selected note and bond issues * First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; November 1941-March years Average effective rate for the year ; opening and closing rate for the month Based on seven-day averages of daily effective rates for weeks ending Wednesday. Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages refecting fees and charges as well as ccntract rate and assumed on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January 1S73 not strictly ccmparable with prior rates From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less s Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data. Beginning data are for short-term commercial and industrial loans ( other than construction and land development ) and are from survey of terms of bank lending Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-66. Instalment credit extensions and liquidations * ( Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Revolving Year or month Extensions : Total Automobile Mobile home Home improve * ment Bank credit card May. " June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec_ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Oec> Bank check credit All other : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Liquidations : * t Excludes 30-day charge credit held by retailers oil and gas companies and travel and entertainment companies Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Note. Consumer instalment credit consists of short- and intermediate-term credit extended through regular business channels to finance the purchase of goods and services for personal consumption or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid in two or more instalments. Mortgage credit is excluded Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-67. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing ( Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multifamily properties Commercial properties i Conventional ' to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : II... III.. IV... : II...III.. IV... : ll.-__ III.-- i Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations > Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Other holders Commercial banks Life Federal insurance and comrelated panies agencies ' Individuals and others * I960 b : II III IV : II III IV : II III... Includes loans held hy nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( F N M A ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( G N M A ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-69. Net public and private debt l [ Billions of dollars ] Private Public Individual and unincorporated enterprise End of year Total FedFederally eral sponGovsored erncredit ment > agencies State and local governments Total Nonfarm Corporate Total Total Mortgage Commercial and financial * Consumer Farm * _ L I L. " ~ 6.T Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating government and corporate debt Net Federal Government debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Debt of agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest. The obligations of the Federal land banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal home loan banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal intermediate credit banks and banks for cooperatives are included beginning with * Farm mortgages andf arm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories Debt to banks ( other than consumer credit ) security credit policy loans and some single-payments loans Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) based on data from various Federal agencies and ther sources GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts... Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions. Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds ~ Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds.. OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS. National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement. Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf See next page for continuation of table and for footnotes TABLE B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays ransition quarter Federal funds Trust funds I nterfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) _ Federal funds Trust funds.. OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment. Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services.. Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance.. Interest Allowances. Undistributed offsetting receipts Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirementInterest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September The period July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Earned income credit payments in excess of an individual 's taxable liability are classified as income tax refunds beginning and as outlays prior to Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-71. Federal budget receipts and outlays,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) -20,7R4 ^ ! I960 ! ^ Transition quarter i Estimate Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year ran from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year ran from October through September The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter See Note Table B-70 regarding treatment of earned income credit payment Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays beginning For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-72. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures Total budget receipts RECEIPTS Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Bcnuses en Outer Continental Shelf land leases ._ Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures.- Note.-See Note Table B-71 See Special Analysis A " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget O TABLE B-73. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures State and local government Federal Government Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( -> nationa income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts 1977P : II III.. IV... : l__ II Ill IV : II.. Ill IV * Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-74. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) \ Receipts Expenditures Transfer payments Indirect PerPurbusi- Consonal Corpo- ness tribuchases tax rate tax tions Year or quarter of and Total non- profits and for tax non- social TotaM goods To and tax acperserv- sons re- cruals tax insurices acance ceipts cruals Fiscal year : Calendar year : I960... * Grantsin-aid to State and To forlocal eign- governers ments Net interest paid Surplus or Subsidefidies cit less cur- ( -> narent tionsurplus al income of and govprodernuct ment enter- acprises counts [ ft ? ? : II.. Ill IV : l__ _ II III IVP Excludes wape accruals less disbursements not shown separately. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) in each of the quarters of and Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-75. -Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total ndirect PerCorsonal porate business tax tax profits and and tax nontax accruals nontax receipts accruals '.8 Expenditures Pur- TransContrichases fer butions Fedof payfor eral Total i goods ments social grantsto and insur- in-aid servperance ices sons Subsidies less current Net surplus nterest of govpaid ernment enterprises Surplus or deficit <- ) national income and product accounts -LI L8 g -L2 * >_ : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV * ____ '.5 l'.O Excludes wage accruals less disbursements not shown separately. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) in each of the quarters of and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-76. State and local government revenues and expenditures ^ selected fiscal years \ [ Millions of dollars ] General expenditures by function J General revenues by source * Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual ncome taxes Revenue All from ederal others iovernment Corporation net income taxes Total Education Highways Public welfare All other " " " ; l,75f ' I960. : ; ! 6,97< ; 62.26S ! 74,00C ' 4,09C or _ _ ] 114,55C ! : ! ; ? * ; ? ' 2,51J 3.18C 3,73.r 15,37f : ; ' 26,lir 131,33f " ; ; 21< ! ! ! : ! ; ! ll,90C ' ! ^ ' ! ; 35,82i 40,2H * : : Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues ' Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures * Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-69 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-77. Interest-bearing public debt by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] Marketable End of year or month Total interestbearing public debt Total Bills Fiscal year : Nonmarketable Treasury Treasury notes bonds * Total U.S savings bonds : Jan. Feb.. Mar. Apr. MayJune July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr__ May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec '15 Foreign Governgovernment ment account series2 series * Other Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series and foreign-currencyseries issues Includes Treasury deposit funds and some special issues formerly included in " Other. " < Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks * Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-78. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors Held Held by Federal Govern- Reserve ment Total accounts Banks End of year or month Fiscal year : Mutual savings State MiscelCombanks Total mercial and in- Corpo- and local Indi- laneous rations govern- viduals invesbanks surance tors ments companies : Jan_ Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July _ Aug _. _ Sept Oct Nov Dec * _._ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June U.S. savings bonds series A F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value As of July public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the data in this table For comparability with published data published data for have been adjusted to exclude notes of the International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in each year through These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department of the Treasury Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-60 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies e Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-79. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt held by private investors Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year Ho years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Average length Years Months Fiscal year : 1969._ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. MayJune July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. MarApr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct_ Nov. Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year runs from July through June ; starting in October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year runs from October through September Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-80. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments P : II III IV : II _ III IV : l._ _ II Ill _ ._ _ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-81. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Financial1 Total Total Total Nonfinancial Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing Wholesale and Utilities Other retail trade Rest of the world v : ll_.__ III.. IV... : IL.._ III.. IV... : ll___ III.. See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-81 Corporate profits by industry Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Domestic industries l Financial Year or quarter Total Nonfinancial Federal Reserve banks Other Wholesale and retail trade Utilities Other Total Total Total Manufacturing Rest of the world l l '.2 _ v : ll_.__ III. IV.. : l..._ ll_._ III IV.. : I IL__ IIL B R Consists of the following industries : banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-82 for industry detail Consists of transportation communications electsic gas and sanitary services Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-82. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Nondurable goods Year or Total quarter manuFood and facturing Total kindred products Chem- PetroElectric Motor Primary Fabri- Machin- and icals leum ery and and Other Total metal cated elec- vehicles except and allied coal indus- metal electri- tronic equip- Other prod- prodtries products equipcal ment ucts ucts ment L.6 > L8 >.i >.6 l.l l.Z J.I : ; L.5 * : IIIII IV ! : l _ II. III IV : II.. III. See footnotes at end of table '. \ '.Z L.7 TABLE B-82. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capita ! consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Nondurable goods Year or quarter Total manuFood Chemfacturicals ing Total kindred and prod- allied products ucts Petroleum and coal products Durable goods Other Total Electric Primary Fabri- Machinand cated metal ery elecmetal indusexcept tronic tries products electri- equipment cal Motor and equipment Other L953 L955 L956 ? ? ? ? L963 L964 ? ? ? L972 p ? ? 9.S : II. III. IV. ? ? ? : II. III. IV. ? ? ? : ? II.. III.. ? lb.9 b Note. The industry classification i> on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O i TABLE B-83.- Sales profits and stockholders * equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Profits Stock- Sales StockStockholders ' ( net ) Before After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Before After equity equity ( net ) income equity income income income income income taxes taxes taxes * taxes taxes taxes Profits Year or quarter Sales ( net ) ? ? ? f> ? ? : IV... New series : : IV : | II III... IV... : II III... IV... : II III.... IV : II III * In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) See " Quarterly Financial Report " first quarter Federal Trade Commission Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report " Federal Trade Commission Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Year or quarter All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV : II.. : New series : : IV : III IV : II III IV Ill IV Ill Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only See " Quarterly Financial Report " first quarter Federal Trade Commission Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See also Note Table B-83 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-85. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders9 equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Industry III I II III IV III All manufacturing corporations- Durable goods industries.. Motor vehicles and equipment. Aircraft guided missiles and parts Instruments and related products.. Other durable manufacturing prod15.2 ucts Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals. Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical Electrical and electronic equipment Transportation equipment Nondurable goods industries. Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products2 Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs. Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products Ratios based on equity at end of quarter Includes other industries not shown separately Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B Sources and uses offunds nonjarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses External Year or quarter Total Credit market funds nternal1 Total Total Longterm Shortterm Other Total Purchase of physical assets * Increase in financial assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) : oo II III IV 3b. : II III _ _ Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits Stocks bonds and mortgages Bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans * Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-87. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets AdReNet vances Fedceiv- Notes Other Notes and Cash U.S eral Other workables curing Incurand on Govand preinfrom acvenrent Total payaccome rent capiTotal hand ernU.S tal liaand counts tories astax ment ments counts in securi- Gov- receivsets * pay- liabili- biliU.S ern- able ties s banks * ties ties able Govment ernment3 All corporations " End of year or quarter Current liabilities 5fi ? ? fi1 Nonfinancial corporations II III IV : II III Includes time certificates of deposit * Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to the U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations'books or amounts arisingfrom subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * I ncludes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well assundry current assets Includes commercial paper outstanding the portion of long-term debt due in less than year and miscellaneous current liabilities not elsewhere classified Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Excludes banks sayings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Note. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Department of the Treasury ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics cf Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from rr.any different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Federal Trade Commision TABLE B-88. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Industry of corporate issuer Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Manufacturing ^ Electric gas and water * Transportation ' Communication Other I960... : I II III IV : I II Ill Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues s Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle. " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-89. Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( percent ) Common stock prices l New York Stock Exchange indexes ( December = ) Year or quarter Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Standard Dow& Poor 's Jones composite Dividendindex industrial price average ( = ratio ) * Earningsprice ratio 4.C9 ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ * July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange s Includes stocks Includes stocks s Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day of quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow-Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-90. -Business formatiori and business failures Business failures1 Year or month Index of net business formation ( ) New business rations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures ness failure rates Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over in Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. " : : : : " " : : : Sept Oct. Nov Dec. : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ May June.. _ _ July _ ._ Au ? Sept _ Oct NOVP. | i Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks end railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises s Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet. Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-91. Income of farm people and farmers [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Year or quarter Net to farm operators Realized gross ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- IncludFrom From From receipts penses ing net ing net nonall farm Total s from inven- invenfarm tory sources sources1 sources markettory ings change change * Billions of dollars III IV : II III v " III IV dollars ' Current dollars Dollars Net income per farm including net inventory change $ Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney and other farm income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family livinp items on a 1S67 base. As of January movement of the index is based on the overall change in the consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-92. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Farm output TotaP Livestock and products ' Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs Feed grains Hay and forage 1968._ 8> P. Y ar Food Vege- Fruits and grains tables nuts Cotton ToOil bacco crops Total Meat animals Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-93. Farm population employment ^ productivity and Farm population ( April l ) i Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Per hour of farm work Year Mum ber ( thousands ) As percent of total population Per Total Family Hired unit of workers workers total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre Index = I960 p lil Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-29 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-94. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices ( = except as noted ] Prices received by farmers I960 : Jan Febl5 Mar Apr May June 15__ July Augl5 Sept Oct Novl5 Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Augl5 Sept Oct Novl5 Dec All farm products Crops ( ) ? B333 Year or month Prices paid by farmers All items Live- interest Family stock taxes living and and items products wage rates ( ) ( ) Selected resource prices Tractors and Produc- selfprotion pelled items machinery Average hourly Average farm wage real rate Fertilestate izer all value hired per farm workers1 acre $ n ) n L.33 L.44 L.55 L.73 HA Without room or board > Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through and for February beginning Monthly data are for first of month Series discontinued. Consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) substituted in calculating total prices paid Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E B-95. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Year Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Total hours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor Farm real estate MeFeed chaniseed Agrical and Taxes Miscelpower cultural liveand chemi- stock interest laneous and cals mapurchinery chases P _ i Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens * Fertilizer lime and pesticides s Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-96. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector ( Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Financial assets MaHousehold DeReal LiveTotal estate stock i chinery equip- posits and Crops * ment and motor and curvehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal prieInvestTotal estate Other tors ' U.S ment debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives \ \ ? > U _ P H Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-97. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Merchandise'2 Year or quarter Exports Imports Investment income3 Net balance __ Balance on current account ._ Nt e Remittances pensions and other unilateral transfers i __ Payments Balance on goods and services i * Receipts Net military transactions Net travel Other and servtrans- ices portation receipts i-7,188 : I... II.__ III.. i : I... II.. III.. : I II.- Ill p. Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net * In concept the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the national income and product accounts although the two may differ because of revisions special handling of certain items etc ( Footnotes continued on following page. ) TABLE B-97. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) Foreign official assets Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets Other U.S Government assets U.S private assets Total Total Assets of foreign official reserve agencies Other foreign assets Statistical discrepancy AllocaTotal tions of special ( sum of the drawing items rights with ( SDR ) sign reversed ) Of which Seasonal adjustment discrepancy _ ._ : I I III...- IV : II III. IV.__. ; : II UK Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for changes in U.S. official reserve assets U.S. private assets abroad and foreign assets in the U.S. are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-98. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use categories Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Imports Nonagricultural Year or quarter Total Agricultural Non-petroleum Total Total Capital goods Other goods Petroleum and products Total Industrial supplies Other goods II III.. IV : II III.. : Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military grant shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions ot dollars ] Exports Developed countries. Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Developing countries OPEC Other2_ Eastern Europe Imports Developed countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Developing countries OPEC i Other2 Eastern Europe. U51,048 Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republic other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less petroleum exporting countries and the International Monetary Fund Average of first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate. Detail may not add to totals because of seasonal adjustment discrepancy Includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund not in area detail Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military grant shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-100. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment U.S. assets abroad U.S. Government assets Special drawing rights ( SDR ) Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Foreign currency reserves Gold U.S. loans and other long-term assets U.S. short-term assets other than reserves U.S. private assets Direct investments abroad ( book value ) Foreign securities Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S nonbanks Foreign official assets Foreign assets in the United States U.S. Government securities i Other U.S. Government liabilities Liabilities reported by U.S. banks Other official assets Other foreign assets Direct investments in the United States ( book value ) Liabilities reported by U.S. banks U.S. Treasury securities Other U.S. securities2 Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks Net foreign wealth ( including official gold holdings ) of the United States Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks Note. Gold is valued at SDR35 per ounce throughout. The SDR value is converted to dollars at $ 1/SDR before December at $ 1.08571/SDR from December through January at $ 1.20635/SDR from February through June and as measured by the basket valuation of the SDR beginning July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December [ Millions of dollars ] i Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Total.net Investment in international financial institutions3. Net new economic and technical aid grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Net new credits < New credits Less : Principal collections Under assistance programs net Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Currency claims acquired Sales of farm products Second-stage operations7 Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country Other uses Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries,8 net total Developed countries net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Negative figures ( ) occur when the total of grant returns principal repayments and/or foreign currencies disbursed by the Government exceeds new grants and new credits utilized and/or acquisitions of foreign currencies through new sales of farm products July through December Yearly average is for 4> years Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the special funds of the African Development Fund Asian Development Bank Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Development Association and International Finance Corporation Net new grants are not adjusted for settlements of postwar relief and other grants under agreements and net new credits exclude prior grants converted into credits. Repayments on these settlements are included in net new credits s Outstanding credits on December totaled $ million representing net credits extended since organization of Export-Import Bank February 1S34 less chargeoffs and net adjustments due to exchange rates ( $ million ) and excluding World War I debts. The amount repayable in dollars at U.S. Government option was $ million ; the remainder was repayable in foreign currencies commodities or services at the option of the borrowers TABLE B-101. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December Continued [ Millions of dollarsp Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Net new economic and technical aid grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Net new credits * New credits Less : Principal collections Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Under assistance programs net Investment in international financial institutions3 Total net Currency claims acquired Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country Other uses Sales of farm products Second-stage operations Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries * net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Developed countries * net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Equivalent value of currencies still available to be used including some funds advanced from foreign governments and after loss by exchange rate fluctuations ( $ million ) was $ million on December Includes foreign currencies acquired from triangular trade operations and principal and interest collections on credits originally extended under Public Law which since enactment of Public Law are available for the same purposes as Public Law currencies s Developed countries include Australia Canada Japan New Zealand Republic of South Africa and all countries in Europe except Malta Portugal Spam and Yugoslavia. Developing countries include all other countries. This classification is on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Less than plus or minus $ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis based on information made available by operating agencies TABLE B-102. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country November All countries U9.263 Other Europe Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Norway and Sweden ) Switzerland United Kingdom United States Canada Japan Industrialized countries2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa Oil exporting countries Iran Nigeria Saudi Arabia. Venezuela... Others Other less developed areas Other Western Hemisphere Other Middle East Other Asia Other Africa _ Includes Cuba Includes Luxembourg Algeria Indonesia Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar and United Arab Emirates Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDR ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country Exports f.a.s Developed countries United States Canada Japan European Community France West Germany.. Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries. Developing countries OPEC * Other. Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL. Imports c.i.f.6 Developed countries3 United States Canada Japan European Community France West Germany.. Italy United Kingdom. Other developed countries. Developing countries OPEC Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China. TOTAL. Preliminary estimates Free-alongside-ship value Includes the OECD countries South Africa ane non-OECD Europe * Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes U.S.S.R. Eastern Europe China North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia Cost insurance and freight value Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE E-1C4. World trade balance and current account balances and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country World trade balance2 Developed countries3 United States Canada Japan European Community ! France West Germany Italy. United Kingdom Other developed countries. " Developing countries. OPEC * Other.. Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL Current account balances7 United States Canada... Japan European Community s-2.3 France West Germany. _ Italy United Kingdom. Other TOTAL OECD Developing countries. OPEC K Other.. Preliminary estimates Exports f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) less imports c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) Includes the OECD countries the South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes U.S.S.R. Eastern Europe China North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia e Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage classification timing and valuation in the recording of transactions by the countries involved OECD basis s Excludes cancellation of Indian debt ( $ billion ) and extradordinary grants ( $ billion ) Consists of countries in footnote plus Bahrain Includes Communist countries and non-OECD developed countries Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ = ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Consumer prices .__ v __ __ _ : II Ill IV : II III IV * _ _ Hourly compensation ' v i Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners the self-employed and unpaid family workers ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For france and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-106. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada European Community ! Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) v : II III IV : II III IV * _. _ _ ~ Unemployment rate ( percent ) P * III IV : II III IV p Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom and West Germany All data exclude construction Unemployment rates adjusted to U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland < 11-month average seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] to annual average Area and country U.S. dollar value in ( billions ) United States Canada Japan. European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom A OECD countries Other OECD Communist countries ._ U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China Less developed countries OPEC Other. _ _____ TOTAL * Preliminary estimates Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for except for those of the Communist countries which were converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents Percent change from to Sum of OECD Communist countries and less developed countries plus an estimate of $ billion for non-OECD developed countries Note. For Italy and United Kingdom data relate to real gross domestic product. For France data relate to gross domestic product excluding nonmarket activity such as compensation of employees in the government sector Sources : Department of Commerce and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) TABLE B-108. Exchange rates [ May parities = 100J Year and month Belgian franc Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen May rate : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec __ _ _ __ _ : Mar June Sent _ _ __ Dec : Mar June Sept _ _ Dec ' Mar June Sept Dec Mar June SeDt _ Dec Mar June SeDt _ __ Dec : Mar June Sept Dec _ United States dollar May rate * Multilateral tradeweighted average : Mar June Sept Netherlands guilder Dec : Mar June Sept. Dec Mar June Sept. _ _ _ Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar. June __ _ Sept Dec Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec _ Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound Bilateral tradeweighted average Cents per unit of foreign currency Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O