Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Stock Number CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER PROGRESS AND PROBLEMS IN CHAPTER REDUCING INFLATION CHAPTER T H E ECONOMIC OUTLOOK CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY MANAGING INTERDEPENDENCE APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ( HI ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : Two years ago when I took office our economy was still struggling to recover from the deep recession of Unemployment was widespread and a substantial part of our industrial capacity stood idle Today million more Americans are at work and factories across the country have regained high levels of output. Family incomes after adjustment for inflation have risen handsomely and so have business profits The task now confronting us is to manage an economy operating at close to its capacity to sustain prosperity and extend its benefits more widely among our citizens Under the best circumstances designing economic policies to carry out that task calls for restraint and careful choices. Developing such policies has been made more complex by the acceleration of inflation last year and the declining growth of productivity that was partly responsible for it My economic and budgetary program deals forthrightly with the economic realities we face today. It is based on four principles First reducing inflation must be our top economic priority. Inflation endangers the gains in employment and income that we have made during the past years. We must act forcefully and effectively to combat inflation and we must persist until the battle is won Second government must do its job better. Reducing inflation will require budgetary austerity and moderation of economic growth. With productivity growth at a low ebb living standards will not rise as fast as they have in the past years. In such a climate waste inefficiency or misplaced priorities are particularly intolerable. It is now more essential than ever that our government in both its budgetary and regulatory programs make the best use of the resources at its disposal and seek better less costly means to achieve our national objectives Third we will not reduce inflation at the expense of the most vulnerable members of our society the poor the elderly and those who have difficulty finding jobs even in a high-employment economy. Ours is a compassionate Nation dedicated to a sense of fairness. We will not lose sight of those who most need our help Fourth our policies must reflect the fact that the United States is a very important part of a closely related world economy. We will continue to pursue domestic policies and undertake other actions as necessary and appropriate to foster a strong and stable dollar and we will join with other countries to promote an open and growing world economy In the months ahead I will work closely with the Congress to ensure that the policies adopted by this government are consistent with these four precepts. The budget for must be very tight and I intend to make sure that a fiscal policy of firm and measured restraint is maintained. But the budget must continue and strengthen our most essential programs and I have supported such programs strongly. In order to further the fight against inflation I will seek prompt adoption of my real wage insurance program and my proposals for hospital cost containment and regulatory reform I will continue to seek the cooperation and support of the American people in the fight against inflation. Last October I proposed to the Nation a program of price and pay standards designed to brake the price-wage spiral that has beset our economy for more than a decade This program has received substantial support from the American people and I will make every effort to enlist the broadest possible cooperation with it in the year to come The pay and price standards ask every American to exercise restraint Every American should therefore expect the government to ensure that its own actions will contribute to not undermine the voluntary effort to reduce inflation. Steadfast pursuit of fiscal and monetary discipline and limits on the inflationary impacts of other government actions are crucial to the success of the anti-inflation program. Together the actions of government and the private sector can lay a new foundation for a durable prosperity Progress and Problems in Among my first actions in office were steps to strengthen economic growth and speed the return to a high-employment economy. Those actions paid generous dividends. In our rate of economic growth increased by nearly a full percentage point over the prior year and in the Nation 's output of goods and services advanced by a healthy J4 percent. Today our Nation is using its industrial capacity more fully than a year ago Last year million new jobs were created. A larger proportion of our people is at work now than at any other time in our history. Gains in employment during the past years have been especially strong among women and members of minority groups Unemployment declined to less than percent of the labor force during Nearly l/2-million fewer Americans were unemployed in December than years earlier. Unemployment among minority groups has also begun to decline from the very high levels that persisted earlier in the recovery but these groups still bear a disproportionate share of the burden of unemployment Gains in employment and output produced strongly rising incomes for most Americans during Disposable personal income adjusted for inflation rose by more than percent over the quarters of last year The income of our country 's farmers which was severely depressed in and showed a marked recovery Business profits rose more than percent in thereby promoting conditions for the continued growth in investment needed for productivity improvement and healthy economic expansion. Business investment in new plant and equipment also strengthened in raising the proportion of our national output devoted to capital formation to the highest level in years On most counts the prosperity of our Nation rests on a solid base Our economy at the end of last year was still growing strongly. The momentum of expansion will be sustained early this year by the reductions in taxes on individual incomes and corporate profits that were provided in the Revenue Act of Last year as in the earlier years of the recovery the process of economic expansion remained relatively well balanced. Business inventories are lean. Industrial firms and financial institutions are in good financial condition. Shortages and speculative buying generally are absent. But inflation does pose a serious threat to the Nation 's continued economic health. If we make progress in reducing inflation the prospects are good for a successful transition from a period of economic recovery to a period of moderate but sustained growth For more than years our country like many other nations has faced stubborn inflation. During the course of our inflation problem worsened. Consumer prices rose by about percent a large acceleration from the % percent rate of inflation in Increases in wages also were larger and since productivity gains declined sharply costs of production moved up much more strongly The anti-inflation effort was given top priority in In May I recommended that the Congress reduce by $ billion and delay months the tax cut that had been proposed earlier. In October I set forth a strong and comprehensive program to combat inflation. Shortly thereafter in cooperation with other countries the Nation undertook a series of measures to strengthen the dollar abroad and further contribute to a reduction of inflation at home Inflation in Rising inflation last year stemmed from several sources. Cold winter weather affected food supplies and prices. Depreciation of the dollar in foreign exchange markets added to prices of imports and to prices of goods produced by U.S. firms that compete with imported products Costs of land and building materials were driven up by exuberant demands for new homes and the rise of mortgage interest rates added to the costs of buying a home. At the same time the cumulative effects of government legislation and regulation over recent years gave further impetus to cost pressures A large part of the worsening of inflation last year however stemmed from poor productivity. Over the past decade or more the rate of growth in our productivity has been slowing. In late and throughout the slowdown in productivity growth reached serious proportions. Last year the productivity of our economy increased by less than percent The reasons for the weakening of productivity growth in our country especially its poor performance last year are complex and are not fully understood. But the consequences are well known. With slower productivity growth our living standards individually and as a Nation can not rise as fast. Slower productivity growth means that the resources available for carrying out governmental programs become scarcer. It means that large increases in wages and other incomes put greater upward pressure on costs and prices. If we ignore the realities of slower productivity growth if governments continue to press forwaid with unabated claims on resources and private citizens continue to demand large gains in money incomes our inflationary problem will worsen Dealing with Inflation Inflation injures every person in our country. It means that paychecks do not go as far as they once did. It means that savings accumulated for retirement or for a child 's education become inadequate. Many poor and elderly persons see prices they pay for food shelter and heat rise rapidly while their incomes rise slowly or not at all. These problems are so acute that they demand an all-out effort to reduce inflation. Yet rising prices and costs have additional and very serious effects on our economy as a whole Inflation drives up interest rates. It undermines the competitiveness of our industries and the value of our dollar abroad. Confidence of businesses in the future is reduced and investment plans are upset. Consumers3 confidence in their own future is sapped. Sooner or later these effects of inflation will undermine the basis for economic expansion and make sustained prosperity impossible Finally the corrosive effects of inflation eat away at the ties that bind us together as a people. One of the major tasks of a democratic government is to maintain conditions in which its citizens have a sense of command over their own destiny. During an inflation individuals watch in frustration as the value of last week 's pay increase or last month 's larger social security check is steadily eroded over the remainder of the year by a process that is beyond their individual control. All of us have to plan for the future when we lend or borrow save for a child 's education change a job buy a home or choose a career. The future is uncertain enough in any event and the outcome of our plans is never fully within our own control. When the value of the measuring rod with which we do our planning the purchasing power of the dollar is subject to large and unpredictable shrinkage one more element of command over our own future slips away. It is small wonder that trust in government and in social institutions is simultaneously eroded It is for all of these reasons that reducing inflation must now be the primary concern of economic policy Policies to Control Inflation Firm sustained and carefully appliedfiscaland monetary restraint must be the first element in our effort to reduce inflation. We have entered a period in which the high rate of economic growth that we experienced when the margin of unused resources was larger no longer is appropriate We will apply the needed restraint and stick with it We will not try to wring inflation out of our economic system by pursuing policies designed to bring about a recession. That course of action would be unfair. It would put the heaviest burden of fighting inflation on those who can least afford to bear it. It also would be ineffective Twice in the past decade inflation has accelerated and a recession has followed but each recession brought only limited relief from inflation The underlying pressures behind rising prices and costs continued to be strong and inflation eventually accelerated again when recovery began Stop-and-go policies do not work. A successful anti-inflation program must be durable to deal with a long-run inflation problem. Our program meets that test When I announced my anti-inflation initiatives last October I pledged to pursue a restrained budgetary policy in fiscal year I have kept that pledge. The central element of my fiscal program is tight control over Federal spending : Growth in Federal spending will be curtailed. As in Federal outlays in the next fiscal year will increase in real terms by significantly less than percent The share of the Nation 's output accounted for by Federal spending will be reduced to about percent in fiscal a full year ahead of the schedule that I had earlier announced Restricted growth in Federal spending combined with the revenues yielded by a moderately growing economy will reduce the budget deficit to $ billion in fiscal less than half its size in the year before I took office. This course of fiscal policy will exert the measured restraint that is needed. Excessive demands upon the Nation 's resources will be avoided. Growth in economic activity will slow to a little below the rise in the Nation 's economic potential These measures of fiscal policy are being complemented by firm and careful monetary restraint on the part of the Federal Reserve Board. In this way monetary and fiscal policy are supporting each other to combat inflationary pressures and foster a healthy and stable economy Other Governmental Actions I am taking other steps to reduce the inflationary effects of government actions. I have directed the agencies of the executive branch to pay special attention to ensuring that the regulations they issue do not impose unnecessary burdens on the public and I shall continue the efforts that got under way in to improve the regulatory process Last year the deregulation of the airline industry brought American consumers the benefits of substantially lower prices and better service This year I intend to seek congressional approval of legislation to increase the role of competitive forces in the trucking and railroad industries. I will submit to the Congress legislation to reform the process by which regulations are developed by Federal agencies and to increase the emphasis on a careful balancing of costs and benefits. And I am taking steps to reduce the burden of paperwork imposed by the government on the private sector Government must set a clear example in the fight against inflation For that reason I ordered last year that the rate of pay increase for Federal workers be held to percent and that sharp limitations be imposed on new Federal hiring Although these actions by government will not by themselves bring inflation to an end they are indispensable. They can create an environment that encourages voluntary cooperation with the pay and price standards. Without restraint by government the pressures of an overheated economy easily could render meaningless the best efforts of businesses and workers to reduce price and wage increases. However it will take broad cooperation from the private sector if the voluntary effort is to succeed in reducing inflation Voluntary Wage and Price Standards The voluntary wage and price standards call for an average rate of pay increase of percent or less this year. I also have asked businesses to hold their average rate of price increase to at least one-half percentage point below the average rate of increase in Where such price deceleration is not possible the standards provide for limitations on profit margins To meet these standards both workers and businesses must exercise restraint. But they are fair and flexible standards. If they are widely observed as I believe they will be we can reverse the momentum of the price-wage cycle and gradually bring down the rate of inflation I recognize that cooperation with this program entails uncertainties for workers who comply with the wage standards. They may lose if others do not comply or if forces beyond anyone 's control cause prices to rise unexpectedly. In order to provide them some assurance that those who cooperate will not suffer as a result and thus to motivate wider observance of the standards I have proposed to the Congress a program of real wage insurance. Under this program if inflation increases by more than percent this year groups of workers that meet the percent pay standard will receive a tax credit at a rate equal to the difference between the actual inflation rate and percent. This credit will insure workers ' real wages over a range of inflation as high as percent this year far higher than is expected to occur The elements of my anti-inflation program are mutually supportive and designed to mount a sustainable attack on our long-run inflation problem. Voluntary cooperation with the pay and price standards is essential to reversing the momentum of inflation. Government needs to take strong action to avoid contributing to inflationary pressures in order to ensure that the benefits of voluntary restraint are fully realized. Together these policies offer our best opportunity to win the fight against inflation Outlook for My anti-inflation program will support the health of our economy in in two respects. First the rate of inflation should slow this year to about * /2 percent over the year as a whole and to somewhat below percent by the end of the year. Second moderation of inflation will help us avoid a recession and improve the prospects for sustained economic growth in and beyond Over the quarters of the Nation 's output should rise by about * percent somewhat less than the economy 's potential growth. This should create an economic climate in which the wage and price standards have good propects for success. The labor force will continue to expand strongly and most new workers will find jobs Further progress in reducing inflation can be expected in as the effects of the anti-inflation program begin to cumulate. Moderate growth in the year ahead combined with substantial progress against inflation will lay the basis for an enduring prosperity In the years beyond as we are successful in containing the growth in Federal spending and bringing down the rate of inflation we can look toward reductions in Federal taxes. Rising real income and inflation even at a reduced pace push taxpayers into higher tax brackets and thereby raise the average effective tax rate. Both to sustain economic growth and to relieve citizens from unwarranted tax burdens tax reductions will from time to time be highly desirable It would be unwise and indeed very dangerous to commit ourselves now to any mechanical formula for future reductions. No such formula will pass the test of budgetary responsibility. Our knowledge of future economic conditions and developments affecting the rate of inflation is too limited to make such decisions at this time. There is simply no substitute for the difficult process of matching our overall budgetary policies year by year to the economic requirements of the Nation Policies to Meet the Nation 's Needs In a period when the overall growth of budgetary resources must be tightly restrained budget decisions take on special importance. Some real growth in our defense budget is essential to meet our national security needs and keep our international commitments in the face of the growing military strength of our potential adversaries Within the domestic budget I have given special priority to the needs of the poor and the disadvantaged. I have recommended substantial funding for programs that address their needs for assistance in health care education employment and training and basic subsistence The budget directs the resources of those programs more carefully toward those most in need. Similarly I have sought to maintain and in some cases expand the assistance provided to our financially troubled cities and counties. I have paid particular attention to the need to move ahead with the development of alternative energy sources including solar energy and to spur basic research and development which has been lagging in our country We can not be satisfied with the condition of our economy while many of our disadvantaged citizens especially among minorities are unable to find work even in periods of prosperity. In the Congress enacted with my support the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act. That act restates and amplifies the responsibilities of economic policy that have faced our Nation in recent decades. The act challenges us to provide the fullest possible opportunities for useful employment to rely on the private sector as the principal provider of jobs and to create an environment of price stability that will make it possible to sustain prosperity. These are very ambitious goals that challenge us as a Nation to set our sights high. The act also establishes important new procedures for moving toward the realization of full employment and price stability Neither can we rest while large numbers of Americans still live in poverty. This Nation has made a concerted effort to provide for those in our society who are in need. We have assisted the poor to acquire the basic necessities of life. We have taken steps to assure adequate incomes and medical care for the elderly. And we have helped to assure better health care nutrition and education for the young. My budget for continues to respond to the challenge that poverty sets before our Nation Each of these challenges calls for action by the government. In a period of inflation however our ability to act is limited. We can not do everything but we must do what we can and do it well. That is the framework within which I have constructed my budgetary program for and This budget provides a carefully balanced spending plan which will ensure that the activities of the Federal Government are well administered and effective and that we continue to respond to the important needs of the country My budget provides important building blocks for the future in many areas : Health programs which I have expanded substantially during my first years in office will be maintained at those levels and in some cases increased. In addition consistent with the development of a National Health Plan new resources have been provided for the Child Health Assessment Program which will extend Medicaid benefits to over million low-income children. Funds have also been provided for extending Medicaid coverage to low-income pregnant women not now eligible Authority for new spending for education is maintained at the level that I provided in my budget last year. This program will support spending nearly percent greater in real terms than years ago Publicly assisted housing will be provided through subsidies for new units for families with low or moderate incomes Job-related programs will include funds that will support an average of public service jobs phasing down to jobs by the end of These jobs have been targeted more tightly to serve the structurally unemployed. Another training opportunities also will be provided for the structurally unemployed. Programs to provide employment and training opportunities for youths remain a high priority. More private sector job opportunities will be made available through the new private sector initiative and the targeted employment tax credit A welfare reform program to take effect in will expand aid to families with dependent children increase the earned income tax credit for low-wage workers substantially improve employment opportunities for the Nation 's neediest citizens and provide fiscal relief to State and local governments with severe welfare burdens Important reforms in the administration of the program will make America 's welfare system easier to operate Aid to our cities and counties will continue to be provided through revenue sharing community development block grants urban mass transit assistance and urban development action grants. My budget provides new resources for the National Development Bank and requests funding in fiscal and for a new program of special fiscal assistance to cities and counties with severe unemployment problems This spending program provides for our Nation 's vital needs while remaining within the constraints required by today 's inflationary economy The International Economy Developments last year reminded us once again of the interdependence of our economy and those of other nations around the world. Our trading partners are looking at our ability to deal with our economic problems at home as an indicator of the strength and leadership they can expect from the United States. We will not disappoint them Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight was a year of significant progress in the world economy. Real output began to pick up in industrial countries other than the United States. Important initiatives in the international arena occurred in trade policy in balance of payments adjustment and in financial markets all influenced by the cooperation shown at the Bonn Summit Late and early will mark the culmination of the Tokyo round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations. These historic negotiations which began in and were intensified in should lead to the first comprehensive overhaul of the rules of international trade since the 1960s The need for a revamping of the trading system is clear. Our large foreign trade deficit stems in part from a loss of American vitality in world markets. But it has also resulted from the tariff and nontariff barriers of our trading partners. Over the coming years under a final multilateral trade agreement barriers at home and abroad will be reciprocally dismantled During I will be working closely with the Congress to adopt the final multilateral trade agreement along with implementing legislation that will foster robust export growth and free and fair competition in world trade under rules that are both equitable and economically sensible. These measures will provide a framework for trade that will enhance our living standards in the decade to come In recent years the United States has had a serious balance of payments deficit. Our imports surged as we grew rapidly and drew heavily on imported oil. Our exports lagged because of slow economic growth abroad. These factors contributed to a trade deficit rising from about $ billion in to an annual rate of almost $ billion in early As a result of the sharp increase in our external deficit and the acceleration of inflation in the United States the value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets fell substantially last year We have taken important steps to correct the deficit : In late Congress enacted the National Energy Act the first comprehensive legislation for dealing with our energy problems The effect will be to reduce our oil imports in by million barrels per day In I announced the first phase of a National Export Policy By setting up a framework to increase support for exports and reduce disincentives to export we can begin to increase our share of world commerce. Fundamental improvement in our trade position is critical to a healthy dollar O A strong and effective anti-inflation program has been put into place. An integral part of that program consists of monetary and fiscal policies that will moderate the rate of economic expansion These actions will help reduce our large foreign trade deficit These policies were beginning to bear fruit by the end of Exports today are growing more rapidly than the domestic economy. The merchandise trade deficit declined from a $ 38-billion annual rate in the first half of last year to about $ billion in the latter half of the year. Narrowing of the deficit should continue and we foresee a marked improvement in the more comprehensive current account measure Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight was also a year of unusual instability in international financial markets. In the fall movements in the exchange value of the dollar became very disorderly and its decline became clearly excessive On November I announced a series of steps to restore order to the foreign exchange markets and to correct the excessive decline of the dollar. Up to $ billion in foreign exchange resources were assembled by the United States to be used in coordination with other countries utilizing their own resources to protect the dollar 's value in currency markets. Domestic interest rates were raised significantly to help reduce inflation and strengthen the dollar in exchange markets. And the United States underlined its commitment to deal with its inflation problem and strengthen its underlying economic position These actions have improved the tone of the exchange markets and contributed to a rise in the value of the dollar. More importantly for the longer term they are helping to create more stable conditions in the exchange markets in which the value of the dollar can better reflect the fundamental strength of the U.S. economy Progress also was made in in achieving closer economic cooperation among the leading industrial nations. I met in Bonn with the leaders of the six major industrial countries to discuss major economic problems facing us. Out of this came a concerted action program to restore greater balance and confidence in the international economy and in world financial markets. Together we took the necessary steps to achieve those ends the United States committed itself to combat inflation and reduce oil imports Germany and Japan to increase growth and reduce trade surpluses others to take measures on trade or inflation. Only through continued economic cooperation and sound policies can we attain the goal of full employment and price stability that is our ultimate objective Building for the Future During this coming year we as a Nation have an opportunity to strengthen our economy and lay the basis for continuing prosperity. The gains of the last years have been notable. We have made great progress at home in recovering from the recession and we have strengthened the stature of the United States in the world economy. In the year ahead we can secure and extend those gains by working together to moderate inflation. I am confident that we will rise to the challenge January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Grbwth Act of Cordially Charles L. Schultze Chairman Lyle E. Gramley William Nordhaus CONTENTS Page CHAPTER PROGRESS AND PROBLEMS IN An Overview of the Year The Major Sectors of Aggregate Demand in Personal Consumption Expenditures Housing Business Fixed Investment Net Exports Inventory Accumulation Government Spending Labor Market Developments Prices and Wages in Food Prices in Depreciation of the Dollar Housing Costs Medical Care Aggregate Demand Management in Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy Credit Flows in CHAPTER REDUCING INFLATION The Acceleration of Inflation Inflation in Explaining the Inflation Causes of Wage Acceleration The Productivity Slowdown Potential GNP Economic Policy in an Inflationary Environment Aggregate Demand Policy Standards for Wage and Price Behavior Regulatory Policy CHAPTER T H E ECONOMIC OUTLOOK The Economy in and Fiscal Policy for and Monetary Policy The Economic Forecast Price and Wage Developments CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK Continued Economic Objectives and Policy for the Longer Run The Humphrey-Hawkins Act Goals for the Economy to Requirements to Achieve the Economic Goals Attaining the Goals for Unemployment and Inflation... Summary Investment Policy Report Postwar Trends in Investment and Capital Formation. Investment Incentives Research and Development The Supply of Investment Capital Small Businesses CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY MANAGING INTERDEPENDENCE The Global Economy : Developments and Prospects Growth and Inflation Prospects Current Account Developments and Prospects International Financial Developments The Operation of Flexible Exchange Rates Important Developments The November Initiative The European Monetary System The Changing Environment of World Trade The Multilateral Trade Negotiations U.S. Domestic Trade Policy The National Export Policy Page APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Shares of National Income Growth in the Major Components of Real Gross National Product Changes in Real Business Fixed Investment Unemployment Rate and Growth in Employment and Labor Force by Demographic Group Alternative Measures of Inflation Measures of Wage Rates and Costs Changes in Prices Costs and Profits Per Unit of Output Private Nonfinancial Corporate Sector List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Page Changes in Retail Food Prices Changes in Currency Values and Consumer Prices by Country Third Quarter to Third Quarter Actual and High-Employment Federal Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Federal Unified Budget Outlays as Percent of Gross National Product and Budget Surplus or Deficit Fiscal Years Annual Rate of Change in Selected Consumer and Producer Prices and Employment Costs Selected Measures of the Rate of Wage Increase Private Nonfarm Economy Mean Wage and Benefit Adjustments in Major Collective Bargaining Agreements Labor Productivity Growth Productivity Growth by Industry Potential Gross National Product and Benchmark Unemployment Rate Estimated Annual Budgetary Cost of Real Wage Insurance Proposal Cyclical Contractions in Mortgage Credit and Housing Starts Growth in Deposits Economic Outlook for Economic Goals Net Saving by Sector and Federal Unified Budget Receipts and Outlays Under Current Policy Budget Fiscal Years Private Net Saving and Investment and the Unemployment Rate Saving Rate and Population Growth by Age of Household Head Selected Unemployment Rates Fourth Quarter and Fourth Quarter Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real Gross Domestic Product Capital Expenditures by Business for Pollution Abatement by Industry Determinants of Business Fixed Investment Annual Growth in Real GNP in the United States and Other Major Industrial Countries Annual Growth in Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Page Annual Growth in GNP Per Employed Worker in Major Industrial Countries Changes in Consumer Prices in Major Industrial Countries World Current Account Balance Current Account Balances for Selected Major Industrial Countries Charts Selected Interest Rates and Bond Yields Unit Labor Costs and Deflator Nonfarm Business Capacity Utilization Rates Unfilled Orders-Shipments Ratio Durable Goods Manufacturing Selected Unemployment Rates New Hire and Quit Rates in Manufacturing Actual and Potential Gross National Product Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real GNP Unemployment in the U.S. and Five Major Industrial Countries Consumer Price Inflation Rate in the U.S. and Six Major Industrial Countries Weighted-Average Exchange Value of the U.S. Dollar Monthly Average of Daily Exchange Rate Changes U.S. Share of Fifteen Industrial Countries ' Exports of Manufactured Goods CHAPTER Progress and Problems in T HE U.S. ECONOMY LAST YEAR maintained substantial momentum in its fourth year of expansion. Output and employment rose and unemployment fell. But the year was marred by a serious acceleration in the rate of inflation and a decline in the value of the dollar that was sharper than fundamental economic conditions warranted. Although economic growth slowed from 5yi percent over the quarters of to % percent during real income rose in all sectors and all demographic groups experienced employment gains. A reasonable balance was maintained among sectors of real spending. Business fixed investment grew vigorously and residential construction remained strong despite sharply rising interest rates During the years immediately preceding the rapid growth associated with economic recovery had absorbed many of the capital and labor resources idled by the recession. Thus it became appropriate that growth should slow to a pace more in line with the long-term potential of the economy. The decline in the growth rate during was the first step in that transition Much remains to be done to provide adequate employment opportunities for those who can not find jobs even in a high-employment economy This task can not be accomplished solely through aggregate demand policy however without risking further acceleration of inflation. Aggregate demand management must now aim at a more moderate rate of economic expansion to combat inflation while structural measures are developed to attack remaining pockets of unemployment AN OVERVIEW OF THE YEAR The quarterly pattern of growth during the year was once again uneven Unusually severe winter weather and a major strike in coal mining reduced output growth to zero in the first quarter. Both consumer spending and construction activity were curtailed by the adverse weather. In the second quarter both of these sectors rebounded strongly and virtually all of the sales and production lost in the first quarter were regained. Taking a 2quarter average real gross national product ( GNP ) rose at a * percent annual rate in the first half of the year. In the second half of the year there was again substantial disparity between the quarters. Growth slowed in the third quarter and accelerated in the final quarter. Over the quarters together the annual rate of growth of real GNP averaged } percent the same as for the first half The increase in employment over the quarters of last year was slightly less than in million compared to million. It remained very large by historical standards however as the growth of productivity slowed significantly. The unemployment rate continued the marked decline begun in the latter part of falling from percent in the fourth quarter of to percent by the final quarter of All sectors achieved further increases in real income in Aside from the farm sector however the gains were more modest than in the previous years of stronger fiscal stimulus and rapid recovery in real output. The growth of real per capita disposable income for example slowed from percent in a year when personal income taxes were reduced to percent over the quarters of During the years since the first year of cyclical recovery from the recession the growth rate has averaged percent slightly above the 2/2 percent trend for the two decades from through Corporate profits in dollars rose moderately further in following larger gains earlier in the recovery. Rising capacity utilization has lifted real profits at an average annual rate of percent since the cyclical low in Both the rise in capacity utilization and the improvement in profitability helped to spur a recovery of business capital investment to a percent share of GNP Farm income is of course less sensitive to fluctuations in overall economic growth but very sensitive to other factors such as weather foreign demand and agricultural policy. Farm income rose to an exceptionally high peak in from which it drifted down until A sharp recovery occurred last year with farm proprietors ' income reaching $ billion for the year as a whole ( national income and product accounts basis ) In dollars farm income in was $ billion or percent higher than a year earlier The division of income among employee compensation and other shares has remained relatively constant during the most recent years of expansion as shown in Table The share received by employees as wages and fringe benefits has risen slightly from the earlier part of the decade and is up substantially from the 1960s. The corporate profits share has improved significantly from recession lows although it remains well below the high level of the preceding decade One of the most discouraging developments of was the very slow growth of productivity. Output per hour in the private nonfarm business sector grew by only three-fourths of percent during the year. ( The reasons are explored in Chapter ) Weakness in productivity growth did much to exacerbate inflation. Since increases in nominal wage costs were offset to a lesser degree by productivity gains unit labor costs rose more rapidly than was anticipated and prices were pushed up faster. Furthermore labor de- TABLE Shares of national income [ Percent ] average average average ' Farm Nonfarm Corporate profits2 Item Compensation of employees Proprietors ' income : Other ' Preliminary With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments * Rental income of perscns ( with capital consumption adjustment ) and net interest Note. Detail may not add to percent because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis mand strengthened more rapidly than it would have done if productivity growth had been better and this may have been a factor in the acceleration in hourly earnings early in the year Unlike earlier years of the recovery when price indexes excluding food and energy rose at a fairly steady rate of around to ^ percent witnessed a pervasive acceleration of prices and labor compensation. Compensation per hour in the fourth quarter of last year was almost percent higher than a year earlier in contrast to the to 8/ percent rate of increase during the preceding years. And price increases were larger in than in earlier years for almost all categories of goods and services. The GNP deflator increased percent over the quarters of compared to percent in The consumer price index ( GPI ) rose by percent over the months ending in November compared with percent in This more rapid rise of prices especially consumer prices was attribuable not only to poor productivity performance but also to adverse developments in particular markets Food prices rose sharply since supplies of red meats were even more limited than had been expected and adverse weather damaged fruit and vegetable crops. Moreover the substantial depreciation of the dollar in international exchange markets was accompanied by higher prices of imports and of competing domestic products In view of the worsening of inflation the Administration in May postponed the effective date for its proposed tax reduction from October to January and reduced the proposed cut from $ billion to about $ billion. Growth in Federal outlays was also slower than had been estimated. For fiscal unified budget outlays were $ % billion below the estimate contained in last January 's budget and the estimate for fiscal has been revised down by $ billion. Real purchases of goods and services by all levels of government rose percent over the quarters of in contrast to the ^ to * percent that had been anticipated at this time last year Both domestic and international conditions in also prompted a more restrictive monetary policy. The Federal funds rate increased from 6J4 percent to about percent during the year. Other short-term interest rates rose commensurately. As is typical long-term rates rose less than those on short-term securities Tightening fiscal and monetary policies were one cause of the slower economic growth in than in The postponement of the tax cut and slower growth of Federal purchases contributed to a more moderate rise in consumer incomes and expenditures during than had been foreseen a year earlier. The inflation itself also played a part in slowing growth. Increases in food and import prices siphoned purchasing power away from most domestic consumers The largest single reason for the slower growth in than in was the leveling out of residential construction after a prolonged rise in housing starts beginning early in This leveling may have been partly the result of the increased restraint that developed in financial markets over the year The more important influences were probably a filling of backlogs of demand and the fact that the home-building industry was operating at nearly full capacity The economy at the end of still showed substantial momentum but the serious inflation problem and its interaction with the international value of the dollar have created a marked degree of uncertainty. Nominal interest rates are approaching historically high levels to some extent as a result of the necessary steps taken at the beginning of November as part of the dollar support package. Financial restraint has not yet had significant adverse effects on spending but it is difficult to predict how consumers and businesses will respond to rising interest rates in the current environment. Furthermore the continuation of inflation casts a shadow on the economic horizon. Compliance with the anti-inflation program announced by the President in October is fundamental to maintaining a strong economy. This program is discussed in detail in Chapter If success is achieved in containing inflation this year the prospects are favorable for maintaining a satisfactory growth rate and avoiding a recession. There are no major imbalances plaguing us. Capacity bottlenecks are relatively rare ; capacity has been growing at a sustainable pace ; inventories in most lines of business are reasonably balanced with sales ; and liquidity positions although declining are not severely strained. The international trade position has been improving Continued strength in the near term seems assured. Employment and output rose strongly in the fourth quarter. Orders for durable goods have increased substantially. And the January tax cut will help to sustain consumer spending early in the year. But the outlook for the latter part of will depend heavily on moderating inflation and on careful coordination between fiscal and monetary policies THE MAJOR SECTORS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND IN Private demand sustained the economic expansion through its fourth year. The continued strength of business fixed investment last year was a notable aspect of the composition of demand ( Table ) Housing starts demonstrated remarkable resilience ; despite tightening credit conditions they remained near the high level that had been reached at the end of Consumption expenditures grew somewhat faster than disposable income during the year ; and the saving rate declined from its already relatively low level at the end of In contrast growth in State and local spending over the quarters of was at a slower pace than in ; the effects of the economic stimulus measures many channeled through the State and local sector gradually diminished. Federal purchases in real terms declined slightly due to a variety of special factors TABLE Growth in the major components of real gross national product [ Percent change seasonally adjusted annual rate ] IV to IV Component Gross national product __ Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Government purchases : Federal State and local Domestic final sales3 IV to IV IV to I V i IV to to IV i Preliminary Largely attributable to fluctuations in Commodity Credit Corporation expenditures Gross national product excluding change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES Personal consumption is typically a major source of stimulus in the early stages of recovery. The current expansion is no exception. Between mid-1975 and the end of the personal saving rate declined substantially and the fraction of disposable income spent on durable goods rose. Consumption subsequently became a less important source of stimulus but it remained an expansionary factor in The increase in consumption came to percent in real terms during the last year one-half percentage point more than the increase in real disposable income Since the household sector has significantly increased its stocks of durable goods. In the process outstanding consumer debt rose enough to lift the ratio of debt repayments to disposable income from a low of percent to percent at the end of It is therefore not surprising that the rate of growth of spending ( in dollars ) for durable goods declined substantially to percent in compared to per- O cent in Nonetheless durable goods purchases in real terms held at about percent of real disposable income the level reached late in Auto sales remained at a high rate of 11T/4 million units a year but did not rise further. Despite steep price increases for foreign cars the foreign car share of the new car market declined relatively little during the year With durable goods sales remaining comparatively high the volume of outstanding consumer installment credit rose substantially further in ; during the year the net increase amounted to $ billion. In the fourth quarter repayments of consumer installment debt had reached percent of disposable personal income four-tenths of a percentage point above the peak ( the earliest available data for the present series ) Total repayments including mortgage repayments amounted to almost percent of disposable income in the third quarter The high fraction of consumers ' income absorbed by debt repayment has created some concern that a downturn in consumer demand might ensue. Survey data on the use of consumer installment credit suggests however that the increase in the ratios of installment credit extensions and repayments to disposable income may have been due to rapid growth in the number of households in the age bracket associated with relatively heavy credit usage. Rapid growth has occurred in the number of young adults in the to 34-year age bracket ; this group uses credit the most heavily An absence of excessive debt burdens is also suggested by the fact that delinquency rates on installment loans did not rise during the year At the start of last year the Administration forecast a rise of real consumption of about ^ percent measured fourth quarter to fourth quarter or about three-fourths percentage point more than the percent actually realized. The reason for this difference was slower growth of real disposable income. This slowdown in turn is partly explained by the postponement of the effective date of the proposed tax cut from October to January A more important cause however was the increase in the rate of inflation that occurred during the course of Effective tax rates were increased as households were moved into higher tax brackets. Furthermore the percent rise in food prices reduced the growth of real incomes for most consumers as did the price increases associated with the decline of the dollar 's value in foreign exchange markets In the past sharp unexpected increases in the rate of inflation have increased the personal saving rate. Inflation generally tends to raise the cost of borrowing and curtail the growth of real wealth. In addition consumers may become less confident of their future prospects. In contrast the saving rate declined in The continued strength of consumer expenditures in the face of high actual inflation rates and rising nominal interest rates may to some extent have stemmed from anticipatory buying in advance of expected price increases. Evidence from surveys suggests that some consumers considered the present time to be propitious for buying because they expected prices to rise further. This may have helped sustain the already high level of durable goods purchases Relative price changes appear to have contributed to changes in the composition of consumption during For example real purchases of transportation services and clothing and shoes rose more sharply than total consumption. In these areas price increases were below the average for all consumer goods and services. A shift in the composition of food consumption as a result of the rapid rise in food prices was probably the major reason for the decline in the measured real value of food consumption Whenever food prices rise steeply consumers tend to shift toward less costly foods although they do not necessarily eat smaller quantities of food. For example the sharp reduction in supply and sharp increase in the price of red meats generated a significant shift of consumption to poultry and dairy products HOUSING Housing activity remained on a plateau throughout last year following nearly years of steady advance. Real residential construction on a calendar year basis was percent above that in and there were million housing starts last year. The number of single-family starts was just below the 15/2-million record level of while multiunit starts rose to Over the quarters of however residential construction in real terms declined slightly in contrast to a rise of percent in the previous quarters. This flattening out of residential investment outlays was a dominant element in the slower growth of real GNP in In the first quarter housing starts fell about percent as a result of the inclement winter in the North Central and Northeast regions. The shortfall was largely made up in the second quarter ; then housing starts leveled out at an annual rate of around million units This leveling of housing starts and residential construction in was not surprising. Three years of strongly rising building activity had filled backlogs of demand created by the depressed level of new construction during the period of credit restraint and low income. Moreover the sharp rise in prices of a wide range of building materials suggests that the building industry was operating at close to capacity in Indeed the striking feature of the housing sector last year was its continued high level of activity in the face of sharply rising interest rates The resilience of housing in a year of tightening financial markets is largely attributable to the ability of specialized mortgage lenders to compete more effectively for savings. Beginning in June new regulations permitted commercial banks and thrift institutions to issue 6-month certificates of deposit on which rates paid are tied to those on 6-month Treasury bills. These new money market certificates sustained the supply of mortgage credit but they did not prevent interest rates on mortgages from rising along with other rates. The national average effective mortgage rate for new houses reached percent by the end of the year. The strength of demand particularly for single-family units in the face of such high mortgage interest rates results partly from the large number of people who were born in the baby boom of and are now reaching age brackets where the rate of homeownership is traditionally high. Demand may also be stimulated by the expectation that houses will continue to be a good inflation hedge. Over the past years purchase prices for new homes adjusted for changes in quality and size have risen at an annual rate about one-third faster than other prices. The tax deductibility of mortgage interest and the favorable tax treatment of capital gains from home sales add to the attractiveness of such investment Multifamily housing starts rose percent in They were still about below the peak of million which included close to publicly subsidized starts. The number of subsidized starts last year was almost up substantially from the lows of and For all rental housing the vacancy rate remained close to percent through the third quarter of last year a historically low figure. Rents rose percent almost percentage point more than in This probably contributed to an improvement in profits and helped to stimulate multiunit building BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT A year ago there was widespread concern that business fixed investment was not demonstrating its usual cyclical response to improvement in such basic determinants as the rate of growth of output business profits and cash flow and the cost of capital. In fact revised data for that became available last July showed a much stronger rise of investment than had appeared earlier and growth last year continued to be relatively strong. The rate of real growth of business fixed investment over the quarters of last year was percent ( Table ) For the year as a whole investment rose to percent of GNP close to its share in the high investment periods of the 1960s and early 1970s Investment in structures which had been disturbingly weak earlier in the recovery climbed percent in and by year-end it exTABLE Changes in real business fixed investment [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter ] Component Nonresidential fixed investment _ _ Structures Producers'durable equipment.. _ _ ___ _ _ _ _ Autos and trucks Other Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ceeded its previous peak reached in the fourth quarter of Growth of real spending for producers ' durable equipment on the other hand slowed to percent during the year in contrast to percent during the preceding year. Business purchases of autos and trucks grew much less rapidly than earlier. Strength in investment was greatest in durable goods manufacturing particularly in machinery and in stone clay and glass and also in electrical utilities and petroleum refineries The increased strength in investment during the past years reflected a response to growth in profits and increases in capacity utilization in manufacturing during the course of the recovery. Corporate profits ( with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) rose percent over the quarters ending in the third quarter of last year and amounted to % percent of GNP at the end of the period. This shows a substantial improvement from the percent average ratio in though little change from Capacity utilization in manufacturing rose from percent in the latter part of to almost percent at the end of In general utilization rates were higher in the primary processing industries than in the advanced processing industries. Utilization in basic metals industries which had been relatively low at the beginning of the year rose dramatically and greatly improved profits in those industries Thus the rate of investment has been relatively high in the past years and the structure of investment has begun to shift toward longer-lived assets. Nevertheless a further rise in the share of GNP directed to business fixed investment would be desirable in order to maintain growth of the capital stock in line with the rapidly rising labor force and to meet environmental and other regulatory requirements. This issue is discussed further in Chapter NET EXPORTS Real net exports fell substantially during the first years of the current expansion. During net exports in dollars appeared to be leveling out at about $ $ billion a little less than percent of real GNP. Late in and early last year howrever our net export position deteriorated further although the magnitude of this deterioration was exaggerated by the effects of the East Coast dockworkers ' strike Throughout much of the period exports grew slowly while imports of both oil and other goods increased sharply. By mid-1978 however reversals of these trends became evident ; net exports in dollars in the last half of were $ billion higher than in the first half Agricultural products were once again one of the leading export sectors Agricultural exports in dollars reached a relatively high level of $ billion in well above the $ 12.9-billion average in Poor crops in the Southern Hemisphere last spring and income growth in the rest of the world were the main reasons for the increased demand for U.S. farm products The volume of nonagricultural exports in the second quarter rebounded from depressed levels early in the year and continued to rise strongly through the rest of Accelerating growth in other countries made a significant contribution to this advance. The depreciation of the dollar in late and early which lowered U.S. export prices in foreign currencies also encouraged exports but its principal effect on exports will occur in Import volume grew at an annual rate of percent from the beginning of the expansion until the end of This is somewhat more rapid than past experience would suggest given the growth of U.S income. That trend has since been reversed. Oil imports were percent lower in than in the year before. The startup of million barrels per day of Alaskan oil production displaced imported oil and more than offset the increase in U.S. oil consumption last year. The volume of non-oil mechandise imports grew more slowly during than in because of less rapid U.S. growth and higher import prices due to dollar depreciation INVENTORY ACCUMULATION The cautious inventory policy that has characterized the current expansion continued in This caution was reinforced by sharply rising shortterm interest rates which increased the cost of holding inventories. The rate of inventory accumulation in dollars last year was about three-fourths of percent of GNP. The ratio of inventories to final sales ( in dollars ) for the nonfarm sector was nearly constant. The stability of the inventoryto-sales ratio is especially noteworthy in the face of the percent share of GNP absorbed by business fixed investment. Such a high investment share tends to raise the ratio of stocks to sales by virtue of its significant contribution to inventories of work in progress One exception to this stability of inventory-to-sales ratios was at general merchandise stores. The ratio of real inventories to sales in this sector which has shown a slight uptrend in the past decade appeared to be moving up sharply during the summer and early fall months. A stronger pace of sales at these stores late in the year helped to alleviate this problem GOVERNMENT SPENDING Government purchases rose less during than was expected a year ago. In real terms the actual increase was percent Slower than expected growth was confined principally to the Federal sector where the real value of purchases declined percent. Commodity Credit Corporation purchases had been expected to decline. The shortfall in other purchases was about evenly divided between delays in the buildup of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and shortfalls in numerous other categories of nondefense purchases which rose in nominal terms percentage points less than anticipated. The slow accumulation of petroleum reserves meant lower oil imports and on balance had no effect on aggregate demand in contrast to the other shortfalls State and local government purchases in real terms grew rapidly in the first half of last year but slowed in the second half. From the second quarter of through the second quarter of a common fiscal year for these units of government the real value of State and local purchases rose by percent. This was a significant contrast to the virtual stability in In nominal terms compensation of employees rose by percent over this period while other purchases rose by percent. Construction activity in this sector ( about one-third of other purchases ) had been declining in real terms between the last quarter of and the first quarter of but it appears to have risen substantially in In the 3-month period ending in October the real value of street and highway construction was percent higher than a year earlier sewer system construction was up percent and water supply construction was up percent The acceleration of spending by State and local governments in primarily reflects two forces : the rise in revenues during the economic expansion and a sharp increase in Federal aid. A substantial part of the stimulus package was funneled through State and local governments augmenting special countercyclical programs that had been initiated earlier The principal components of the package were an expansion of public service employment authorization of a second round of local public works grants and expansion of antirecession fiscal assistance grants to State and local governments. Public service employment exceeded its target of jobs by the spring of and subsequently declined somewhat. Local public works grants were fully committed by the end of but the expanded value of outlays followed with a lag. Distribution of antirecession fiscal assistance peaked in the third quarter of and ended a year later Real growth slackened in the second half of last year in part because States and localities entered new fiscal years in an environment influenced by public sentiment for tax reductions and restraint in government spending As a result of the increased growth in purchases and the pressure for tax reduction the aggregate budget surplus in the State and local sector declined sharply in The surplus on current and capital account ( but excluding social insurance trust accounts ) fell from a peak of $ billion ( annual rate ) in the third quarter of to $ billion a year later. Of the $ 7.5-billion decline that occurred between the second and the third quarters roughly $ % billion is attributable to California 's Proposition which mandated a reduction of about percent in local property taxes or about one-fourth in total local revenues. This local tax cut was followed by a substantial redistribution of funds from the State government which had been incurring a surplus to the local governments Proposition and similar measures in other States suggest the likelihood of significantly slower growth in State and local spending in the near future and an approximate balance or a deficit in the aggregate current and capital account of this sector. In the fall elections States had proposals on their ballots that would immediately limit State and local taxes or expenditures or both. Such measures passed in eight of these States. Referenda mandated substantial reductions of property taxes in Idaho and personal income taxes in North Dakota. The measures in other States differ in their form and the degree to which they will constrain taxes and expenditures but their enactment by large margins in some cases clearly indicates public sentiment for budgetary restraint. This is likely to put downward pressure on both spending and the current and capital account surplus Movements in this aggregate State and local surplus or deficit are dominated by national trends but conceal great diversity across States and among cities and areas within States. Per capita personal income perhaps the best single measure of taxable resources varies widely among States but the growth trends in various regions have been narrowing these differentials throughout the twentieth century. The regions with the highest income levels have tended to experience the slowest growth. These same regions have the highest per capita public sector expenditures the highest tax effort and the highest level of per capita Federal aid. Many forces help to create this pattern : high-income localities may choose to spend more on public services as well as on private goods and services ; where the cost of living is high more must be spent to obtain the same level of services ; and some high-income areas also contain significant concentrations of poverty and have greater needs. Extreme care must therefore be used in drawing general conclusions about the fiscal condition of the State and local sector or of individual areas within it from the aggregate surplus or deficit The social insurance accounts of State and local governments continued to show a moderately growing surplus throughout last year. By the end of the year the surplus had risen to $ billion up $ billion from a year earlier. Growth in this surplus has been augmented by strong earnings on investments as well as the excess of contributions over benefit payments Continued growth in this surplus is likely as States and localities move to provide actuarially sound funding of these trusts LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS Demand for labor continued to be unusually strong in Despite another sharp increase in the labor force participation rate the creation of new jobs exceeded the growth of the labor force by a substantial margin and the rate of unemployment declined further. The proportion of the working-age population employed continued to climb in reaching percent in the fourth quarter The civilian labor force rose by % million over the quarters of This is a percent annual growth rate well above the long-term trend rate of 2T/4 percent per year which results from population growth and a longterm upward drift in labor force participation rates Women teenagers and blacks contributed most to the growth of the labor force ; their participation rates rose to new highs. The participation rate for adult women increased percentage points to percent passing the percent mark for the first time. The teenage participation rate jumped percentage points to percent and that for blacks and other racial minorities increased percentage points to percent Employment increased by million from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of a smaller gain than in but still large by historical standards. The growth in employment was surprisingly large in relation to the rise in real GNP reflecting the year 's poor productivity performance. The employment gain was broadly based across industries with service-oriented and typically cyclical industries showing the largest gains Among manufacturing establishments most nondurable goods industries showed little or no growth in employment. Employment was reduced in such industries as apparel textiles leather products and tobacco manufactures. Some of the durable goods industries particularly those related to construction and transportation showed sizable gains. Among these were nonferrous primary metals fabricated metal products nonelectrical machinery ( particularly construction and related equipment and computers ) and aircraft Employment also increased in other major sectors during the year. Of these construction employment grew at the fastest pace with gain of percent. Other large gains in employment were registered by finance insurance and real estate ( percent ) ; retail trade ( percent ) ; and services ( percent ) Employment gains were greatest among women blacks and teenagers the groups that led the labor force expansion. The employment increase among adult women ( aged and over ) accounted for more than half of the total ; the percentage increase in their employment was more than double that of their male counterparts. Blacks and members of other racial minorities filled about one-third of the new jobs. Employment in these groups grew more than twice as fast as that of whites Overall unemployment declined from percent of the labor force in the final quarter of to percent in the fourth quarter of Most of the decline occurred early in the year. The unemployment rate for adult white women fell to percent but the white teenage unemployment rate showed little change since in that age bracket the growth in the labor force was as rapid as the rise in employment ( Table ) Earlier in the recovery the unemployment rate for blacks had declined more slowly than that for whites widening the gap between the two. In TABLE Unemployment rate and growth in employment and labor force by demographic group Unemployment rate ( percent IV Group Total Employment Civilian labor force Percent change from IV to IV Both sexes years Males years and over.. Females years and over White. Both sexes years Males years and over.. Females years and over Black and other. i Percent of civilian labor force in group specified ; seasonally adjusted s Adjusted for the increase of about in employment and labor force in January resulting from changes in the sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics some progress was made in reversing that pattern. The unemployment rate for blacks declined by percentage points to percent compared to the percentage point decline for whites to percent Since mid-1975 there has been a fairly steady reduction in the percentage of unemployed persons who report job loss as the reason for their unemployment. The percentage of unemployed who are reentrants to the labor force has been increasing fairly rapidly while the percentage who are new entrants and the percentage who quit their last job have both increased moderately These typical cyclical patterns continued in PRICES AND WAGES IN Price developments last year were a major source of disappointment and concern. The consumer price index rose by percent from November through last November ; producer prices of finished goods rose by percent from December to December and the GNP deflator rose by percent during the quarters of the year. In all cases the increases were considerably greater than in each of the preceding years As shown in Table the acceleration of prices was widespread. Energy prices which had been a major factor contributing to high inflation rates in the period did not play a large role last year. Food prices however were once again an important influence. Even if one eliminates food and energy prices from the price indexes thus removing the effects of external shocks to supply the remaining prices show an acceleration in The upward movement in these other prices was a response to a wide variety of forces including the pass-through of higher import prices associated with depreciation of the dollar the effects on home prices of in- TABLE Alternative measures of inflation [ Percent change December to December except as noted ] Measure 1978i Consumer price index : All items Food Energy _ All items less food and energy. Producer price index for finished goods : All finished goods Food consumption Other goods and services. Implicit price deflator for gross national product Foods All other. Capital equipment. Consumer goods Consumer price changes are from November to November Changes for price deflators are preliminary Data beginning January relate to all urban consumers ; earlier data relate to urban wage earners and clerical workers Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and gasoline motor oil coolant etc * Changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) centives to invest in land and houses as an inflation hedge and some supply bottlenecks in construction materials. A particularly troublesome phenomenon however was the slow growth in productivity. This added directly to costs of production and may indirectly have affected wage rates by increasing the demand for labor Table shows the acceleration in hourly earnings and in total compensation per hour the slower growth in productivity for the nonfarm private business sector and the effects of both of these forces on unit labor TABLE Measures of wage rates and costs [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter except as noted ] Item Adjusted hourly earnings index Union wage changes ( total effective adjustment ) ' Private nonfarm business sector all persons : Compensation per hour Contribution of : ( ) ( ) Wages and salaries and private fringes. Employer payments to social insurance Productivity Unit labor costs. Preliminary Adjusted for overtime in manufacturing and for interindustry employment shifts Agreements covering workers or more. Changes are for the four quarters ending in December through and ending in September for * Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics costs last year. Table indicates that the rise in prices in the nonfinancial corporate sector was less than the increase in unit labor costs. Nevertheless profits per unit of output still continued to increase although much less rapidly than in TABLE Changes in price costs and profits per unit of output private nonfinancial corporate sector [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter except as noted ) Item Labor costs Nonlabor payments Corporate profits Other nonlabor costs Implicit price deflator Changes are measured from third quarter to third quarter Interest rent depreciation and indirect business taxes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Chapter develops in considerably more detail the relation between wages productivity and prices. The following sections describe some of the special factors adding to inflation last year FOOD PRICES IN Retail food prices for the months ending in November rose percent well above the percent increase for all items excluding food Most of the increase in food prices occurred during the first half of the year and was very broadly based. Prices for meats poultry fish and eggs rose percent ( Table ) and the index for fruits and vegetables was up percent. The index for all food consumed at home was percent higher. Prices of imported food rose less than in however because coffee prices declined from the record highs of TABLE Changes in retail food prices [ Percent change seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Consumer price index component Nov. to Nov. Food away from home Food at home Meats poultry fish and eggs Dairy products __ Fruits and vegetables Sugar and sweets. ._ _ __ _ All food II III IV i Based on October-November data Based on unadjusted data Includes items not shown separately Note. Data beginning relate to all urban consumers ; earlier data relate to urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Increases of this magnitude in food prices were not anticipated as the year began and price forecasts for food had to be revised repeatedly in the following months. There were a number of reasons for the unfavorable developments : hog production failed to expand despite favorable grain prices ; cattle marketings continued to decline ; adverse weather curtailed some crops here and abroad ; government farm programs and price support levels were changed ; prices of major grains rebounded from abnormally low levels in ; costs of food processing and marketing went up ; and the increase in the minimum wage raised labor costs both for food marketing and for restaurant meals The cattle cycle has always been a major determinant of U.S. meat prices When ranchers become optimistic about future beef prices they hold back cows and heifers for breeding purposes. Over a period of years cattle numbers rise until overexpansion of the herd occurs and the large supplies lead to a fall in beef prices. The cycle then enters its liquidation phase until the herd is reduced enough to make the longer-term price outlook more promising. At that point the cycle begins again The past years have witnessed a prolonged liquidation phase. The number of cattle and calves on farms in the United States declined from million head in January to about million head at the end of last year. This represents a percent drop the sharpest ever recorded With fewer cattle available in slaughter was down by percent and per capita beef consumption declined by more than percent to pounds It was expected that lower beef production in would be largely offset by a higher output of pork and poultry. Analysis of the intentions of hog producers in late indicated a probable percent increase in pork production in the following year but the severe winter weather radically changed the outlook. Conception rates fell abortions increased and the average number of pigs per litter dropped percent below normal Disease rising feed costs uncertainty over government regulation of feed additives and use of nitrites in processing a.nd structural changes in the industry also kept hog production from reaching expected levels. When it became evident that pork production was not expanding meat prices began to rise very rapidly with strong consumer demand adding further pressure Adverse weather in also affected other food prices. Heavy rains in California delayed spring plantings last year and fresh vegetable prices rose dramatically. Most fruit crops were also reduced by bad weather apples being the only major exception. In December freezing temperatures in southern California and Arizona once again hurt citrus and fresh vegetable crops In contrast weather conditions during the growing season for grain were very favorable in the major producing areas. The corn crop reached a record of billion bushels and the national average corn yield exceeded bushels per acre for the first time in history. Other major grain harvests were also fairly ample Changes in government farm programs and increased price support levels for agricultural products also led to retail price increases for some food products in In January import fees on foreign sugar were raised in order to guarantee the effectiveness of the domestic price support program. In March land diversion programs were expanded to improve grain prices. The grain reserve programs which were instituted last year to provide some insurance against the price-raising consequences of a crop failure led to higher wheat and flour prices while the reserves were being built up. Dairy price support levels rose automatically in April and October as required by statute but lower production and strong demand kept prices of milk and dairy products above those higher support levels Increasing costs and prices in the rest of the economy also affected food prices. The value of farm commodities together with the cost of imported foods such as coffee and cocoa accounts for percent of retail food expenditures. The other percent represents the cost of transporting processing and marketing the commodities. Thus when the costs of labor transportation packaging and other inputs increased last year the food sector was affected as were other sectors. Approximately one-half of the food price increase in was attributable to higher prices for these marketing services The percent increase in the ( nonfarm ) minimum wage at the beginning of may have had a particularly large effect on restaurant and institutional food prices and on food marketing costs. Since many workers in these industries are paid the minimum wage an increase in that wage would quickly translate into higher costs. For food consumed away from home which represents about one-fourth of total food consumption prices rose percent during the year DEPRECIATION OF THE DOLLAR Another source of inflationary pressure in the U.S. economy during was the decline in the value of the dollar relative to other currencies An index of the value of the dollar relative to the currencies of other industrial countries computed by using the percentage of world trade of each country as its weight ( multilateral basis ) shows a percent decline in the dollar from September to September Weighted by each country 's share of U.S. trade ( bilateral basis ) the decline was percent The difference between the two indexes is largely caused by the high share of Canadian trade in the latter index and by the percent decline of the Canadian dollar relative to the U.S. dollar Changes in the relative value of the dollar affect the price of imported goods and thus the cost of living. Over the quarters of prices of nonfuel imports rose 15J/2 percent. This was substantially less than the percent rise in foreign prices in dollar terms in the largest countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The difference between these two price movements indicates that foreign producers absorbed a substantial amount of the fall in the dollar by reducing their profit margins on exports. Such behavior is consistent with historical experience The rise in the prices of imported goods has a further effect on domestic prices by raising wage demands and by allowing price increases for goods that compete with imports. The econometric evidence suggests that over a 2-year period these indirect effects might amount to about twice the direct effects on prices of final products. A percent depreciation will generally result in a roughly 11/2 percent increase in prices by the end of a to 3-year period with approximately half of the effect coming in the first year The impact of the decline of the dollar on domestic prices is limited by the denomination of oil prices in dollars. As a result the price of imported fuel does not rise as the dollar falls. In addition the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) did not raise its prices in The large increase in OPEC prices announced on December for means that this moderating influence will not be repeated this year Inflation affects the depreciation of the dollar as well as being affected by it. Countries with low inflation rates tend to have strong currencies and the appreciation of their currencies helps to hold down the rise of their domestic price levels ( Table ) Relative inflation rates are by no means the only factors that influence the relative value of currencies. Indeed in the short run factors such as relative interest rates differences in real growth the size of the current account balance and expectations of traders in foreign exchange markets are likely to be dominant influences TABLE Changes in currency values and consumer prices by country third quarter to third quarter [ Percent change ] Consumer price index Country Canada France Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development HOUSING COSTS Housing is the largest single component of the consumer price index comprising over one-third of the expenditures covered by this measure. This component encompasses many items such as rent utilities and home purchase costs. Most of these costs have been rising very rapidly Housing is one sector in which a classical demand-pull inflation seems to have been occurring in The strong demand for houses has raised the price of both land and materials. The average price of a new single- family house rose by 13/ percent in the months ending in October Demands for construction materials have strained the capacity of some supplying industries and prices of building materials have risen strongly Lumber prices for example have risen percent in the last years and shortages of gypsum products have been common. The increase in energy prices since has also affected prices of building materials particularly the prices of insulation and asphalt products such as shingles If housing starts taper off this year as expected some of these problems should become less severe. Energy conservation tax credits enacted late in however may keep pressure on prices of insulation Some have questioned whether the widely used consumer price index appropriately measures the real burden of rising housing costs in periods of rapid inflation. Capturing the magnitude of rising housing costs in the index is indeed difficult. Rental costs in multifamily dwellings are in principle fairly easy to measure. Owner occupancy poses different problems however because of the distinction between the costs of owning a house and the costs of using its services During the most recent revision of the consumer price index the Bureau of Labor Statistics reviewed the conceptual basis for the home purchase portion of the index. In principle there are two ways to measure the cost of owner-occupied housing. The first is to measure the home prices mortgage interest rates and other cost elements faced by those buying a home during the period in question. This is the method that has been used historically in the CPI. A second approach would be to price the flow of services from housing using rents on equivalent units as a measure of the true cost of living in a house. This method is used in the national income and product accounts and in the implicit deflators for GNP and its components When home prices move up rents on comparable units will tend to rise Unless vacancy rates are very low however rents will adjust upward only gradually to a level that fully reflects the new and higher price of homes Rent controls in some areas may contribute to the slowness of the process of adjustment. Consequently in a period when housing prices are rising rapidly the measurement technique now used in the CPI will show a faster increase in the cost of home-ownership than the alternative index based on equivalent rents. Conversely when the increase in home prices slows rents may keep rising for some time in order to close the gap and the current CPI technique will show a slower price increase than the alternative Under either method of measurement however a period of rapid rise in housing prices would increase the housing cost index faster than the rise in out-of-pocket costs paid by homeowners who had earlier purchased their homes at lower prices and contracted for mortgages at lower interest rates An important part of the total rise in the CPI last year stemmed from the homeownership component. New home prices rose by percent and mort- gage interest rates by percent. Only about percent of homeowners those who actually bought a house last year were directly affected by the resulting increases in the cost of homeownership MEDICAL CARE Medical care costs have added significantly to inflation for most of the past decade. Except for the period of mandatory wage-price controls from through early medical care costs have risen much more rapidly than other prices. From through the cost of medical care rose at an average annual rate of percent compared to percent for the total consumer price index. During the increase in medical care prices slowed to percent about the same rate as the total CPI The reason for this moderation is not completely clear. Prospects for mandatory cost containment legislation may have been partly responsible ; the success of some of the State cost containment programs may also have been influential. It should be noted however that total hospital expenditures continued to increase as a share of GNP since the deceleration early in in the prices of many hospital services was partially offset by greater use of these services. A significant reacceleration of hospital costs also occurred late in These developments point out the need for some more permanent means of containing the rise of hospital costs. The Administration will resubmit legislation with this aim in AGGREGATE DEMAND MANAGEMENT IN The focus of aggregate demand policy changed during the past year as inflation accelerated and unemployment fell faster than had been expected. The acceleration of inflation in the context of continued large employment gains prompted a lowering of the target for output growth Fiscal and monetary policies shifted toward restraint In the fourth quarter of during the budget planning period the unemployment rate stood at percent. With normal increases in productivity a economic growth rate well above the long-run trend would have been needed to achieve a further significant reduction in unemployment. Fiscal policy was designed to meet that objective by continuing though gradually reducing the stimulative effects of the Federal budget The stimulus measures adopted in were expected to have a dwindling effect in the course of A reduction in income taxes to take effect in the final quarter of the year was proposed to offset the dampening effect on real growth of increases in social security taxes and of the higher effective tax rates resulting from inflation. Some normal cyclical rise in interest rates was anticipated but it was expected that monetary policy would be generally accommodative During the early months of the year however it became apparent that the slow growth in productivity and the associated sharp increases in the O demand for labor were contributing to a serious acceleration of inflation For this reason it became appropriate to slow the growth of the economy to preclude the emergence of excess demand. This slowing would provide an environment in which structural anti-inflation measures and the dollar support program could be effective FISCAL POLICY Shifts in the high-employment budget offer a useful way to summarize changes in fiscal policy. The adjustments made to obtain the high-employment budget remove from actual receipts and expenditures the effects of fluctuations in the economy. Consequently this budget shows the surplus or deficit as it would he if the economy were moving smoothly along its potential growth path. Changes in the high-employment surplus or deficit reflect the effects on receipts attributable to inflation and to growth in potential real GNP as well as to discretionary changes in Federal expenditures and tax rates. Short-run changes in the high-employment surplus or deficit are relatively insensitive to assumptions regarding the level of potential GNP Table shows that fiscal policy shifted toward restraint in For the calendar year as a whole the high-employment deficit was reduced by almost one-half from and declined continuously through The tax cut at the beginning of will temporarily increase the high-employment deficit but the high-employment budget will be about in balance by mid-1980 The reduction in the high-employment deficit occurred for four reasons. First the effects of the stimulus package gradually dissipated : public service employment peaked slightly above jobs in the spring TABLE Actual and high-employment Federal receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Amounts in billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Actual Calendar year or quarter High-employment Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures Amount Percent of GNP Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures Amount Percent of GNPi : IV : II III IV High-employment surplus or deficit as percent of high-employment gross national product Preliminary Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers and antirecession fiscal assistance to State and local governments ceased at the end of the third quarter. Second inflation and real growth moved individuals into higher tax brackets during the year Third Federal spending rose less rapidly than had been anticipated The increase in total expenditures as measured in the national income and product accounts was $ billion from the end of to the end of This increase amounts to only percent in nominal terms in a period when the GNP deflator rose percent. The substantial shortfall in fiscal from the rate of spending anticipated in the January budget came to $ ^ billion on a unified budget basis or percent of total outlays. The prospect of a shortfall became apparent fairly early last year but no attempts were made to offset it since additional fiscal restraint was a desirable outcome in view of unfolding economic circumstances For fiscal which began last October budget projections were similarly scaled down ; on a unified basis fiscal Federal spending is now expected to be $ billion or $ billion below the original estimates made last January ( adjusted to include earned-income tax credits in excess of taxpayers ' liabilities which are now treated as outlays ) The fourth element in the shift toward fiscal restraint was the President 's decision to revise his tax reduction proposal. Originally the Administration had requested a $ 25-billion tax reduction effective on October In May the President asked that the net reduction be scaled back to $ billion and its effective date postponed to January Reduction was still needed to offset the fiscal drag stemming from the changes in effective tax rates occasioned by inflation and real growth from increases in social security taxes previously enacted and from the $ 6.6-billion increase in social security taxes legislated in to take effect in Nevertheless a smaller and later reduction appeared appropriate in view of the need for greater fiscal restraint. The Congress ultimately enacted a $ 20.6-billion reduction of personal and business taxes plus a $ billion increase in outlays for the earned income tax credit. This package yields a net revenue loss of $ billion when allowance is made for the expiration of $ billion in employment tax credits. These tax measures are discussed in Chapter These adjustments to fiscal policy moved the budget more quickly toward two previously stated objectives of the Administration : reducing Federal outlays to percent of GNP and achieving a balanced budget in the context of reasonable economic growth ( Table ) Fulfillment of these objectives is a major challenge because it will require offsetting the upward pressure on Federal outlays from rising prices and from automatic increases in entitlement programs under current law MONETARY POLICY Two major developments dominated monetary and financial conditions during The first was a substantial rise in interest rates. The second was the introduction of new financial instruments through which thrift TABLE Federal unified budget outlays ^ as percent of gross national product and budget surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Current dollars ] Budget outlays as percent of GNP Fiscal years Total i Income security National defense Budget surplus or deficit ( ) ( billions of dollars ) * _ 1977__ 1978__ ( estimate ) ( estimate ) average. average. average. average. Includes other outlays not shown separately Transition quarter averaged with fiscal year Sources : Department of Commerce Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers institutions could continue to attract funds an innovation that modei * ted significantly the degree to which high short-term interest rates depressed housing construction Chart shows the rise in both short- and long-term interest rates. These increases came in several phases. A small upward movement in short-term rates occurred early in the year after the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate in January in response to international developments. This was followed by a period of relative stability through mid-April as the slow pace of economic activity in the first quarter led to quite moderate growth in the monetary aggregates. Very rapid growth in the aggregates began in the second quarter and persisted into the summer. The efforts of the monetary authorities to moderate the growth of the aggregates resulted in substantial increases in short-term interest rates. The Federal funds rate rose by percentage points between March and the middle of October. Most other short-term rates rose in an approximately parallel fashion. Measures to defend the dollar announced at the beginning of November prompted a further dramatic increase in rates. The discount rate was raised by a full percentage point from 8J/2 to 9l/ % percent on November ; between then and the end of the year the Federal funds rate rose by another three-fourths of a percentage point to about percent The movement of long-term interest rates was determined by current developments in short-term rates by anticipations of future interest rate and price developments and by supply and demand considerations in capital markets. Long-term rates drifted up somewhat during the first quarter when demands for business credit remained strong but leveled out subsequently as expectations developed that rates might be nearing cyclical peaks. With short-term rates continuing to increase the yield curve by October had become inverted ; that is long-term rates were below shortterm rates Chart Selected Interest Rates and Bond Yields PERCENT PER ANNUM SHORT-TERM RATES I III II II i1I IIII II IIIIIIII IIIIIII IIII I11IIII II II III 1I II III IIIII1II I BOND YIELDS u> I ! II ! I II I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I NOTE : TREASURY BONDS ARE CONSTANT MATURITIES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE Behavior of the Major Monetary Aggregates During the first half of the year the behavior of the monetary aggregates paralleled fluctuations in the real economy. Growth of Mi ( demand deposits and currency ) and M2 ( including in addition to M1 ? time and savings deposits other than negotiable certificates at large commercial banks ) was quite slow in the first quarter and much faster in the second quarter. Growth of these two monetary aggregates continued to be relatively strong in the third quarter despite rising interest rates and slowing growth of real GNP Between the final quarter of and the third quarter of last year Mi grew at an percent annual rate well above the upper end of the Federal Reserve 's long-term target growth range of to ^ percent. Studies that relate the real value of Ma to real GNP and to short-term interest rates indicate that the usual historical relationship held up fairly well through this period. The continuation of rapid growth of the monetary aggregates through the third quarter appears to have been largely attributable to the rapid increases in nominal GNP which raised transactions demands. There was virtually no growth in Mi during the fourth quarter when interest rates were rising sharply In the latter half of the year two major innovations in financial markets tended to change the usual relation between the monetary aggregates on the one side and economic activity and interest rates on the other. The first innovation was the new regulation permitting commercial banks and nonbank thrift institutions on June to begin issuing money market certificates ( MMCs ) of 6-month maturity in minimum denominations of $ Commercial banks were permitted to pay a maximum yield on these certificates equal to the discount rate on 6-month Treasury bills but interest could be compounded if the bank chose to do so. The maximum rate for nonbank thrift institutions is one-fourth of a percentage point above the rate payable by commercial banks The second innovation introduced on November was a regulation permitting commercial banks to offer individual customers an automatic transfer service whereby funds are automatically transferred from a customer 's savings account to cover needs for funds in the customer 's checking account. By the end of the year it is estimated that there were $ billion in accounts covered by this service. Use of these services can be expected to grow over the future The introduction of MMCs influenced the growth of M2 by enabling banks to retain time and savings deposits that they would otherwise have lost. Growth in M remained very strong in the third quarter at a percent annual rate but slowed significantly in the fourth quarter to percent The introduction of the automatic transfer service began to have a significant effect on the growth of Mi in the last months of During November and December Mi declined $ billion. In the absence of the new deposit services Mi probably would have risen by about $ billion In response to this effect on the behavior of the conventional aggregates the Federal Reserve defined a new aggregate Mi It includes in addition to Mi all passbook savings accounts at commercial banks and all checkable deposits at nonbank thrift institutions ( negotiable order of withdrawal accounts demand deposits at mutual savings banks and share draft accounts at credit unions ) This aggregate thus includes all transactions accounts plus those accounts from which transfers to the automatic transfer service accounts are most likely to occur. The annual rate of growth of this aggregate dropped from percent in the first half of to percent in the second half Role of MMCs in Monetary Restraint The new money market certificates played a critical role in the way the economy responded to monetary restraint in J978. Experience would have led one to expect that the large rise in interest rates would sharply curtail the availability of mortgage credit during with strongly adverse effects on home building. The growth of mortgage credit did taper off somewhat during the year and residential construction activity did flatten out. The magnitude of these responses was very small however compared with past periods of tight financial markets In previous periods of sharply rising market interest rates individuals began at some point to divert funds from deposits in thrift institutions to market securities because of the low ceiling rates on deposit instruments The growth of thrift deposits usually slowed to a percent range in such periods and net new inflows ( excluding crediting of interest ) fell to around zero. This necessarily slowed the acquisition of mortgages by these institutions and consequently housing credit dried up During late and early this same pattern began to emerge After the introduction of MMCs in the middle of the year however the pattern was dramatically reversed. As a result mortgage acquisitions declined much less than in previous periods of rapidly rising market interest rates The introduction of these instruments does not wholly resolve the disintermediation problem or entirely buffer the housing market from credit restraint. Home buyers are affected by the higher cost of credit although they are affected much less than before by the reduced availability of credit Furthermore since mortgage rates do not rise commensurately with shortterm rates the thrift institutions are confronted with reduced cash flow for two reasons. First the spread between the cost of new deposits and the return from new mortgages narrows. Second the composition of deposits becomes more heavily weighted by the higher-interest certificates. Since this is occurring faster than the mortgage portfolio is rolled over the average cost of deposits is rising relative to the average yield on mortgages. In early however the spread between the return on the mortgage portfolio and the cost of deposits had become quite large and the narrowing that occurred in the second half of the year was relatively small. Therefore barring a prolonged period of very narrow spreads between mortgage rates and shortterm rates savers the thrift institutions and the housing market will all benefit from the new instrument The reduced sensitivity of mortgage credit availability to rising market interest rates smooths the adjustment of the economy to credit restraint It also implies however that interest rates must move through somewhat larger cyclical swings to achieve the effect on aggregate demand that would formerly have resulted from variations in both credit availability and interest rates. Such a change also means that the distribution and timing of the response of the economy to monetary restraint will be different. The period ahead will require adroit reading of the signals to judge the degree of restraint that is occurring and is appropriate CREDIT FLOWS IN Credit flows had been very strong at the end of and remained so through the first part of last year. The ratio of total funds raised in credit markets ( exclusive of corporate equities ) to GNP reached a record peak in the third quarter of and moved only slightly lower in the following quarters. Some decline developed in the second and third quarters of last year. The ratio of total private funds raised to private GNP remained on a record high plateau from the third quarter of through the first quarter of last year but then began to decline The composition of credit flows shifted during the year. Mortgage credit flows peaked late in and then moderated somewhat. With the dollar value of residential construction continuing to rise the ratio of net home mortgage extensions to household investment in residential construction turned downward last year from a very high peak. The large volume of mortgage credit that was being used in late and early relative to residential construction suggested that homeowners were realizing capital gains on houses when ownership changed hands and were using the funds to finance other types of expenditures Consumer credit continued to grow strongly through the first half of the year reflecting the strength of new car sales and sales of other durables The rate of installment credit extensions leveled out however in the second half of the year on a plateau slightly below the June peak Federal Government borrowing also declined relative to the total of funds raised in credit markets. The moderation in Federal borrowing from domestic sources resulted from the shift in fiscal policy previously discussed and also from an increase in official foreign purchases of U.S. securities with dollars obtained through intervention in foreign exchange markets The nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business sector borrowed heavily in the fourth quarter of and the first quarter of last year. Indeed credit market funds raised in the first quarter were more than a third greater than a year earlier. The amount of funds raised leveled out subsequently at an annual rate below this peak but exceeded all previous years except Business borrowing from commercial banks in particular was exceptionally heavy in the first half but slowed in the second half of the year. The strength of capital spending relative to internal funds is the primary reason for the rapid growth in business credit demands. The ratio of external funds raised to capital expenditures rose to slightly under one-half in which is a high though not unprecedented figure Efficiency of Financial Markets Both of the innovations in financial markets described above work to provide individuals with a competitive return on their savings. The automatic transfer services perform another valuable function : they reduce the loss of efficiency associated with substantial shifts of funds from one type of deposit to another in response to interest rate differentials. Furthermore to preserve the competitive position of nonbank thrift institutions the Federal Home Loan Bank Board is considering giving nonbank thrift institutions authority to receive deposits from which third-party payments may be made Such a move might further stabilize their deposit flows These changes however entail cumbersome bookkeeping and transactions procedures. A further consolidation of the institutional changes initiated this year would be to move toward a uniform structure for commercial banks and nonbank thrift institutions under which all of these institutions would have authority to accept household checking deposits and to pay interest on them. The bill proposed by the Administration in the last Congress to authorize negotiable order of withdrawal accounts for all U.S. banks and thrift institutions was one approach to this reform CHAPTER Reducing Inflation E CONOMIC POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES faces a formidable challenge in the years immediately ahead. Inflation must be brought under control if the strength of the economy is to be maintained and if the significant gains in employment and output over the past years are not to be jeopardized. Unwinding an inflation that has been building for more than a decade will require monetary and fiscal restraint to moderate the pace of economic growth. We will have to learn to achieve social objectives within the constraints of tight government budgetary policies. Widespread compliance with the President 's standards for wage and price behavior will be essential This chapter presents a diagnosis of our inflationary problem and explains what the Administration is doing about it. Special factors were partly responsible for the acceleration of inflation during as Chapter indicated but there was also a substantial increase in the underlying rate of inflation. Unit labor costs rose sharply reflecting some acceleration of wage inflation and a deterioration in the growth of productivity. These developments along with their important implications for economic policy will be analyzed in the following discussion THE ACCELERATION OF INFLATION The current inflation has been gathering momentum for over years. The acceleration began in the late 1960s when the economic stimulus of the Vietnam war added pressures to an economy already approaching high employment. With the economy operating at very high rates of resource utilization the rate of inflation rose from less than percent in to about percent in In policies of monetary and fiscal restraint were applied to cool the overheated economy but the results were disappointing. The economy headed into recession and unemployment rose from 3J/2 percent of the labor force in to over percent by the end of Nevertheless inflation continued at a rapid pace. The rise of consumer prices excluding food continued unabated in and the rate of increase of average hourly earnings remained unchanged. W7hen inflation failed to respond significantly to macroeconomic policy a 90-day wage and price freeze was announced on August ; it was followed by a period of mandatory wage and price controls Relaxation of the controls began in in response to distortions and inequities that had begun to develop in the economy. The relaxation coincided with a second acceleration of prices which was in part a consequence of rapid economic growth. Between the fourth quarter of and the first quarter of real gross national product ( GNP ) increased at an annual rate of % percent unemployment dropped sharply and capacity utilization rose. The major inflationary pressures however came from a series of large external shocks to the American economy. A simultaneous expansion in virtually all the industrial countries and the percent depreciation of the dollar between mid-1971 and mid-1973 raised the cost of foreign goods A worldwide crop shortage caused food prices to soar. Finally the oil embargo by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) and the subsequent rise in oil prices contributed to a nearly percent increase in the energy component of the consumer price index ( GPI ) from the end of to the end of In early the rate of inflation fell substantially from the doubledigit rate of The severity of the recession was partly responsible. But smaller increases in food and energy prices and the end of the price bulge associated with the lifting of controls were important contributing factors. By the middle of the underlying rate of inflation was down to the to ^ percent range. There was no further improvement during the early stages of the recovery despite continued high unemployment and much excess capacity Each of the two major episodes of accelerating inflation in the last decade was fed in part by relatively stimulative fiscal and monetary policies and each was followed by a recession stemming in part from more restrictive policy actions. But in neither case did the increases in unemployment and excess capacity bring inflation down to the levels that preceded the acceleration Once under way a high rate of inflation generates responses and adaptations by individuals and institutions that perpetuate the wage-price spiral even in periods of economic slack. Expectations develop that wages and prices will continue to rise at a rapid rate. In response an increasing proportion of income is adjusted to inflation by indexation arrangements. Employee groups attempt to match the wage gains of other workers in order to avoid declines in their own relative earnings. And multiyear collective bargaining agreements which now cover over percent of the workers in large collective bargaining units provide pay increases that are more likely to reflect past conditions than the actual economic environment prevailing during the term of the agreement The formal and informal adaptations to a long-standing inflation exert a powerful force tending to sustain inflation even after the originating causes have disappeared. Braking the momentum of past inflation would therefore have been a serious problem for economic policy makers even without the acceleration of prices and wages during The price and wage developments of this past year have made the task even more difficult INFLATION IN The rate of price increase rose markedly in Some of the acceleration was the result of special factors discussed in the previous chapter : the sharp rise in food prices early in the year and the fall in the value of the dollar that exceeded the depreciation warranted by underlying economic conditions. A minor offset to this was the stability of world oil prices after OPEC elected not to raise oil prices in the face of the sluggish world economic recovery and the consequently weak demand for oil The larger part of the acceleration however came from an unexpected increase in the underlying rate of inflation. The rise in consumer prices excluding food and energy quickened from percent in to percent in as shown in Table This is the development that has posed the most serious challenge to economic policy The behavior of the underlying rate of inflation is related to movements in costs. In the increase in unit labor costs in the private nonfarm sector stepped up considerably from percent in to percent TABLE Annual rate of change in selected consumer and producer prices and employment costs [ Percent ] Item Relative importance December ( percent ) to to to Consumer prices All items Food Energy All items less food and energy Producer prices for finished goods All finished goods Finished goods less foods Private nonfarm business all persons Compensation per hour Contribution of : Wages and salaries and private fringesEmployer contributions to social insurance Output per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Preliminary Through changes are measured from December to December for prices and from fourth quarter to fourth quarter for private nonfarm business data. For changes are from November to November for prices and from fourth quarter to fourth quarter for private nonfarm business data Not available Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers in Both of the determination factors of unit labor costs contributed to the acceleration. Compensation per hour went up from a percent rate of increase in to a percent rate during Productivity which had risen only percent for nonfarm business in advanced even more slowly at a percent rate in The acceleration of cost pressures during was unevenly distributed In manufacturing unit labor costs which had risen percent in increased at an annual rate of percent in Productivity in manufacturing rose more rapidly in than in ( compared to percent in ) However the most substantial rise in the rate of increase of unit labor costs was in nonmanufacturing where productivity actually declined Most econometric analyses of the relation between prices and wages conclude that fluctuations in productivity growth that are expected to be temporary are not usually translated into similar fluctuations in prices For that reason price movements in the nonfarm sector are less volatile than year-to-year changes in unit labor costs. And in the sharp acceleration in unit labor costs stemming in part from the very poor productivity record was not fully matched by an acceleration in prices charged by nonfarm producers. Even so the rise in unit labor costs was still a major factor in the acceleration of inflation ( Chart ) Chart Unit Labor Costs and Deflator Nonfarm Business PERCENT CHANGE FROM YEAR EARLIER A A UNIT LABOR COSTS / i \ IN/ " * IMPLICIT PRICE ^ DEFLATOR / V V I I I / NOTE : DATA RELATE TO ALL PERSONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR EXPLAINING THE INFLATION The worsening in the underlying rate of inflation during raises a fundamental question for macroeconomic policy : Has the U.S. economy reached full employment of its labor and capital resources ? The question involves three issues concerning demand and unit cost pressures that are analyzed in the remainder of this section. The first is whether capacity utilization became so tight that there was excess demand in product markets driving up prices relative to costs. The second has two aspects : How much did the wage acceleration that occurred in reflect excess demand in labor markets and do those markets now approximate conditions in which further reductions in aggregate unemployment would raise the inflation rate ? The third issue relates to productivity : To what extent is the recent disappointing behavior an aberration and to what extent does it reflect a more fundamental slowdown in the potential growth of the economy during the years immediately ahead ? How Tight Were Product Markets in ? During the course of the recovery rates of capacity utilization have increased significantly and they rose still further in At the end of the percent rate of capacity utilization in manufacturing indicated by the Federal Reserve index was still well below the highs of the early 1950s and mid-1960s and somewhat below the highs of the period ( Chart ) In the materials-producing industries where high rates of capacity utilization in were an important source of inflation current rates of utilization have remained substantially below the peaks ( Chart ) Statistical measures of capacity utilization offer only an imperfect guide to the presence or absence of excess demand in product markets. There is other evidence however that industrial capacity was not under severe pressure. Typically periods of capacity strain lead to sharp increases in unfilled orders especially in the durable goods industries. But ratios of unfilled orders to shipments have remained far below earlier highs both for durable goods industries as a whole and for the nondefense capital goods industries ( Chart ) At the same time excess demand developed in a few industries. For example the building materials industry appeared to be under demand pressure because of capacity limitations. The very high and sustained level of single-family home building combined with a rapid growth in home installation of energy-saving measures led to a sharp increase in demand for building materials and thus to strained capacity. As a consequence prices of lumber wallboard cement insulation and related products rose steeply Moreover although productive capacity was not generally strained over the past year continued growth of industrial production at rates experienced Chart Capacity Utilization Rates PERCENT- ^ MANUFACTURING i i MATERIALS i I I i I I i i i I i i i i i I i i i I I I I I I i i i i i i i U SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Chart Unfilled Orders-Shipments Ratio Durable Goods Manufacturing RATIO ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) ^ NONDEFENSE CAPITAL GOODS TOTAL DURABLE GOODS i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i I i I I I I I I I I I i I II I 11II11 II1 I y UNFILLED ORDERS-SHIPMENTS RATIO FOR LAST MONTH IN QUARTER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I I I I in would move utilization rates into the range associated with excess demand pressure on prices Pattern of Wage Behavior Wages began to accelerate early in The exact quarterly pattern and degree of acceleration vary according to the measure of the rate of wage increase but all broad indicators show a similar pattern of wage acceleration in late and early ( Table ) For the second half of the year wage increases were lower than in the first but still above the and experience TABLE Selected measures of the rate of wage increase private nonfarm economy [ Percent change ; quarterly data are annual rates ] Measure II III IV Average hourly earnings2 Adjusted hourly earnings index2 3___ Employment cost index ( ' ) ( ) ( s ) Union Nonunion __ _ Preliminary Annual changes are measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter ; quarterly changes for are from preceding quarter. Data are seasonally adjusted This index un earnings series above it excludes overtime pay in manufacturing and is adjusted his ndex unlike the average hourly eanings se he o to eliminate the effects of interindustry employment shifts oyment shifts g s December to December ; change for is from September to Changes for and are measured from D September ; quarterly changes are within quarter. Data are not seasonally adjusted S t b t l h ithi t Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The pattern of acceleration and subsequent deceleration in the first quarters of the year was dominated by the behavior of wages of nonunion workers. In early for the first time in several years nonunion wage rates increased faster than union rates. This development is normal in labor markets when unemployment falls and the percent increase in the minimum wage for nonfarm workers on January undoubtedly contribute to the high rate of nonunion wage increases in the first half of the year The difference between union and nonunion wage changes in was also influenced by the collective bargaining calendar : comparatively few major contracts ( those covering or more workers ) were scheduled for renegotiation in Since increases tend to be largest in the first year of a collective bargaining contract years of light bargaining generally are years of lower average wage increases for union members. Wage adjustments for union workers may be attributed to three different sources : current settlements past settlements ( those that provide for deferred increases ) and automatic cost-of-living escalators ( Table ) For the first months of the portion attributable to current settlements was down sharply from its O level while that attributable to past settlements and automatic costof-living escalation was greater than in The decrease in the current settlement portion came about solely because there were fewer new labor agreements not because the average wage increases granted in new settlements were smaller. As the lower part of Table shows the new settlements reached in in major contracts provided for somewhat larger first year increases than settlements in had done TABLE Mean wage and benefit adjustments in major collective bargaining agreements [ Percent ] Type of change quarters ended II III IV Year II III Sept ? ? i n ? s Wage rate settlements ( or more workers ) : First-year adjustment Average over life of contract fi Wage and benefit settlements ( or more workers ) : First-year adjustment Average over life of contract i in ? f ) fi fi Sept Effective wage-rate changes : Total effective adjustments Adjustment resulting from : Current settlement3 Prior settlement Escalator provision Increases in new settlements : Preliminary Effective wage rate changes are wage rate changes actually going into effect per worker ynder major contracts in the respective quarters. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Changes resulting from collective bargaining settlements made that calendar year * Quarterly data are at annual rates Note. Quarterly data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics In comparison with settlements labor contracts concluded in show an acceleration in wages over the life of the contract. Wage rate adjustments in new settlements averaged percent for the first year and percent annually over the life of the contract during the year ending in the third quarter of compared to percent for the first year and percent over the life of the contract for the same period a year earlier ( These measures exclude cost-of-living adjustments tied to the future rate of price inflation. ) There is considerable evidence that the responsiveness of wages to overall changes in economic conditions is significantly greater in nonunion than in unionized labor markets. Changes in average wage rates paid to union members are not significantly related to the contemporaneous unemployment rate or alternative measures of labor market pressure although they are sensitive to price changes because of cost-of-living adjustments. Most of the inertia in average union wages is a by-product of multiyear labor agree- ments in which the size of agreed wage increases is more closely tied to economic conditions during and immediately preceding the renegotiation of a contract than to conditions during the term of the agreement Wage increases during the first year of a collective bargaining agreement are about as responsive to labor market pressures as nonunion wages. Increases over the life of the agreement however are much less strongly related to underlying market pressures prevailing at the time the contract is signed and deferred increases are essentially independent of prevailing market conditions. Consequently new inflationary pressures show up much more gradually in union than in nonunion wages. Conversely when the initial causes of inflation subside the moderating effect is less evident in union wage increases than in nonunion. Multiyear collective bargaining agreements can therefore be an important source of wage inertia How Tight Were Labor Markets in ? With unexpectedly slow growth of labor productivity labor demand was strong and the reduction in the unemployment rate early in the year exceeded expectations. Nevertheless the percent unemployment rate experienced in the first quarter of was higher than most estimates of the rate of unemployment at which inflation will begin to accelerate. In the remaining quarters of the rate was lower but relatively stable within a range of to percent One approach to the question of labor market pressure is to examine how closely labor markets in late resemble those of earlier periods of accelerating wages. During the overall unemployment rate was above the levels associated with accelerating wages in the late 1960s and mid-1970s ( Chart ) Such a comparison could be deceptive however because the demographic composition of the labor force has changed. Certain demographic groups have higher rates of turnover and therefore higher rates of unemployment and these groups now make up a larger proportion of the labor force than in the past A better indicator of labor-market pressure is a fixed-weight index constructed so that each demographic group has the same amount of influence in each year as it had in a high-employment period like when the aggregate unemployment rate was percent. The fixed-weight unemployment rate has fallen relative to the official rate over the past decade but in the fixed-weight rate was still somewhat above the levels of earlier periods of tight labor markets A third measure of labor market pressure is the unemployment rate of a group of experienced workers with continuous labor force attachment such as the rate for men between the ages of and That rate too is still somewhat above the levels associated with prior wage accelerations Tight conditions in labor markets also affect labor turnover rates. As the number of job vacancies rises relative to the number of unemployed employers first call back former jobholders ; but when these are no longer avail- Chart Selected Unemployment Rates PERCENT ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) RATE FOR MALES ' AGES TO h M \ n 111n1 it. 1111111111111fiHI ii i/THE FIXED-WEIGHT UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS CONSTRUCTED UNDER THE ASSUMPTION THAT THE COMPOSITION OF THE LABOR FORCE WITH RESPECT TO SEVEN DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS REMAINS UNCHANGED OVER THE PERIOD SINCE NOTE : SHADING INDICATES PERIODS OF ACCELERATING WAGES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS able vacancies are filled by hiring from the pool of unemployed and by bidding workers away from other employers with offers of higher wages and other benefits. In response to these incentives a larger number of workers quit their current jobs and take better-paying ones. As a result both the new hire and quit rates in manufacturing tend to rise as labor markets tighten and wages accelerate. Both rates have reached postwar peaks in periods of very tight labor markets during the past decade. As seen in Chart however the rate of new hiring in late was below these levels Over the past decade the composition of the work force has shifted toward young and inexperienced workers who tend to quit their jobs more frequently in the search for better employment. The quit rate associated with a given degree of labor market pressure has therefore drifted up over the past decade. Although measured quit rates were relatively high in late they do not necessarily imply as much labor market pressure as they would have done at these levels in the mid-1960s Although the measures of labor market tightness examined above did not reach levels associated with accelerating wages in the past that fact alone is not sufficient to determine that excess demand was absent from Chart New Hire and Quit Rates In Manufacturing RATE PER EMPLOYEES ^ Ol i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i n tt I u i I n .r I i i i I i i i I i i L h n t i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I J-/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED NOTE : SHADING INDICATES PERIODS OF ACCELERATING WAGES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR labor markets during There is some evidence for example that even the fixed-weight and prime-age male unemployment rates associated with accelerating inflation have moved upward over time ( Chart ) Some analysts have suggested that increases in the level duration and availability of unemployment benefits and other transfer payments have raised the unemployment rates for some groups in the labor force by facilitating longer and more frequent periods of job search. These factors together with changes over time in the structure of labor markets in rates of productivity growth and in the reaction of wages to past and expected rates of inflation make it difficult to estimate the rate of unemployment below which wage acceleration is likely to occur. A number of studies have attempted to determine that rate but have produced a wide range of results Although it is impossible to estimate the precise rate of unemployment below which wages begin to accelerate an analysis by the Council of Economic Advisers and a review of the available studies do identify a range of estimates that encompasses the consensus of most observers. The evidence suggests that under current labor market conditions the danger of accelerating wages begins to mount as the rate of unemployment falls significantly below percent. During the unemployment rate moved into the top of the range. The economy also underwent an acceleration of wages. But since the range itself is uncertain we can not automatically conclude that the lower unemployment rate caused the acceleration. A more careful look at developments is necessary CAUSES OF WAGE ACCELERATION The pattern of union and nonunion wage increases in is consistent with the view that tightening labor markets were a partial source of wage acceleration. But the moderation of the rate of increase in wage rates after the first quarter casts doubt on the hypothesis that the unemployment rate had declined to levels producing a sustained acceleration of wages and prices It suggests that the acceleration of wages in early may derive from other factors To explore these issues the Council conducted an econometric analysis of several potential explanations for the wage acceleration. The analysis examined two aspects of labor market pressure : the general balance between the demand for and supply of labor resources represented by the level of the unemployment rate and the more transitory pressures generated by the rapidity with which unemployment decreases as employment gains exceed labor force growth The rapid drop in unemployment in late and early was accompanied by a sharp growth of employment. It is quite possible that a very rapid rise in the demand for labor relative to the increase in the labor force may cause an acceleration in wages even though the level to which unemployment falls does not imply excess demand for labor. A large increase in hiring occurring in a short period and spread across a large number of industries causes many workers to leave low-wage jobs as high-wage vacancies appear Employers in low-wage industries face a special difficulty when they must not only add to their work force but replace those who have quit to accept higher-paying jobs. Wage rate increases may therefore be particularly large in low-wage industries. While ultimately the pool of unemployed might be enough to fill the new jobs without putting added pressure on wage rates the attempt to hire large numbers of workers quickly sets up temporary imbalances in labor demand and supply that accelerate wage increases The Council 's analysis confirmed that the level of the unemployment rate early in the year played a limited role in the wage acceleration. However pressures associated with the ^ speed of the decline in unemployment were an important source of increased wage inflation. The rapidity of the reduction in the unemployment rate added about percent to the adjusted hourly earnings index during the fourth quarter of and another percent during the first half of according to estimates made by the Council. During the second half the unemployment rate held fairly steady and the absence of further pressure from this source contributed to deceleration of wage increases late in the year A second important factor in the wage acceleration was the minimum wage increase in January According to the Council 's analysis between percent and percent was added to the adjusted hourly earnings index in the first quarter by the change in the minimum wage. If the minimum had not been raised the index would have risen at an annual rate of around percent in the first quarter instead of the percent that actually occurred. Thus over two-thirds of the acceleration of the index in the first half of the year can be explained by the combined effects of the speed with which unemployment declined and the increase in the minimum wage In summary in late and early a marked but temporary acceleration of wages followed a rapid fall in unemployment. The acceleration reflected the influence of minimum wage increases and the unusual growth of demand for labor during late and early The acceleration also occurred at a time when productivity growth was very low and the two developments together added strong impetus to cost and price increases Although the rapidity of the drop in unemployment put some transitory pressure on wage rates the level of the unemployment rate during that period was still above most estimates of the range associated with a sustained increase in inflation. Later in the year however the recovery clearly brought the unemployment rate into the top of that range. In view of the acceleration in inflation which has occurred a further reduction of the unemployment rate during would run some risk of generating excess demand and creating inflationary pressures in labor markets THE PRODUCTIVITY ^ SLOWDOWN Productivity growth in showed a very marked slowdown from accustomed rates adding substantially to inflationary pressures and raising fundamental concerns about underlying trends. With real GNP growth of about percent over the year exceeding the normal trend rate of growth most observers expected that productivity in the private nonfarm sector would grow at least percent. Instead as seen in Table productivity showed essentially no improvement increasing only percent in the course of the year. The slowdown was concentrated in the nonfarm nonmanufacturing sector where productivity actually declined percent during Productivity growth in manufacturing on the other hand was strong The slow productivity growth over the past years adds to the accumulating evidence that the underlying trend in productivity growth since has been substantially lower than in earlier periods. Between and productivity growth in the private nonfarm sector averaged percent per year. In this rate declined to percent. Since private nonfarm productivity growth has averaged less than percent per year. In the following examination of recent evidence on productivity growth and the discussion of its implications for the growth of potential output the key questions raised by recent experience are these : Was the recent poor performance a nonrecurrent extraordinary event from which we will soon bounce back ? Or does the recent lag in productivity indicate that the U.S. economy has entered a period of very slow productivity growth ? Productivity Determinants During most of the postwar period the economy produced productivity gains exceeding percent annually as shown in Table However a number of the factors generating the strong productivity growth between World War II and the mid-1960s have since been reversed TABLE Labor productivity growth [ Percent change per year ] Sector t o Private business econopiy Nonfarm Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing t o t o t o to i Preliminary Note. Data relate to output per hour paid for for all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics For example between and high rates of private investment led to a growth in the capital-labor ratio ( measured by the ratio of the net nonresidential capital stock to aggregate hours worked in the private nonfarm sector ) amounting to almost percent per year. Since as a result of low rates of investment that growth rate has dropped to % percent per year. Although the precise effect of slower growth in the capital stock is hard to measure empirically analytical studies estimate that it could well have reduced productivity growth by up to one-half of a percentage point per year from earlier trends Productivity growth has also been reduced by a dramatic shift in the age-sex composition of employment. Starting about the children of the postwar baby boom attained working age adding many young and inexperienced workers to the labor force. Rapid increases in the labor force participation of women also added to the supply of less experienced workers If average earnings of each age-sex group are used as a rough approximation of the relative productivity of its members losses in productivity growth due to increases in the proportion of young and inexperienced workers in the labor force may be calculated. Such demographic shifts in employment can explain a reduction of percentage point in the annual growth rate of productivity between and Since this trend has slowed as the new workers that entered the labor force between and have become older ; and for the more recent period the reduction has been closer to one-third of a percentage point Increased economic and social regulation has aggravated the productivity slowdown in a number of ways. Productivity is a measure of output produced per unit of resources used in production. Economic regulation as in transportation precludes labor and capital from flowing to those uses that have a relatively high value. The effects of social regulation are more complicated. The gains from social regulation in such forms as reduced pollution and greater safety are generally not included in measured output When an increasing fraction of society 's labor and capital resources is diverted to producing these gains measured productivity growth is reduced In addition important indirect costs are generated by social regulation The implementation of new regulatory statutes is often associated with considerable litigation and uncertainty which tends to reduce innovation and investment. Moreover some regulations specify or suggest the technology to be used to meet new standards rather than prescribing a level of performance to be attained. As a consequence innovations that could meet the standards at lower cost are not encouraged On an aggregate basis one private study estimates that for the direct costs of compliance with environmental health and safety regulations may have reduced the annual growth of output relative to total inputs in the private nonfarm sector by percentage point. Similar estimates for are incomplete because of lags in the compilation of data but according to preliminary estimates these restrictions may have subtracted an additional percentage point from annual growth of output relative to inputs since Productivity growth has fallen significantly in many industries over the past several decades. ( See Table ) The costs of regulations have increased substantially in some of these industries but not in others. For example from to labor productivity in mining grew percent per year but since it has declined at an annual rate of percent. In the late 1960s and early 1970s stringent mine safety laws began to take effect. Some part of the productivity decline in mining can be attributed to other factors and there have been such measurable benefits as lower accident rates but regulation has undoubtedly been very costly in terms of real output per hour worked. In the utilities sector growth in output per hour worked fell successively from to to percent per year in and While a number of influences have been at work to reduce productivity growth in this industry the increase in environmental regulation had an important bearing The loss of productivity growth as a consequence of increasing social regulation does not itself imply that the costs of regulation exceed its benefits It has already been noted that the output measures generally used to calculate productivity do not include environmental improvements and other benefits of regulation. Nevertheless the magnitude of the productivity effects does highlight two facts : regulation is very costly ; and benefits should be closely compared with costs in the design of regulatory legislation and specific regulations Some have suggested that a decline in the intensity of research and development in the United States may be a significant cause of the productivity slowdown. The evidence for such a view lies in the falling ratio of research and development expenditures to total output ; this ratio reached a peak of percent in but has since dropped to an estimated percent in Most of the reduction can be attributed to a substantial cutback in military and space-related research research that may have a somewhat less direct effect in increasing aggregate output per hour worked in the private sector than basic research or private research and development. Private industry has consistently provided about percent of GNP for research and development since the mid-1960s. In the course of time however the direction of industry 's research and development activity may have shifted away from basic research and new product development in response to such influences as the changed regulatory environment Little of the decline in private nonfarm labor productivity or the further reduction in seems to stem from shifts in the industrial composition of employment. Although movement out of the farm sector added a sizable productivity bonus in the early postwar years this process had ended by the mid-1960s. Further even though the proportion of the work force engaged in manufacturing has grown smaller since the level of manufacturing productivity has been about the same as that of the private nonfarm sector as a whole ; the sectors of the economy employing larger proportions of the work force include some with higher and some with lower levels of productivity and hence the shift has left aggregate productivity more or less unchanged Productivity Growth Since Productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector since has been unusually erratic. Although growth during was in line with the trend there were abnormally low growth and even declines in and The productivity decline in was particularly striking Labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector fell in every quarter from the second quarter of to the fourth quarter of dropping a total of percent in a 7-quarter period. On the basis of the usual relationship between fluctuations in productivity and fluctuations in output no more than percentage point of that decline could be attributed to the sharp recession during the period. The additional drop of percentage points accounts for much of the difference between the expected percent annual growth rate between and and the percent rate that actually occurred In both and productivity growth was again disappointing Although private nonfarm productivity was expected to increase at least percent per year it grew instead at only percent in and percent in This latest deterioration in productivity indicates that the slowdown in was not just a temporary aberration and adds to the accumulating evidence that the secular trend in productivity growth may be considerably less than percent per year Recent deviations of productivity from its postwar trend have been so pronounced that one is tempted to search for the influence of special factors Some suggest that the oil embargo of and the subsequent quadrupling of oil prices had an adverse impact on productivity growth. However it is difficult to find a mechanism by which an oil crisis could have such an immediate and severe effect on the economy. Widespread declines in productivity growth rates would only occur as adjustment of production methods to economize on energy took place. Actually adjustment to the new oil prices has been extremely slow. Moreover other countries in which energy prices rose more than in the United States did not show such large productivity declines. In general possible productivity-reducing effects occur as firms substitute labor or cheaper fuels for oil or as energy-inefficient plant and equipment are replaced but these effects will be spread very gradually over a long period There is no obvious set of special factors that could explain the poor productivity record of Year-to-year variations however have always been substantial and deviations from trend of as much as percentage point are not unusual. If the long-term growth rate of productivity has fallen well below earlier rates as now seems likely a year with a very small increase in production should occasion little surprise Part of the decline in the growth of private nonfarm productivity between and was attributable to reduced productivity gains in the conTABLE Productivity growth by industry [ Percent change per year ] industry output share ( percent ) to to to Agriculture. Mining Construction Manufacturing : Nondurable.. Durable Transportation. Communication. Utilities Trade : Wholesale Retail.... Finance insurance and real estate Services Government _ All industries : Current weights _ Fixed weight ( output weights ) Detail may not add to percent because of rounding Note. Growth data relate to output per hour worked for all persons Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers struction and financial sectors. Statistics on productivity in these sectors ( and those in the government sector ) are notoriously bad and so it could be argued that the apparent reduction in productivity growth during this period was a statistical artifact. However the further widespread decline since lends no support to that interpretation Table shows the pattern of labor productivity growth ( gross product originating per hour worked ) for major industries. In almost every sector of the economy the growth of productivity has slowed appreciably. Data for are not yet available ; but given the aggregate productivity performance last year sectoral averages for will be even lower than for except perhaps in manufacturing POTENTIAL GNP Behavior Since The erratic productivity performance of the last years raises serious questions about earlier estimates of the economy 's productive potential Potential GNP is defined as the level of real output that the economy could produce at high rates of resource utilization. The level of potential output is less meaningful than its rate of growth. The latter gives the best estimate of how much the economy can actually grow over the next few years without putting additional pressure on labor or product markets. Before making a judgment of the future trend for potential output it is useful to review the growth of potential over the last years and to examine recent behavior of the unemployment rate The Council of Economic Advisers has undertaken several reexaminations of the conceptual as well as the empirical basis of potential output over the last years. These studies led to a significant reduction in in the estimate of the growth of potential lowering the estimate to 3J/2 percent annually for the period from the fourth quarter of onward. Previously the growth rate of potential had been estimated to be percent for the period from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of and ^ percent thereafter. The revision discussed in the and Economic Reports puts the potential GNP in at $ billion ( prices ) about percent higher than actual GNP The and estimates were based on a higher benchmark unemployment rate and on the optimistic assumption that the productivity decline in was an aberration that would be subsequently corrected. The underlying productivity trend was therefore assumed to be equal to that observed between and For that assumption to prove correct strong increases in productivity would have had to occur since Productivity growth in and did show substantial improvement keeping open the possibility that productivity would return to the level indicated by the trend ; and early in initial productivity statistics suggested a sizable percent gain for However the subsequent down- ward revision of the productivity statistics for and the very poor productivity performance of make the earlier view untenable. It no longer seems reasonable to assume that the exceedingly poor productivity growth in and represented statistical aberrations or onetime events implying no reduction in the long-term trend. Downward revisions of our estimate of long-term productivity growth and of potential GNP are clearly necessary The uncertainty about the growth of potential output over the period requires one to distinguish three factors affecting productivity : its long-term trend its cyclical movements and the erratic declines from trend that occurred in and to a lesser extent in It is possible to place rough bounds on the range in which the trend of productivity growth must lie by examining two separate views. The optimistic view holds that was a period in which productivity and potential output dropped as a result of nonrecurring factors affecting the level of productivity after which the long-term trend of productivity growth resumed its earlier pace. On this basis we calculate the long-term trend rate of growth in productivity from to to be about percent per year and the growth of potential GNP over this period to be percent per year. Such a view of productivity behavior interprets the performance as another marked aberration which has temporarily reduced productivity well below its long-term trend The pessimistic view holds that the period was not extraordinary According to this view long-term productivity growth began to slow substantially after the mid-1960s although unexpectedly favorable developments in late and in early disguised the fact. The poor average performance of productivity since early reflects that slowdown and the particularly disappointing episodes in and are fluctuations around a greatly reduced long-term trend. According to this interpretation the estimate of potential should be based on a long-term growth of productivity which follows a much slower pace after This pessimistic version produces an estimated long-term trend rate of productivity growth during the past years of around percent a year and a growth of potential GNP of only percent annually over the period Placing an exact number on recent potential growth is extremely difficult The growth of potential from to probably falls between the two extremes. The productivity shock was to some extent nonrecurrent. But the deceleration in productivity in recent years is too striking to ignore in estimating the long-term trend Unemployment Forecasts Another way of analyzing the growth of potential output over the period is to examine the actual behavior of real GNP and unemployment in this same period. Particularly since mid-1977 the behavior of the unemployment rate has been a puzzle. In the economic forecasts underlying the budget for example real GNP was forecast to rise percent over the quarters of and an additional percent in On the basis of estimates that assumed a potential growth of percent per year the unemployment rate was forecast to reach percent in the fourth quarter of In fact it reached that level a year earlier even though real GNP growth in was less than expected The most common method of forecasting the unemployment rate relates that rate to the gap between actual and potential GNP the relationship known as Okun 's law. Over the postwar period a cyclical coefficient of ^ has been observed ; that is a reduction of % percentage points in the gap between potential and actual GNP could be expected to lower the unemployment rate by about percentage point. Although aggregate data may be unreliable there is some suggestion that the cyclical coefficient was closer to in early years and may have declined to near in the 1970s The use of this relationship and previous estimates of potential GNP produced substantial overestimates of the unemployment rate in and For example from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of real GNP grew percent reducing the estimated GNP gap by percentage points under the old definition of potential. The expected reduction in the unemployment rate was percentage point ; the unemployment rate actually fell by percentage points Last year produced a similar surprise : a percent increase in real GNP with a percent growth of potential output should have lowered the unemployment rate from to percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Instead the unemployment rate was reduced to percent percentage point more than expected. Given the unemployment rate at the end of and the actual path of output since then unemployment by the end of was percentage point lower than was expected if it is assumed that potential GNP grew at percent per year. By revising downward our estimate of the growth of potential GNP from to percent per year about half the unanticipated drop in the unemployment rate can be explained. The remainder is within historical error margins for the output-unemployment relationship Revised Estimates Weighing recent trends in productivity and labor force growth as well as the unemployment-output relation one can form a rough judgment about the trend in potential output over the period. Clearly placing an exact number on potential growth is very difficult. On balance the Council 's view is that potential output has grown at an average rate of percent during the last years The percent overall growth rate of potential between and can be broken down into the following components : a percent annual growth in potential employment a percent per year decline in annual hours per employee and a percent per year growth in productivity. Reflect- ing the large decline in the percent productivity growth during the past years was about one-half of percentage point below our estimate of the long-term trend ( discussed below ) But its effect in depressing potential GNP was offset by an annual growth in the labor force about one-half of percent above its long-term trend Chart Actual and Potential Gross National Product BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES POTENTIAL POTENTIAL POTENTIAL ACTUAL GNP I I I I I I i I I i SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS- The latest estimate puts potential GNP at $ billion in Chart shows the latest revision of potential output ( labeled potential ) along with the two earlier versions. The revised data are in Table Actual GNP in was only about % percent below its potential level TABLE Potential gross national product and benchmark unemployment rate [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Year Potential GNP Actual GNP GNP gap ( potential less actual ) Benchmark unemployment rate ( percent ) _ i Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers Future Trends Projecting potential GNP growth into the future is subject to large errors Growth of the labor force in recent years has varied substantially. In the past years the surprisingly low productivity growth has been offset as noted above by higher than expected increases in the labor force producing more growth in potential output than would have seemed likely from the low productivity statistics alone The wide variation in productivity growth rates since and our inability to determine precisely the underlying trend of such growth during these years make predicting future rises in private nonfarm productivity unusually hazardous. Improved growth in investment during the past years should help to improve productivity growth over the next years. At the same time labor force growth should decline when the young people born in the baby boom have entered the labor force. This demographic reversal should also add to productivity growth as the drop in the average age and experience of the labor force tapers off. These positive developments however may well be offset to some extent by increased regulatory burdens Studies by the Council of Economic Advisers indicate that the range of estimates of productivity growth per hour lies between * and * percent annually over the next years. These estimates are based on the alternative hypotheses about the period discussed earlier. Taking account of recent disappointing productivity developments our forecast is for a productivity growth of l/<x percent annually over the next years. This projection is based on the view that some part less than half of the drop in productivity represents nonrecurrent events ; in addition it does not assume any rebound of productivity growth from recent trends back toward those experienced in the 1950s or 1960s Other components of anticipated potential growth over the next years are these : an expected fall in hours per employee of one-half of percent annually ; an average rise in the labor force participation rate of threefourths of percent annually ; and a rise in the relevant population averaging 1J4 percent annually Taken together these components imply a growth in potential output over the period of percent annually the same as the revised estimate for It is recognized that we are in a period of adjustment to new trends in energy regulation and international competition that an attempt to estimate the underlying trend is therefore extremely hazardous and that estimates of productivity growth are particularly subject to large margins of error ECONOMIC POLICY IN AN INFLATIONARY ENVIRONMENT In recognition of the need for a balanced approach to the problem of inflation the Administration announced a three-part anti-inflation program in October The program sets out the basic objectives for economic policy in As the first element of the program fiscal and monetary policy will be used to achieve and maintain a balance between aggregate demand and supply that is conducive to a reduction in inflation. The second element is a set of explicit voluntary wage and price standards designed to reduce inflation. The third consists of an effort to reduce the direct contribution of government to inflation by reducing the cost of regulatory actions. In the remainder of this chapter the policy initiatives associated with each element of the anti-inflation program are discussed AGGREGATE DEMAND POLICY During the course of an economic recovery a stage is reached at which the emphasis of macroeconomic policy must switch from efforts to strengthen growth in economic activity to measures that restrain inflation. The U.S economy passed through that stage during The disappointing performance of productivity the related sharp drop in unemployment and the acceleration of inflation brought the economy to that position somewhat earlier and more abruptly than had been expected. Reducing inflation must be the top priority of economic policy in Unless we bring inflation under better control the progress made during the past several years toward recovering full employment of our economic resources will be jeopardized Since the trough of the recession in early total real output of goods and services has grown at an annual rate of percent or about percentage points per year faster than the economy 's long-term potential. The gap between actual economic performance and the level made possible by our resource base has therefore steadily diminished Job creation during this recovery has proceeded at an extraordinarily rapid pace especially during the past years. Overall unemployment has therefore declined substantially despite record increases in the civilian labor force Nevertheless unemployment rates remain extremely high for some major segments of the population. Both here and abroad structural unemployment represents an unacceptable waste of economic resources and a severe social problem. But the problem can not be dealt with by an expansive aggregate demand policy without generating further inflationary pressures. As pointed out in Chapter the task must be addressed with measures such as targeted employment tax credits and training and jobs programs aimed directly at those who can not find jobs even in a relatively fully employed economy Earlier in this chapter evidence was cited that excess demand pressures in most labor and product markets were not a dominant factor in the recent acceleration of inflation except for a period in late and early when the rapidity of decline in unemployment contributed to an acceleration of wage increases. But the analysis also indicated that the economy has approached the point where the overall margin of unused resources is very slim. By late the cyclical component of unemployment was down to relatively small proportions as evidenced by various measures of labor O market tightness and the gap between the economy 's actual and potential output had shrunk from percent of potential in to percent in the fourth quarter of Moreover the outlook for growth in productivity is very uncertain. Since we are not yet able to say precisely why productivity gains were so weak last year we can not be confident that our estimate of the GNP gap and our forecast of growth of potential GNP are correct For all of these reasons it is essential that economic policies be restrained Economic growth must slow to a moderate and sustainable pace one that avoids adding the effects of excess demand to existing inflationary forces As Chapter describes in detail the Administration is forecasting a growth rate of real GNP amounting to % percent over the quarters of and ^ percent in The average growth rate over the years ? percent is slightly below the estimated long-term growth potential of percent. If growth in the labor force and productivity is about in line with long-term trends the margin of slack between actual and potential GNP will increase slightly over the next years and market forces can work together with the pay and price standards announced by the President on October to moderate inflation Restrained fiscal and monetary policies are an essential ingredient of the Administration 's strategy for combating inflation. Monetary and fiscal restraints alone however are not equal to the task of unwinding an inflation that has been under way for more than a decade and has become deeply embedded in expectations and in the normal way of doing business by consumers workers labor unions and business establishments. Experience since the late 1960s reviewed at the beginning of this chapter amply bears out that conclusion The stubborn resistance of inflation to the traditional remedies reflects the fact that the rate of wage and price increase is relatively inflexible in the face of slack demand. As last year 's Economic Report discussed in more detail there is some evidence that wage rates over the past quarter century have become progressively less responsive to the balance between aggregate demand and supply in labor markets. Reductions in output and major increases in unemployment are no longer as effective in slowing the rate of wage and price increase. The resulting loss of output of jobs and of human dignity pays only modest dividends in lower inflation A political consensus exists in our country today that inflation is the Nation 's most serious economic problem and that fiscal and monetary discipline is needed if inflation is to be reduced. The inflationary problem can be dealt with most successfully by persisting with the discipline of antiinflation policies for an extended period even if economic growth for a time should fall below the path that is now forecast. The chances of maintaining the necessary consensus long enough to make real gains against inflation will be much greater if we avoid an overdose of restraint that leads to sharp increases in unemployment reductions in output and stagnation of investment The Roles of Fiscal and Monetary Policies The objective of aggregate demand policies for and is thus clear. To avoid creation of excess demand economic growth needs to slow to a pace at or somewhat below the long-term potential rate of expansion Fiscal and monetary restraint is needed to accomplish that aim. The restraint however must be applied in a measured way to moderate growth without producing a recession As Chapter indicated the course of fiscal policy began to shift toward restraint during In fiscal the year beginning in October the budget deficit will decline to about $ billion or $ billion less than in the prior fiscal year. In fiscal the deficit will drop an additional $ billion to a level of $ billion. Further reductions are expected in succeeding fiscal years. To reach these results we must keep a very tight rein on the growth of expenditures. In fiscal Federal outlays will decline to percent of GNP from percent in fiscal Given the course of fiscal policy being pursued by the Administration the task of reducing inflation will not fall on monetary policy alone. Success in the struggle against inflation will require that monetary and fiscal policies work together ; the objective of slowing economic growth while avoiding a recession will necessitate very careful coordination and balance between fiscal and monetary policies The task of mapping the appropriate course of monetary policy will not be easy. Monetary restraint in did not affect aggregate demand in the way that past history would have suggested nor will it do so in and As discussed in Chapter institutional changes in financial markets by altering the availability of credit to private borrowers have reduced the degree to which changes in monetary policy affect spending. In today 's economy monetary and credit policies increasingly influence private investment and consumption through fluctuations in interest rates and associated movements in financial asset prices rather than through changes in nonprice terms of credit This development has both negative and positive aspects from the standpoint of economic stabilization policy. On the negative side monetary policy is likely to affect aggregate demand with even longer lags than it once did Since our ability to forecast future developments is very limited the task of identifying the appropriate course of monetary policy has become more difficult. On the positive side however monetary policy has been changed from a very harsh and selective tool of economic stabilization to one whose influence on aggregate demand is more gradual and evenly distributed Working together with fiscal policy monetary restraint prudently applied can be used more successfully than before to reduce economic growth to a modest but sustainable pace and thus create a favorable climate for an unwinding of inflation The American people and the Administration look forward to a decline in nominal interest rates from their present very high levels. It must be clearly recognized however that a significant and lasting drop in interest rates can not be expected until inflation begins to recede. When that happens interest rates can and should decline. In a less inflationary environment it will also be possible to support adequate real growth with a slower expansion in the monetary aggregates than is currently required STANDARDS FOR WAGE AND PRICE BEHAVIOR General macroeconomic policies can create an appropriate market environment for unwinding inflation. However years of inflation preclude achievement of a given deceleration of prices solely through aggregate demand policy without much more demand restraint and loss of growth than would have been the case in earlier periods. Unless ways are found to brake the momentum of self-perpetuating wage and price increases that have acquired a prominent place in our private behavior inflation will continue at an unacceptably high rate In recognition of this fact the Administration at the beginning of called for a slowing of wage and price increases. Each company was asked to hold its price and wage increases below the average of the prior years Although some individuals and groups did make an effort to meet the standard the program was not generally effective. The deceleration standard was not specific enough to provide a clear guide for wage and price decisions The Administration therefore incorporated more explicit standards into the anti-inflation program announced in late October. The voluntary program now includes an explicit numerical ceiling for wage and fringe benefit increases as well as a price deceleration standard for individual firms. The potential effectiveness of the program is heightened by expanded monitoring by relating Federal procurement actions to the standards and by an innovative program of real wage insurance designed to encourage compliance. The pay and price standards were published in preliminary form on November followed by a 30-day period for public comment. On the basis of the comments offered and after consultation with business and labor groups some modifications in the detailed specifications were announced on December The final standards were published in the Federal Register on December The pay standard limits the increase in hourly wages and private fringe benefit payments to a maximum of percent for each employee group in a company. Employee groups subject to the pay standard are : ( ) individual groups covered by major collective bargaining agreements ; ( ) other nonmanagement personnel ; and ( ) management personnel. This grouping takes account of the differing institutional arrangements for setting wage rates and prevents an inequitable distribution of wage moderation1. It also permits considerable flexibility in distributing wage changes among individuals within a group in response to economic circumstances equity and other factors so long as the average increase for the employee group meets the standard In collective bargaining situations a newly negotiated contract in which wage and fringe benefit increases average no more than percent annually over the life of the contract is consistent with the pay standard provided that the increase is no greater than percent in any year of a multiyear agreement. In determining compliance with the pay standard provisions for cost-of-living adjustments will be cost out on the assumption of a percent annual rate of inflation in the consumer price index over the life of the contract. The standard therefore leaves room for complete flexibility in allocating the pay increase between wage and fringe benefits and between fixed increases and cost-of-living adjustments. Formal collective bargaining agreements signed before the announcement of the anti-inflation program and ( for nonunion employee groups ) annual pay plans in operation by October are not subject to the pay standard In determining compliance with the pay standard employers ' contributions that are required to maintain the existing level of health and pension benefits are distinguished from contributions made to improve the level of benefits. Increases above percent in the costs of maintaining existing health benefits are not counted in judging compliance. Special provisions also apply to pension plans that pay specified benefits at retirement Changes in employers ' costs resulting from changes in funding methods amortization periods actuarial assumptions and plan experience are not included as pay-rate changes but changes in employers ' costs resulting from plan amendments changes in the benefit structure or the effect of wage and salary changes on benefit levels are included. Further details on the application of the pay standard to various pay plans can be found in the regulations issued by the Council on Wage and Price Stability on December In the interest of equity and improved productivity some exemptions from the pay standard are allowed. First workers who earned an hourly wage below $ on October are exempt from the standard. Second wage increases in excess of the standard are acceptable if they are offset by explicit changes in work rules and practices that demonstrably improve productivity to a matching or greater degree. Third wage increases above the standard are justifiable to preserve a historically close tandem relationship with another employee group. Finally where several explicit and tightly defined criteria show that pay rate increases above the pay standard are necessary to attract or retain employees in a particular job category because of an acute labor shortage the amount of the excess may be exempted from the standard Rates of price increase tend to vary considerably more from industry to industry than rates of wage increase. This occurs because rates of productivity growth and the relative importance of nonlabor costs differ across industries. Realistic standards must recognize this inherent variation and its significance as an allocational device in a market-oriented economy. At the same time it is important to avoid a variable price standard based upon a simple pass-through of costs since such rules can weaken the incentive to improve productivity. The Administration 's approach to the deceleration of inflation avoids these pitfalls. The price standard requires that individual firms limit their cumulative price increases over the next year to one-half of a percentage point below the firm 's average annual rate of price increase during Some industries had abnormally high or low rates of price increase during this base period. These extremes are taken into account by limiting the price increase for an individual firm to no more than percent and by regarding any increases of percent or less as complying with the standard. If increases in hourly labor costs within a firm decelerate by more than one-half of a percentage point relative to the rate of increase the deceleration of prices must be commensurately greater to be in compliance with the standard. Certain categories of goods and services specified in the price standard regulations issued by the Council on Wage and Price Stability are excluded from the calculation of a company 's average price change A company that is unable to comply with the price deceleration standard because its average price change can not be calculated or because of uncontrollable price increases in the goods and services it buys is asked to satisfy a two-part profit limitation. The company 's profit margin during the program year should not exceed the average profit margin for of the company 's last fiscal years prior to October Besides this however program-year profit should not exceed base-year profit by more than percent plus any positive percentage growth in physical volume from the base year to the program year Finally a percentage margin standard is available to companies in the wholesale and retail trade and in food manufacturing and processing industries as an alternative to the price standard. Details on this alternative are provided in the regulations issued by the Council on Wage and Price Stability Real Wage Insurance One of the obstacles to the success of voluntary wage and price standards is fear on the part of each group of workers that their observance of the wage standard could lead to a loss of real income if others do not cooperate or if uncontrollable events such as a serious crop shortage result in price increases. Faced with such uncertainty and basing their price expectations on recent patterns of inflation many workers might be reluctant to cooperate with the standards program. To improve the acceptability of the standards the Administration is proposing to the Congress an innovative program of real wage insurance for those who observe them Under the real wage insurance proposal employee groups that meet the percent pay limitation would receive a tax credit if the consumer price index increased by more than percent over the year. The rate of the tax credit would be equal to the difference between the actual increase in the consumer price index and percent up to a limit of percentage points ( percent inflation ) This rate will be applied to each employee 's wages up to a maximum of $ per job. Employee groups that are exempt from the pay standard ( low-wage workers and those under existing collective bargaining contracts ) will qualify for real wage insurance if their average pay rate increase is percent or less during the program year The most important factors determining the cost of the wage insurance program are the rate at which workers participate in it and the rate of inflation. Compliance with the standards by firms and employees will reduce labor costs and price increases should move down correspondingly. But there are other less predictable factors that influence the overall rate of inflation such as changes in the prices of food and fuel in exchange rates and in productivity. The uncertainty surrounding the behavior of these factors means that the cost of the program itself is uncertain With reasonable assumptions concerning participation and the likely behavior of other economic factors influencing inflation we can arrive at general estimates of the program 's cost. Some million workers are potentially eligible for the program although not all are likely to qualify for the wage insurance. For example low-wage workers and those covered by existing contracts are exempt from the pay standard. Given expected wage increases for these groups most workers who are exempt from the pay standard are unlikely to qualify for real wage insurance. Estimates of the cost of the program thus depend in part on assumptions concerning the likely compliance of workers who are not exempt from the standard If three-fourths of those workers are in compliance the real wage insurance program would result in a budget cost of approximately $ billion for each percentage point of inflation in excess of percent. Lower compliance by nonexempt employee groups would raise the expected inflation rate but lower the number of workers eligible for the tax credit. In this sense the potential budgetary impact of the insurance program is self-limiting As noted above the expected budgetary cost of the program will also depend importantly on productivity growth and the behavior of food and energy prices. Estimates of the budgetary impact adjusted for the expected response of the consumer price index to the oil price decisions reached by the OPEC cartel in December appear in Table With three-fourths compliance by employee groups who are not exempt the expected budgetary cost of real wage insurance would vary principally with productivity and food price developments as shown in Table With full compliance the most likely payout would be zero since price increases should be less than percent under each combination of food price and productivity assumptions in the table. As a result even without the incentive provided by real wage insurance substantial compliance with the standards would yield a significant reduction of inflation and a gain in real wages TABLE Estimated annual budgetary cost of real wage insurance proposal [ Billions of dollars ] Assumed productivity growth Assumed food price increase percent percent. i2.5 percent percent This is the estimate in the fiscal year budget and is based on the current forecast for food price increases and productivity growth Note. Calculations assume three-fourths compliance by nonexempt employee groups Source : Council of Economic Advisers Real wage insurance is a novel use of incentives to foster wage and price restraint. The tax credits are not designed to compensate on a straight dollar-and-cents calculation those who might have received higher wage increases but chose to observe the standards. Even with real wage insurance in effect observance of the standards by particular groups of employees requires a recognition of the national interest in individual wage and price decisions and an awareness of the long-run gains that everyone can enjoy if inflation is reduced. Real wage insurance offers to groups of employees not a cash " buy-out " of higher pay increases but an important protection against the major risks associated with compliance Although the proposed program would rely on the tax system to provide refunds if inflation exceeds percent in it is different in purpose design and effect from proposals to index the general revenue system in such a manner that the connection between inflation and tax revenues would be reduced or eliminated. The overriding purpose of the plan is to reduce inflation directly by inducing cooperation with the pay and price standards of the anti-inflation program. Tax indexation proposals on the other hand seek to insulate the tax payments of individuals and corporations from the effects of inflation but they do not reduce inflation Sectoral Problems The pay and price standards are designed to be guides for decision-making agents who have discretionary power in wage and price determination. Even with widespread compliance however it will be necessary to supplement the standards with special programs tailored to unique inflationary problems in some sectors Prices of health care for example have generally outpaced overall inflation and expenditures for such care constitute a steadily escalating share of our national output. Yet the health care industry is not one in which market forces can be expected to provide an adequate restraint on price increases The Administration has taken measures to strengthen health planning and to encourage growth in Health Maintenance Organization programs which embody incentives to promote cost consciousness. The Administration is also seeking a substantial deceleration in the growth of hospital charges which are the largest and fastest growing component of medical care costs through voluntary standards for hospital cost increases. For the ceiling on such increases is percent which implies a deceleration of over percentage points from current rates of hospital cost increases. The President will propose to the Congress a legislative initiative on hospital cost containment that would establish a hospital cost standard in law Professional workers in the health industry are also subject to the general standards for professional fees which apply to companies providing professional services on a fee-for-service basis. A company will be in compliance with the standard if the average rate of change in its fees does not exceed percent and if the increase in the fee for any single service does not exceed percent Food price changes have accounted for a major part of the recent inflation and in general follow a more erratic year-to-year course than other prices. At the farm level price changes are usually the result of weather conditions and other supply-side shocks beyond the control of individual farming units. The monitoring of these prices will therefore focus on overall market trends. Where price increases in particular commodity markets exceed the overall inflation rate and are not justified by changes in costs administrative actions to expand supply will be considered At the retail level individual firms in the food processing and distribution sectors will be expected to adhere to the price standards with respect to increases in margins. The Department of Agriculture and the Council on Wage and Price Stability will cooperate in a joint effort to monitor cost price and marketing margins. Efforts will be made to ensure that lower commodity prices at the farm level are quickly reflected in retail prices Moreover decisions on support and import levels have been made with careful attention to their impact on inflation REGULATORY POLICY Most of the regulatory activities of the Federal Government can be classified into two main groups. Social regulation seeks to control threats to the environment and to human health and safety that arise as an undesirable byproduct in the production and use of goods and services. Economic regulation controls the prices wages conditions of entry or other important economic characteristics of particular industries. While the Administration 's efforts toward regulatory reform cover many areas their essential aim is to minimize the costs and improve the effectiveness of social regulation and to reduce the scope and rigidity of economic regulation Economic Regulation The Economic Report discussed in some detail the current problems with economic regulatory programs indicating that in many industries the regulatory structure established in the past is no longer suited to present economic conditions The President recognized this difficulty in the case of the airline industry and the Congress agreed by initiating the first deregulation of a major industry by legislative action in recent history. Under the Airline Deregulation Act of entry and price regulation of domestic airlines will be phased out by and respectively. During the transition the act provides much greater freedom and flexibility in entry and fares than was previously the regulatory norm. The new law strengthens the already substantial impetus to competitive forces that the industry was given last year by the Civil Aeronautics Board. The board 's liberalizing actions on fares and entry produced markedly lower fares along with sharp increases in air travel load factors and airline earnings. The provisions of the new legislation should lower prices even more and broaden the variety of services to consumers In the coming year the Administration will support legislation that will extend the principles and benefits of airline deregulation to the surface transportation industry. The inefficiencies produced by price and entry regulation of the trucking industry are well known : empty return trips restrictions on peak-offpeak pricing anomalous commodity class rates and lack of price competition. For example in New Jersey and California where such restrictions do not apply trucking rates for unregulated intrastate traffic undercut comparable interstate rates by to percent The current problems with rail regulation are different. Rates of return for the rail industry fall below the all-industry average and the number of bankruptcies in the industry has historically been above normal. At the same time the principal rationale for government regulation protection from monopoly has been eroded by competition from trucks and shifts in population. The financial difficulties thus created have been compounded by Interstate Commerce Commission regulation that tends to slow or prevent rail abandonments and to inhibit railroads from reducing rates to meet competition from trucks and water carriers. The adverse effects of competition from other means of transportation and the Interstate Commerce Commission 's regulation of railroad earnings have been offset up to now by substantial Federal subsidies. Unless regulation of the rail industry is relaxed the inefficiencies and necessary subsidies are likely to continue to grow Social Regulation In recent years social regulation has greatly extended its scope and increased its complexity. Much of this heightened activity has been in response to growing public concern about an ever-widening range of environmental health and safety problems. It has also been spurred by our increasing ability to detect potentially harmful health effects from chemicals or chemical reactions. Controlling the harmful side effects of economic activity produces substantial benefits to society. But it also imposes costs and these have mounted significantly as the scope and stringency of regulation have increased Our measurement of regulatory costs and benefits is highly imperfect In addition measures of the benefits from regulatory provisions such as improvements in the environment and in health and safety are generally excluded from the current national income and product accounts. The resources devoted to producing those benefits are not available for producing other outputs. As a society we accept a tradeoff of lower measured output for increases in unmeasured output in the form of general environmental quality Once incurred the costs of regulatory actions enter into the wage- and price-setting mechanisms of the economy. Most of the costs of regulatory action show up not as governmental budget expenditures but as increased costs to industry. Acceptance of higher prices relative to wages and other money incomes is the way in which society pays for the benefits of social regulation. In fact however our economic institutions and measures of prices do not distinguish between these sources of price increases and others. Individuals and groups try to escape paying the costs of regulation by increasing wages and other forms of income to match the higher prices. The result is an additional round of price increases. But the costs of regulation can not be avoided and widespread attempts to do so simply add to inflation Both the large impact of government regulation measured by its costs and bnefits and the way in which the costs add to inflation highlight the responsibility of all branches of government to make sure that regulations are both necessary and efficiently designed. This Administration has undertaken a number of steps toward that goal Present Efforts Effectively managing the regulatory functions of government entails two tasks. The first is to improve the design of individual regulations They should be confined to situations where they are necessary ; they should set standards that will meet statutory objectives without being needlessly stringent ; and they should minimize the costs of meeting those standards The second task is to view the regulatory process comprehensively to judge how all the regulations being issued will affect costs and prices the use of national resources and the economic situation of particular industries and sectors The effort to improve the cost effectiveness of individual regulations began in with the requirement that regulatory agencies of the executive branch analyze the costs and benefits of major new regulatory proposals as part of the process of preparing regulations. In the President broadened this requirement and also took steps to ensure that these analyses were reviewed not only by the regulatory agencies but by the other economic agencies of the executive branch as well. The Regulatory Analysis Review Group was created with representatives from both regulatory and economic agencies to review several of the most important regulatory proposals each year During its first year the review group submitted for the public record analyses of five major regulatory proposals having substantial economic effects : the acrylonitrile standard and generic carcinogen policy of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration the ozone standard proposed by the Environmental Protection Agency the Department of Transportation 's regulation to provide equal access for the handicapped and the Department of the Interior 's surface mining regulations. Analyses of the Environmental Protection Agency 's new source performance standards for steam electric plants and the Department of Energy 's proposed coal conversion regulations for electric utilities and general industry were in progress at year-end The task of ensuring that regulations do not impose undue costs extends beyond the analysis of newly proposed regulations. On March the President issued an executive order requiring agencies to establish a " sunset " procedure for regulations previously issued by the regulatory agencies of the executive branch. Under this executive order each agency must periodically review its existing regulations with a view to eliminating those that are unnecessary and improving and simplifying others. Agencies must publish a semiannual agenda that sets forth the list of regulations to be reviewed including at least one regulation whose economic impact is substantial Effective management of the regulatory process must go beyond measures dealing with individual regulations. Although the scope of social regulations has been expanding rapidly for over a decade the Federal Government has had no process by which the combined social and economic effects of its regulatory actions could be assessed. Because of the complexity of the problems involved development of analytical techniques and procedures to make such overall assessments and to utilize them constructively will have to occur gradually. But in the Administration took several steps in this direction In March the President ordered the executive branch agencies to publish semiannual agendas of forthcoming significant regulatory proposals and actions. In October he created a Regulatory Council charged with improving and using those agendas to create a government-wide calendar of scheduled regulations. The council is composed of all executive departments and agencies with regulatory responsibility as well as a large number of independent regulatory agencies. The calendar itself will present for the first time not only a timetable of new regulatory proposals and issuances but preliminary data on their objectives and potential costs. As procedures data bases and analyses are improved the calendar can provide both the regulatory agencies and the Executive Office of the President with a body of information for use in examining and assessing the effects of regulations and improving overall regulatory management. Using the information and analyses developed in producing the calendar the Regulatory Council itself can address problems of coordination and thus eliminate conflicts and dupli- cation. In addition it will begin to examine the problems that have arisen in particular industries or sectors from the combined effects of regulations imposed by different agencies The measures to improve the regulatory process outlined above are already making major contributions not only increasing the cost effectiveness of individual regulations but improving the overall coordination and integration of regulatory programs. Additional progress will depend however on developing satisfactory approaches to a number of other complex and difficult problems Balancing Costs Against Benefits The statutes authorizing the various social regulatory programs vary widely in the degree that they allow the regulatory agencies to balance benefits against costs in setting regulatory standards. Some statutes dealing with the control of damaging health effects from chemicals or other substances appear to be based on the proposition that effects are harmful above some threshold of concentration but not below it. These statutes in effect require the regulatory agency to set standards at or just below the presumed threshold without regard to costs. In fact scientists are increasingly questioning the existence of the presumed thresholds ; many believe that health hazards diminish continuously down to zero concentration. Since in many cases flatly prohibiting the substance is far too costly or disruptive any standards that set the level of concentration above zero must implicitly take into account a balancing of economic and social costs against the prevention of health risks Some regulations are issued under statutes which do not mention balancing economic costs against benefits but do require that the regulatory standard be " feasible. " Still other statutes not only permit but require economic costs to be taken into account. And fiinally there are cases where regulatory costs are ignored. For example the " Delaney Amendment " to the Food Drug and Cosmetic Act flatly bans substances used as food additives if they have been found carcinogenic in animal tests regardless of their potency as carcinogens or the economic costs that such a ban would impose There is obviously no all-purpose formula for reaching sound decisions about the stringency of environmental health and safety standards given the need to take into account both the prevention of health risks and the costs of such prevention. Uncertainty is always present in determining the specific nature and degree of the health risks from exposure to various substances though the uncertainties in some cases are substantially greater than in others The same is true of costs. In each regulation a decision must be made about how to deal with these uncertainties. Regulators sometimes encounter situations where exposure to health risks is very high but occurs among a small number of people ; at other times one finds very low exposure among a large number of people. Although circumstances thus vary considerably from case to case a generally consistent approach to these and similar problems by the different regulatory agencies would do much to make the needed regulations better and more cost effective. Developing such an approach will require coordination among regulatory agencies as well as a careful analysis and review of the statutory background behind the different regulatory programs Overall Management of the Regulatory Process Despite many differences social regulation shares some of the characteristics of the budgetary programs of the Federal Government. Both are designed to provide economic and social benefits : such things as educational services highways and dams in the case of the budget ; and environmental improvements and health protection in the case of social regulation. Both use national resources that could be diverted to other uses. For the budget the resource costs show up as Federal expenditures which are paid for by taxes The costs of regulations are less visible since they are imposed on industry and paid for by consumers in the form of higher prices The Nation has long had a set of procedures to consider the Federal budget as a whole : Costs of particular programs and of the total budget are estimated in order to make the best possible qualitative judgments about benefits and priorities among programs are established. Regulatory programs have no such established procedures and as a consequence there is no good estimate of the overall cost of regulation. The difficulties of developing such a process are formidable. Since program costs in the budget represent money actually spent by the government there is a firm basis for finding out how much programs have actually cost however difficult it is to estimate future costs Most regulatory costs however are not directly borne by the Federal Government but by private parties. Moreover some of these costs while very real can only be roughly estimated even after they have actually occurred. What for example are the costs of requiring a firm to locate at point M instead of point N or of requiring that chemical Z no longer be used as a pesticide ? Such estimates are necessarily subject to dispute. And not unnaturally people who place a high value on the benefits of the particular regulation tend to arrive at low estimates while those who must pay the costs tend to make high estimates In addition social regulation is carried out under a large number of statutes many of which state quite specifically the objectives to be reached the deadlines for reaching them and the factors that must be considered in setting regulatory standards. The executive branch has much less flexibility in asserting priorities and deferring or speeding up the issuance of regulations on the basis of economic conditons and social needs than in managing many budgetary programs More generally the relationship between the Congress and the executive branch in the case of budget programs is quite different from that in the regulatory process. Although the President has flexibility in determining the priorities among budget programs and the size of the recommended expendi- tures each year the Congress must pass on the appropriations to carry out those programs. Once a regulatory statute is passed the executive branch agencies do not have to come back to the Congress each year and they may issue regulations that confer important benefits and impose large costs without congressional approval. On the other hand the statutes under which most regulation occurs tend to be extremely specific often limiting the ability of the President and the heads of executive agencies to determine priorities and otherwise balance costs against benefits among and within the various regulatory agencies For all of these reasons the development of procedures and techniques to improve the overall management of the Federal regulatory process to achieve social gains at minimum cost and to reduce the inflationary consequences of regulatory activities will have to be a long and carefully executed process. It should proceed step by step and involve both the Congress and the executive branch. Several important gains have already been made. According to polls the public continues to believe that improvements in the environment in health and in safety are an important national goal. But recently this sentiment has been accompanied by a growing recognition of the very large costs and the inflationary effects of regulation. The effort to improve both the cost effectiveness of individual regulations and the overall management of the regulatory process will continue to be a top priority of this Administration CHAPTER The Economic Outlook I N THE ECONOMY will enter its fifth consecutive year of economic growth making this the second longest recovery in postwar history. As a recovery matures sustaining a satisfactory pace of expansion becomes more difficult. Housing in which starts have more than doubled since early is only one example. Given current demographic trends a high level of starts is sustainable but housing could not be expected to add much to growth even under the most favorable circumstances in financial markets. The saving rate has fallen to very low levels by historical standards and the rise of consumption may consequently drop behind the growth of disposable income. In addition business fixed investment in real terms has already regained its prerecession ratio to gross national product ( GNP ) and hence a slower growth of business capital expenditures is likely. All these factors will combine to check the pace of economic expansion next year As Chapter makes clear a reduction in economic growth from the rate of the last years is needed both because idle labor and capital resources have been cut considerably and because inflation has accelerated The task for aggregate demand policies will be to provide a climate in which inflationary pressures can begin moderating but to avoid restraint so severe as to generate a recession THE ECONOMY IN AND Real growth is projected to average about * percent for the quarters of a lower growth rate than in but positive throughout the year. If the anti-inflation program succeeds as is anticipated the rate of growth of consumer prices should slow to less than 7/2 percent over the quarters of and to an annual rate of slightly under percent by the end of the year. According to initial indications business and labor groups are taking the President 's voluntary standards seriously but success can not yet be assured. Widespread compliance with the anti-inflation program is essential to maintenance of a strong and healthy economy In real growth is expected to rise to a rate of ^ percent over the quarters largely as a result of an upturn in housing while inflation will continue to slow dropping below 5/2 percent. Here also success in the fight against inflation will contribute materially to sustaining economic growth by reducing the pressures on credit markets and strengthening confidence among consumers and businesses Employment is expected to rise by about million a year in both and Productivity is expected to grow at about the same rate in as in with some improvement in It is likely to remain well below its trend rate of increase of about l/i percent. With the labor force expected to continue growing at a rate above the long-term trend and real growth slowing the unemployment rate is likely to increase to % percent by the end of and remain near that level in FISCAL POLICY FOR AND The course of fiscal policy that is appropriate for and was described generally in Chapter In specific terms Federal outlays are projected to be $ billion in fiscal an increase of over percent from the previous year. In fiscal the President 's budget calls for outlays of $ billion an increase of less than percent. This figure includes a small real increase in defense spending a constant level of real spending for domestic programs and restraint in or deferrals of new spending initiatives. Because existing legislation mandates continued real growth in some programs such as health care and social security zero real growth in domestic spending can be achieved only through reductions in real outlays for a number of other programs. Holding outlays to $ billion will require strenuous efforts by government agencies as well as cooperation from the Congress Over a year ago forecasts of economic activity suggested that the current economic expansion would slow too much unless the burden of rising taxes was eased. Inflation and economic growth were pushing people into higher tax brackets and substantial increases in social security taxes had been legislated for and later years. To prevent too great a check on the expansion these tax increases would have to be offset by a tax cut. A tax cut was also needed to encourage the investment that would provide the productive capacity for future economic growth and improve the prospects for greater growth in productivity Last January the President therefore proposed a tax cut of $ billion to take effect October Since inflation was higher than expected this was scaled back in May to a cut of $ billion to take effect January The size of the tax bill passed by the Congress is close to this request with a stimulus of $ billion in The bill contains a $ 14.1-billion cut in personal taxes a $ 6.5-billion cut in business taxes and a $ 0.7-billion increase in outlays for the earned income tax credit but allows $ billion in jobs credits to expire O The Revenue Act of The Revenue Act of achieves cuts in individual income taxes largely by lowering the schedule of tax rates. It replaces the general tax credit which was due to expire at the end of with an increase in the personal exemption from $ to $ The legislation also expands the earned income tax credit for the working poor and lowers the tax rates on capital gains. Its provisions include some of the tax reform proposals made by the President in his tax package In general the Revenue Act of will have relatively little effect on the after-tax distribution of income. Most households will receive a cut in tax liability of about percent. Households with incomes above $ and those with incomes below $ will receive larger cuts. These distributional effects contrast sharply with those of the President 's tax proposal which called for larger tax cuts for those with incomes below $ and smaller reductions for those with incomes above $ In its effects the legislation will also differ markedly from income tax legislation enacted between and which increased the progressivity of the tax system The business tax cuts in the Revenue Act are attained primarily by lowering corporate income tax rates. The maximum rate is dropped from to percent and a new tax schedule with more income brackets and lower tax rates is introduced. The tax rate on corporate income between $ and $ is cut the most from percent to percent. The legislation also extends and expands the investment tax credit providing a $ 500-million tax cut for business in Both of these cuts were in the package proposed by the President. Capital gains tax rates were also lowered in the legislation reducing revenues by nearly $ billion in MONETARY POLICY The combined effects of rising inflation and efforts by the Federal Reserve to hold down the growth of the monetary aggregates carried interest rates last year to near record levels. More restrained growth of the monetary and credit aggregates is an appropriate complement to the other parts of the anti-inflation program. It will help to moderate the rate of economic expansion. Additionally higher U.S. interest rates make dollar-denominated assets more attractive than those denominated in foreign currencies and thus contribute to sustaining the value of the dollar in exchange markets Many private forecasters anticipate a recession in partly because they expect that current high interest rates will substantially depress housing and business investment. High interest rates are likely to dampen aggregate demand in but to a lesser degree than one would expect from past experience because of institutional changes in financial markets. Our judgment that economic growth in will be sustained reasonably well and that a recession will be avoided depends in part on our analysis of why the effect of monetary restraint is different from what it used to be During most of the postwar period intervals of substantial monetary restraint were followed by recessions. Curbing aggregate demand through the use of monetary restraint disrupted financial markets because the depository institutions experienced a large outflow of deposits when interest rates on market instruments rose above the rates these institutions were permitted to pay to attract consumer savings. This disintermediation sharply reduced the availability of credit for those borrowers most dependent on commercial banks and thrift institutions for credit. These included small businesses and some units of State and local government but the sector most severely hit was the mortgage market. As mortgage credit became not merely more expensive but unavailable residential construction dropped precipitously and this sharp drop was often important in tipping the entire economy into recession Table shows periods of such cyclical declines in acquisitions of mortgages by financial institutions and the associated declines in single-family and multifamily housing starts. In the period the sharp decline in residential construction contributed to a slowing of overall economic growth but the expansion of Federal outlays was sufficiently strong to maintain economic expansion. The and episodes were all followed by recessions. Of course factors other than the decline in housing were also involved in each of these recessions but the speed with which the decline in housing occurred had a destabilizing effect for which it was difficult to compensate elsewhere in the economy TABLE Cyclical contractions in mortgage credit and housing starts ( Percent change at seasonally adjusted annual rate except as noted ] Housin I starts Period Interest rate ' Mortgage acquisitions'- ' Single-family II to II III to IV to IV to IV Multifamily Percentage point change in the quarterly average market yield en 6-month Treasury bills from the beginning of the period to the peak reached during the period Acquisitions by financial institutions Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Home Loan Bank Board The first half of last year was somewhat like earlier periods of credit restraint. Short-term market interest rates rose well above rates payable on deposits. As shown in Table deposit inflows at thrift institutions slowed and so did their mortgage lending. In the second half of the year however deposits again began to grow rapidly TABLE Growth in deposits [ Percent change seasonally adjusted annual rate1 ! Type of deposit II III IV Commercial banks total Demand _ _ _ __ Passbook Other time Large certificates of deposit ( CDs ) Nonbank thrift institutions total Savings and loan associations Passbook Other II III | V2 Changes are measured from end of quarter to end of quarter Preliminary Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation As discussed in Chapter the principal reason for this higher growth was the new regulation that permitted the issuance of money market certificates beginning last June. This change followed upon similar but much smaller steps taken in and In those instances interest ceilings were raised on longer-term certificates of deposit thus reducing somewhat the vulnerability of thrift institutions to deposit outflows. ( Passbook and shorter-term certificate ceilings were also raised slightly in and ) Other less obvious institutional changes have also modified the response of the economy to credit restraint. One of these is the expansion of secondary mortgage market activity. The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation established in issues its own mortgage-backed securities and purchases mortgages from the thrift institutions. The Government National Mortgage Association has developed a procedure whereby it guarantees securities that are issued by private institutions and backed by pools of mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration or guaranteed by the Veterans Administration. These securities have been purchased by a broad range of investors many of whom were not previously in the mortgage market. Some thrift institutions have also begun issuing their own bonds for which mortgages serve as collateral Institutional changes have also occurred in other financial markets Commercial banks no longer depend primarily on liquidating U.S. Government securities to obtain funds for business lending as they had done through the early part of the postwar period. The advent of liability management ( exemplified by the issuance of negotiable certificates of deposit and the use of nondeposit sources of funds ) has enabled most banks to obtain the funds they want for lending provided they are willing to pay going rates of interest. Moreover large firms can increasingly shift their borrowing between commercial banks and open market commercial paper and between foreign and domestic sources in response to differences in the cost and availability of funds. Their direct access to credit markets makes them less dependent on intermediation by institutional lenders. The expan- sion of trade credit provides a mechanism through which large firms extend this benefit to smaller customers and suppliers The result of these institutional changes has been to smooth the response of the economy to increased restraint in financial markets. In place of sharp changes in availability of credit there is now a more gradual response of credit users to changes in the cost of credit. Measured application of monetary restraint has become more feasible. The degree of restraint required to achieve the desired growth in private demand is difficult to judge however because the response of the private sector is likely to occur more slowly and to be diffused more widely than in the past. Moreover the indicators showing the degree of restraint have changed and experience in implementing monetary policy under present circumstances will come only gradually Over the near future nominal interest rates are likely to remain relatively high by historical standards. It will take time to reduce the rate of inflation and the inflation premiums contained in interest rates. As inflation recedes the maintenance of a restrained monetary policy will be consistent with a decline in nominal interest rates THE ECONOMIC FORECAST The economy is entering with substantial momentum and economic expansion will be bolstered by the recently enacted tax bill which will help to sustain consumer expenditures during the first half of the year. Later in the year as the effect of the tax cut wears off a slower expansion of consumer purchases is foreseen. Partly as a response to current high interest rates housing starts are expected to decline and the growth of business fixed investment to diminish during the year ( Table ) TABLE Economic outlook for Forecast range Item Growth rates fourth quarter to fourth quarter ( percent ) : Real gross national product to Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases __ SUte and local purchases GNP implicit price deflator. % to IK IK to Compensation per hour 2_ Output per hour Level fourth quarter : iy2 \ * A to IK to * y2 -W2 to ^ ^ t o IK 11A VK to Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units4 ) _ Preliminary Private business sector ; Seasonally adjusted to all persons Annual rate Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Growth is likely to be stronger in the first half of the year than in the second half. Housing starts are expected to bottom out during the fourth quarter of and begin to move up in as pressures in money and credit markets ease with the decline in the rate of inflation. The upturn in housing is a principal reason for the anticipated increase in the rate of economic growth in The rate of increase of the GNP deflator is expected to decline from percent in to slightly under ^ percent during the quarters of ; a further drop to just under Gyi percent is probable during partly as a result of a tightening of the pay and price standards. Inflation is likely to remain high during the first half of however because of the minimum wage increase in January the delayed effects on import prices of the decline in the value of the dollar the oil price increases by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) and the continued rise in food prices. As the year proceeds these factors will put less upward pressure on prices and the effects of the President 's anti-inflation program should be increasingly felt. Consequently the increase in consumer prices is expected to fall to an annual rate of below percent by late in the year Consumption Consumption has been a major source of strength in the current expansion Consumers have increased their spending by more than the rise in their after-tax incomes reducing the saving rate from almost percent in to under percent in the last quarter of Some of the possible reasons for this low saving rate were discussed in more detail in Chapter In the saving rate is expected to rise moderately but remain well below its percent average of the 1950s and 1960s. Much of this increase will reflect less intensive use of consumer credit which expanded sharply during Automobile sales in particular are not likely to rise further in and may fall slightly from the high level of the model year Purchases of furniture and household equipment may also decline as a result of the expected reduction in residential construction Continued growth in purchases of nondurables and services should allow personal consumption expenditures to rise in real terms at a rate of about percent close to the projected rate of growth of real GNP but below the rate of increase in real disposable income As inflation abates during consumer confidence in the economy should improve and thus strengthen consumer markets in The saving rate is consequently expected to decline in During that year however rising effective tax rates will tend to slow the growth of disposable income ; the increase in consumer spending is thus likely to be somewhat less than the rise in real GNP Business Fixed Investment Business fixed investment in dollars should grow at a rate of about percent during measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. This estimate represents a slowdown from the percent increase for but the increase is still above the expected growth in real GNP. Investment is foreseen to remain relatively strong in the first half of but to slow later in the year with the rest of the economy. Moderate improvement from the less rapid rate of the second half of is expected during the course of Indicators of the probable pace of investment next year are mixed. Higher rates of capacity utilization are encouraging new and replacement investment and contracts and orders for plant and equipment are rising rapidly Orders for nondefense capital goods in October and November were 12J/2 percent above their third quarter level. Unfilled orders for nondefense capital goods at the end of November stood percent above their September level Moreover the Revenue Act of should provide some encouragement for business fixed investment. Profits seem likely to remain relatively high throughout the next year falling only marginally from their current share of GNP. The confidence of investors with regard to future inflation should improve as the Administration 's anti-inflation initiatives take hold Not all the forces influencing business investment decisions are positive Expectations of a slowdown in economic activity next year are widespread and may already be holding back investment plans. Nominal interest rates have risen to very high levels and their effects will be felt increasingly as progresses. Some reduction in investment in motor vehicles may also follow the recent large purchases of cars and trucks by businesses. This drop in sales may restrain discretionary capital spending by the auto industry although the industry will still have to maintain a high level of capital outlays to meet the requirements of government regulations The latest Commerce Department survey of business investment intentions found that businesses are planning to increase their outlays for new plant and equipment in by percent in current dollars. This compares with an actual rise of percent in If capital goods prices rise in by the percent figure expected by survey respondents the real increase in outlays for plant and equipment in measured on a year-overyear basis would be about percent. Measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter the increase would be less In the past years total outlays for business fixed investment in the national income and product accounts have exceeded the amount included in the plant and equipment survey by a large and widening margin even after allowance has been made for conceptual differences in coverage of the two series. This margin may well persist in The results of the Department of Commerce survey thus seem consistent with our forecast which calls for a moderate slowdown this year in this key element of aggregate demand Housing The number of housing starts and the real volume of residential construction are likely to decline in from the high levels of last year in large part because prospective home buyers will be deterred by the high level of mortgage interest rates. In areas where mortgage rates are limited by usury ceilings some constraints have developed on the availability of credit This should not greatly affect the national total of housing starts but it may restrain housing sales and residential construction in some parts of the country. By the fourth quarter of housing starts are expected to fall to an annual rate of around % million or somewhat less a decline that is significant but less steep than in most postwar periods of tight money The prospects for housing this year will depend importantly on whether thrift institutions continue to attract funds through money market certificates and to make the proceeds available to potential home buyers. Margins between mortgage yields and the cost of issuing the certificates have narrowed. Some thrift institutions may therefore pay less than the maximum permissible yield on money market certificates and in other ways market them less aggressively. Moreover there may be some diversion of funds from mortgages to higher-yielding short-term liquid assets. The potential for strengthening longer-term earnings by issuing money market certificates and acquiring long-term high-yield mortgages in such a period is nonetheless attractive The effect of these new money market certificates in reducing current earnings of thrift institutions is a matter of concern. However the certificates still represent a small proportion of total deposits ( less than percent at year-end ) Moreover at least half of the money going into the money market certificates appears to be coming from outside the thrift institutions and some of the remainder is being converted from high-yielding certificates rather than from low-yielding passbook accounts. In view of the high level of earnings on the mortgage portfolio about ^ percent in the second half of last year thrift institutions in general are in a favorable position to cope with higher deposit costs for a limited time although the earnings and cost positions of individual institutions undoubtedly vary considerably Given reasonable prospects for the availability of mortgage credit the primary determinant of the volume of housing starts will be the response of home buyers and builders to the higher level of mortgage interest rates. The rate on new mortgage commitments had risen sharply to nearly percent by the end of last year Virtually all of the projected decline in housing starts is likely to be in single-family units. Following last year 's upturn construction of multifamily units will probably level out in in response to the high costs for building loans which often have to be carried a long time. But the decline in the rental vacancy rate from a peak of percent in to a historically low level of percent late last year implies a strong demand that should sustain multifamily construction The demand for single-family homes will also be supported by demographic factors. Between and the number of people in the age group grew by percent and the group grew percent. By population in these two age groups is expected to rise nearly percent somewhat below the rate of the last years but far above the rates prevailing before In fact the population in this age group will grow more in the next years than it did in the years up to The largest number of first-time home buyers is in the age bracket. More than half of the married couples aged to and nearly three-fourths of those between and own their own homes. Although the proportion of married couples in the total number of U.S. households has been declining this change has been offset by the rise in homeownership among single persons Given the favorable demographic trends and low vacancy rates it is quite likely that housing starts will begin to rise as inflation and nominal interest rates case late next year. The forecast anticipates a rise in housing starts to about million units by the fourth quarter of Residential construction is expected to add nearly as much to real GNP growth in as it subtracted in This projected turnaround in housing activity is the principal reason for expecting somewhat stronger economic growth in Inventories Businesses throughout this recovery have pursued a cautious policy on inventory accumulation as noted in Chapter Ratios of inventories to sales have been kept relatively low for this stage of the recovery and there are no major inventory imbalances that would depress economic activity this year. Since growth in final sales is expected to moderate in however the rate of inventory investment may decline slightly if businesses continue to pursue their conservative inventory policies as seems likely. Heightened inventory accumulation may occur in as final sales again become stronger Net Exports During for the first time in this recovery the foreign sector provided some support to the expansion of GNP. The volume of exports rose and the growth of import volumes slowed from its rapid pace at the beginning of the year. The foreign sector should continue to contribute to growth in In many foreign countries growth of domestic demand began to pick up during the course of and this movement should increase somewhat more this year chiefly because of a shift toward more expansionary fiscal policies in Germany and Japan in late More rapid growth of foreign demand will help to raise demands for U.S. exports. At the same time the deceleration of growth in the United States is acting to reduce the growth of import volumes. In for the first time since growth rates in the major foreign countries are likely on average to exceed growth in the United States The marked depreciation of the dollar from September through October which has been only partially reversed since then will also help to improve our net exports in Since trade volumes adjust only slowly to changes in relative prices the principal effects of the dollar depreciation on imports and exports are not yet evident U.S. exports tend to respond more strongly to relative price shifts than imports do but with longer lags. Exports of nonagricultural merchandise in dollars are expected to grow by to percent in ; agricultural exports on the other hand are not likely to increase from current high levels. Slower economic growth in and last year 's depreciation of the dollar should limit the rise in the volume of non-oil imports this year. Despite an expected rise in the volume of oil imports the merchandise trade balance should improve in An important development in the structure of our foreign balance over recent years has been a marked surplus in net exports of services especially fees royalties and earnings of American enterprises abroad. In the early years of this decade the United States was near balance on services but in the service component of the current account showed a surplus of $ billion and the surplus rose to an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarters of In the near future this trend should continue since the comparative advantage of a mature industrial country like the United States will increasingly lie in exporting capital and technology Government Demand Purchases of goods and services by both the Federal and the State and local sector will rise in and but the amount of growth will be relatively small in real terms The President 's budget calls for Federal outlays of $ billion in fiscal and $ billion in the next fiscal year. Purchases of goods and services comprising roughly one-third of these expenditures are concentrated in defense outlays where Federal expenditures are projected to rise in real terms. Total real Federal purchases are expected to increase percent during and to fall slightly during The increase follows a small decline in real Federal purchases during Although State and local purchases will continue to grow in real terms during and two recent developments indicate a slowing in the rate of increase from the / percent rate of First as Chapter noted sentiment among voters appears to favor limiting the growth of State and local taxes and expenditures as evidenced by the passage of Proposition in California and successful budget-cutting referenda in eight other States in Second Federal aid to State and local governments which had been growing rapidly will level off over the next years These developments suggest that the rate of growth in real State and local purchases may moderate to about a V/2 to percent annual rate over the next years. The operating balance of the State and local sector which was in surplus by about $ billion in is expected to shift to a small deficit in and Labor Force and Employment Growth in the labor force and in employment can not be expected to continue at the exceptionally rapid rates of the past years. The slower rate of real economic growth foreseen for and and trends in the age structure of the population make it reasonable to expect growth rates for both labor force and employment to decline toward their long-term trend The civilian labor force has grown at an annual rate of about ? percent over the past years up from an average around } percent in the first years of the decade. This recent pace is much more rapid than the average annual growth of percent during the past years. There have been two principal reasons for the relatively high growth of the labor force lately. The number of persons between the ages of and the normal age for entering the labor force is large because of the peak birth rates in the late 1950s ; and a higher proportion of women and teenagers have joined the labor force. Reductions in the size of the Armed Forces were also a factor in the earlier part of the decade. In the past years the labor force participation rate has gone up a full percentage points. The rapid expansion of employment opportunities during this period has undoubtedly had an important bearing on this striking increase In and the factors outlined above are expected to have less effect on labor force expansion. The rate of growth in the noninstitutional population at ages and older will decline from the percent per year average of the early and middle 1970s to percent in and percent in Slower growth of real output will cause the participation rate to rise less rapidly but it may remain above its long-term average annual growth of percentage point. The growth rate for the civilian labor force is expected to average about 2/4 percent per year in and The rate of increase in employment will be limited by slower growth in real aggregate demand. Average employment in the fourth quarter of should be about percent above that in the fourth quarter of Employment growth during is expected to be about percent compared to an average annual employment growth in the preceding years of over 3/2 percent These projections concerning employment and the labor force imply a small rise in the unemployment rate. Unemployment is expected to increase to about * percent of the labor force by late and to remain near that level in Forecasts of unemployment rates must be regarded as highly uncertain however because of the difficulties inherent in predicting growth in the labor force in productivity and in output PRICE AND WAGE DEVELOPMENTS The outlook for prices and wages in is affected in important ways by the Administration 's anti-inflation program. A significant reduction of inflation will require widespread cooperation and compliance with the wage and price standards The wage standard limits increases in compensation generally to percent but even with full compliance by groups not exempt the rise in private compensation is likely to exceed percent. Equity and flexibility require some groups to be exempt from the pay standard including workers who are covered by collective bargaining agreements negotiated before the announcement of the anti-inflation program on October and those who were earning less than $ per hour on October Many workers qualifying for the low-wage exemption received substantial increases on January when the minimum hourly wage was raised from $ to $ as a result of the amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act. Others in this group may be indirectly affected if wages slightly above $ are raised to maintain normal wage differentials. On average wages and private fringe benefits of those qualifying for the low-wage exemption are expected to increase between 8J/2 and % percent Deferred increases in compensation due in under existing collective bargaining agreements are also exempt. These increases vary considerably but the average including allowance for cost-of-living provisions is likely to be in the ! /4 to 8/ percent range New labor contracts will play an important role in wage changes in when a new round in the 3-year collective bargaining cycle begins. For these contracts an employee group is in compliance if the agreement provides for pay increases that do not exceed percent per year over the life of the contract. But increases in any one year may be as large as percent. Industries where major multiyear agreements will be negotiated in include petroleum trucking rubber electrical equipment meatpacking and automobiles. In all the wages of almost million workers in bargaining units with or more workers and of a similar number in smaller units will be determined for the next to years. In the previous round of negotiations many of these agreements provided for double-digit annual rates of pay increase. A repetition of such large increases would have serious inflationary consequences not only in but in subsequent years Despite the large number of exempt workers a high rate of compliance by those not exempt who account for about two-thirds of the entire wage and salary bill will still produce significant deceleration. Substantial compliance would limit the rate of increase of total private wages and fringe benefits to about percent. Total employee compensation per hour including employer payroll taxes would then increase by about 8J/2 percent in a significant deceleration from the % percent increase in Because of the continued rapid escalation of food prices increases in the minimum wage and social security taxes the rise in OPEC oil prices and the continued pass-through of higher prices for other imports inflation is likely to remain relatively high in the first part of As the year progresses the rise in consumer prices should fall somewhat below a percent annual rate a rate consistent with the underlying rise in labor costs A deceleration of wage and price increases during will be an important first step in braking the momentum of inflation. Expectations of continuing inflation would then begin to give way to the prospect of smaller increases in wages and prices. Further progress could be made more certain in by adjusting the pay and price standards. The special factors boosting inflation in and food price increases payroll taxes medical costs depreciation and energy prices may also have less effect in We can reasonably expect further gains in reducing inflation. The rate of increase of consumer prices is projected to fall to just under ^ percent during Food prices over the quarters of are expected to rise between and percent significantly below last year 's percent. During the first half of the year however food price increases may be larger than during the second half as the food processing and marketing system reacts to increased costs for labor energy packaging and transportation as well as to higher prices for wheat cocoa and sugar. Prices of dairy products and the cost of food consumed away from home are projected to rise considerably in the first half of the year An important reason for higher food prices in is likely to be a continued reduction in supplies of beef. Because of a decline in the number of cattle total beef production in is likely to be lower than in Production of pork and poultry is expected to rise significantly however especially in the second half of the year and per capita consumption of all meats is therefore likely to decline by less than percent Some encouraging signs for food prices can be discerned. After increasing very sharply in the first half of the index of prices that farmers receive for crops remained quite stable during the second half of the year. This suggests that with normal winter and spring weather no immediate inflationary pressure should appear at the retail level because of abnormal increases in farm crop prices. The favorable prospects for the grain and soybean crops that will be harvested in the Southern Hemisphere this spring and the higher level of world stocks of these commodities are also reassuring. Hog and poultry producers are geared to expand production significantly helping to offset lower beef supplies. As the Administration 's anti-inflation program begins to show tangible results pressure on processing and marketing margins is also expected to moderate Energy prices will rise substantially in in large part as a result of the 14-J/2 percent increase in oil prices announced by OPEC. This OPEC increase will add almost percent to the consumer price index by the end of ( compared to what would have happened if OPEC oil prices had remained stable ) and some further effect will be felt in Domestic energy prices will also increase. The deregulation of natural gas will add to the price of energy and further rises in coal prices can also be expected Mortgage interest costs are likely to rise less rapidly in than in as nominal mortgage interest rates level off and as the housing market weakens. In mortgage interest costs which include the effects of rising prices for homes and higher mortgage interest rates rose about percent Import prices have already risen significantly in conjunction with the decline in the dollar on foreign exchange markets during To the extent that foreign exporters do not absorb the effects of this depreciation some further price rises are likely in Hospital costs which for several years have increased at nearly twice the rate of overall consumer prices moderated somewhat in Further moderation is expected in and in response to official action at two levels : hospital cost containment legislation to be proposed by the Administration and State cost containment programs ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES AND POLICY FOR THE LONGER RUN During the past years this Administration has developed its economic policies within the context of longer-term objectives for the economy That approach was embedded in law during by the planning procedures incorporated in the newly enacted Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act. This act establishes procedures for developing and reviewing economic policies within the government requires the government to set 5-year goals for the American economy and challenges it to formulate policies to achieve them For the past three decades the Employment Act of has been the basic guide for the President and the Congress in the development of economic policies. The Employment Act charged the government with responsibility to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power through the use of the policy tools at its disposal. Since the instruments of fiscal and monetary policies have been used in ways that contributed to economic prosperity. In recent years however the view has become widespread that amendments to the Employment Act would be an appropriate response to the changed economic circumstances and the serious new difficulties that we face in today 's economy. The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of was designed to address these difficulties THE HUMPHREY-HAWKINS ACT The new law strengthens the Employment Act in three essential respects It explicitly identifies national economic priorities and objectives ; it directs the President to establish and the Congress to consider goals based on those priorities and objectives ; and it creates new procedures and requirements for the President the Congress and the Federal Reserve to improve the coordination and development of economic policies The priorities and objectives set forth in the new act are varied reflecting the nature of today 's economy. The act establishes as a national goal " the fulfillment of the right to full opportunities for useful paid employment at fair rates of compensation of all individuals able willing and seeking to work. " The new act also specifies " reasonable price stability " as a national objective and recognizes the need to improve government policies for dealing with inflation. Emphasis is placed on encouraging private and public capital formation to promote full employment growth in productivity and price stability. The act responds to the widespread desire for reduced governmental intervention by calling for steady reductions in the share of the Nation 's output accounted for by governmental spending and by relying primarily on the private sector to meet the act 's objectives. It also specifies that a balanced Federal budget consistent with the achievement of other goals is to be an objective of national policy. Finally the act stresses the position of our economy in international markets. Those who make public policy are called on to work to improve the trade balance of the United States as well as its competitive position in world trade while promoting fair and free international trade and a sound and stable international monetary system To provide a better focus for the government in its effort to achieve these general objectives the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act requires that the Administration set annual numerical goals for key indicators in the economy over a 5-year period including employment and unemployment production real income productivity and prices. Goals for the first years of the 5-year period are considered short-term objectives and the President is required in his budget to recommend levels of outlays and receipts consistent with them. Goals for the final years are known as medium-term goals and projections of outlays and receipts consistent with them are to be included in the President 's budget The act establishes new procedures for developing economic policies within the Federal Government. Each year the President is to present a program for achieving the economic goals he has set. As a matter of general guidance the act provides that the government should rely as far as possible on growth in the private sector to meet goals for employment and output. At the same time it calls the President 's attention to a variety of governmental measures for dealing with unemployment inflation inadequate capital formation and other problems. No new programs are specifically required or author- ized in the act however and the President would need additional legislation to put new programs into effect To improve the coordination of fiscal and monetary policies the act requires the Federal Reserve Board to report to the Congress twice each year on its objectives and plans with respect to monetary policies. The Board in its reports is required to comment on the relation between its plans for monetary policy and the short-term economic goals established by the President The policies of the President and the Federal Reserve Board will be considered jointly by the Congress. The act directs the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress to review reports from the President and the Federal Reserve Board together with submissions from the committees of the Congress and to offer its findings regarding the economic situation to the Budget Committee in each House prior to development of the First Concurrent Resolution on the Budget. Four hours during the debate on that resolution in each House will be reserved for debate on economic policies and goals and specific budgetary plans for achieving economic objectives. Through this process of reports and debate the new act aims to improve economic decisions by providing better ways of arriving at them and better information on which to base them The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act stipulates that in the first Economic Report published under the act the goal for unemployment in should be percent for workers aged and over and percent for workers aged and over. The act also requires that the goal for the rate of increase in the consumer price index in should be percent Beginning with the Economic Report of the President the President is authorized under the new act to change the timetable for achieving the goals if he determines that such a change is necessary. If the President changes the percent and percent unemployment goals however his Economic Report must state the year that he expects the unemployment goals to be reached GOALS FOR THE ECONOMY TO Lower unemployment and inflation rates are basic objectives but they are not of course the only economic aims of the Administration or the new act. As noted earlier the Humphrey-Hawkins Act places a high priority on improving the competitive position of the U.S. economy in the world encouraging the growth of investment and capital formation reducing the share of Federal spending in the Nation 's output and balancing the budget In formulating economic policies for the next years these additional concerns have been taken into consideration Economic goals consistent with those specified in the act are shown in Table The short-term goals for and represent a forecast of how the economy will respond over the next years not only to the budgetary policies proposed by the President for fiscal and but to the antiinflation program announced on October The medium-term goals for to are not forecasts. They are projections of the economic performance that would be required to reach the unemployment and inflation goals specified in the act TABLE Economic goals Item Level fourth quarter2 Employment ( millions ) Unemployment ( percent ) Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Productivity1 Real disposable income. RealGNP Consumer prices Based on total real GNP per hour worked Seasonally adjusted Source : Council of Economic Advisers The rate of GNP growth for the period that will be needed if unemployment is to be reduced to percent by will depend on the growth rates of the labor force and productivity. Trends in these variables are hard to predict as experience in the past years indicates Over the next years growth in the population aged and over will decline significantly from about percent in to about percent in The rate of increase in the labor force participation rate ( the ratio of persons in the civilian labor force to the total number within the workingage range ) also seems likely to slow. During recent years the participation rate has increased by at least percentage point annually well above the long-term trend. With slowing growth both in the working-age population and in the participation rate increases in the labor force will taper off from current rates of to percent a year to perhaps % to percent years from now This slowing of labor force expansion will reduce the GNP increase that will be needed to achieve any given reduction in the unemployment rate. At the same time however it is reasonable to expect productivity growth to improve somewhat over that of The slowing of labor force expansion will be accompanied by a shift in the age distribution of the labor force toward more mature workers and the average experience of the labor force will also be lengthened by a reduction in the number of new entrants. These developments will help to stimulate greater productivity growth. Strong growth of investment could also improve the outlook for productivity These considerations suggest that potential GNP over the next year ? might continue to increase at about the percent rate of the past 5-year O period. There may be some slowdown in the growth of potential output during the next 5-year period as increases in the working-age population taper off but information on labor force and productivity trends is not sufficient to permit a forecast of when it will happen In developing the projections in Table for to a potential GNP growth of percent was therefore assumed. The trend rate of increase in productivity underlying this estimate is l/i percent while the trend rate of increase in the labor force is percent ; these two numbers add to more than the percent increase in potential GNP since average hours worked are expected to keep declining as they have done through most of the postwar period. The yearly increases in the labor force and productivity shown in the table vary from the long-term trend because they will be influenced by the actual growth rate of real GNP in that year Jobs and training programs to reduce structural unemployment might make it possible to achieve the goal of a percent overall unemployment rate and percent for adults with a somewhat lower rate of growth of real output Although such programs are primarily aimed at reducing the unemployment rate that is consistent with stable prices they may at least in the short run tend to increase the level of employment and reduce the unemployment rate that is consistent with any given level of real output The increase in real disposable income from to is derived from historical relationships between that variable and real GNP assuming no major changes in income shares between personal income and corporate profits REQUIREMENTS TO ACHIEVE THE ECONOMIC GOALS By any criterion these are very ambitious goals. Achieving all of them simultaneously would demand not only a performance by the American economy that is unprecedented in peacetime history but also government programs that can deal effectively with some of our most intransigent problems particularly inflation and structural unemployment. The fact that the aims are ambitious makes it all the more important to consider carefully and realistically the obstacles to achieving them The difficulties likely to be encountered in moving the economy along the path set out in Table follow two broad lines. First will aggregate demand for goods and services be great enough to propel the economy along a relatively fast growth track from to ? What kind of budgetary policies would be required over the next several years to achieve this kind of economic growth ? Second if real economic growth did proceed at the pace needed to reduce the unemployment rate to percent by what are the prospects that the inflation rate would decline to percent by that year and what are the principal obstacles to such a decline ? Answers to these two groups of questions are related. The likelihood of achieving rapid and sustained economic growth while inflation remains high is very small. Inflation gives rise to forces that raise interest rates and discourage investment. It also increases the uncertainties facing businesses and consumers and at times in \ he past it has severely weakened their propensity to spend. Because inflation reduces confidence abroad as well as at home it can undermine the value of the dollar giving rise to further inflationary pressures. The new act recognizes that inflation and growth are not separable concerns and that public policy must seek ways both to achieve low unemployment and to control inflation Adequacy of Aggregate Demand The growth rates of real GNP that will be needed in to reach the goal of a percent unemployment rate by the end of that period are quite high by past standards but they are not unprecedented. The average rate of growth for those years * percent is actually somewhat lower than the average rate of economic expansion from the last quarter of to the last quarter of which was percent. In evaluating the difficulties in maintaining a 4/2 percent average yearly growth rate of real GNP however one should recall that the current expansion will soon be entering its fifth year The course of economic policies that would ensure sufficient aggregate demand growth to permit the economy to grow at a 4/2 percent rate from through and still avoid excess demand that would interfere with the unwinding of inflation can only be described in very general terms. Our ability to foresee economic developments and to design appropriate policies to deal with emerging problems over a 5-year period is extremely limited. The outlook for is uncertain the prospects for are much more so and the probable course of later developments can be foreseen only dimly. The best we can do is to rely on past experience to indicate possible future patterns of economic activity and tell us the kinds of economic policies most likely to contribute to a strong economy over the next years One way to evaluate the prospects for maintaining strong economic growth is to consider the distribution of saving and investment by sector Defined in terms of the national income and product accounts a sector is a net saver if its income receipts exceed its expenditures. If expenditures exceed receipts the sector has engaged in dissaving that is in net investment. For the economy as a whole expenditures and receipts are two sides of the same coin and hence measured saving and investment must always be equal What one sector saves another must invest This equality of saving and investment in the aggregate is of course an accounting identity. There is no reason why decisions to save and invest should lead to a balance in each of the various sectors of the economy and generally they will not. But when desired amounts of saving and investment do not match adjustments occur in the economic system such as changes in interest rates levels of economic activity or prices that force saving and investment into balance Ill The relation between saving and investment and the level of economic activity can be seen by comparing the distribution of net saving by sector in recent years and ( Table ) In a year of relatively full employment investment incentives in the private sector were strong Gross private investment- including residential construction and business outlays for plant equipment and additions to inventories was large enough that it more than offset gross private saving. The governmental sector was close to balance : a small deficit in the Federal sector ( as measured in the national income and product accounts ) was offset by a surplus in State and local governmental budgets. In a year of recession investment propensities were comparatively weak. Gross private investment was far below the volume of private saving even though the latter was not much larger in relation to GNP than it had been in The counterbalancing item was a deep governmental deficit mainly due to the fact that Federal receipts were depressed below the levels that would have occurred in a more fully employed economy TABLE Net saving by sector and [ Net saving or investment ( ) ] Sector Billions of dollars Billions of dollars Percent of GNP Percent of GNP Private sector : Personal Business1 _ _ Government sector : Federal State and local Foreign sector2 ( ) Gross business saving plus the statistical discrepancy minus gross private domestic investment Net capital grants received by the United States less net foreign investment Less than percent Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Maintaining relatively strong growth from through will require that the excess of private investment over private saving be large enough to offset the net saving by both the governmental sector and the foreign sector in a high-employment economy. Large governmental surpluses would tend to make that task more difficult as would large net saving by the foreign sector Prospects for State and Local Budgets During recent years the aggregate surplus in the State and local sector as measured in the national income and product accounts has been fairly large as much as percent of GNP in The magnitude of this surplus is mainly the result of net payments into social insurance funds for State and local employees. But in and the aggregate operating and capital budget of State and local governments was also in surplus because of slow growth of capital expenditures and substantial increases in Federal grant programs. During the operating and capital accounts have returned to approximate balance ; given the strong demands by citizens to reduce State and local taxes a return to surpluses seems unlikely over the next years. The amount of net saving in the State and local sector between now and is therefore likely to depend mainly on the accumulation rate of the social insurance funds That accumulation rate has been moving up rapidly in the past decade from about one-half of percent of GNP in the middle 1960s to about percent at present. This buildup derived from the relatively rapid increase of State and local employment during the period and the effort by State and local governments to fund their pension liabilities. The upward trend in the ratio to GNP is not likely to continue. Growth of employment in State and local governments no longer exceeds the national average and a good deal of funding of existing pension liabilities has already been accomplished Projections by several prominent private forecasting services put the accumulation rate of State and local social insurance funds in and at around three-fourths of percent of GNP Net Foreign Saving The measure of net saving by the foreign sector in the national income and product accounts is conceptually similar to the current account deficit in the balance of payments. ( The principal difference between them is that the unrepatriated earnings of U.S. firms abroad are counted as an export of services in the current account balance but not included as part of net saving by the foreign sector. ) A projection of net foreign saving or of the current account balance in or any single year would be extremely hazardous In the past years net foreign saving has been about percent of GNP ; in on the other hand the foreign sector showed net dissaving that is net investment by an amount equal to percent of GNP. Relative growth rates in economic activity here and abroad differences in the rate of wage and price increases changes in exchange rates and other factors can cause large movements from one year to the next in our current account balance and hence in net foreign saving Looking at trends over a 5-year period it would be reasonable to expect market forces to bring receipts and payments on current account close to balance and the net amount of foreign saving close to zero. A tendency in that direction is already under way. This year the current account deficit is forecast to decline significantly and a further reduction in is expected By and therefore a reasonable forecast of net saving by the foreign sector would be zero The Federal Budget Prospects for the Federal budget of course depend importantly on the fiscal policies pursued in the years from to If there were no further changes in tax laws or Federal expenditure programs other than those recommended in the fiscal budget and if the economy grew as described in Table Federal receipts would rise much faster than outlays With such a " current policy " budget ( Table ) Federal outlays would decline as a share of GNP to under percent by ; but Federal receipts would rise as a proportion of GNP reaching nearly percent by This rise in receipts results from inflation and real growth which push individuals into higher tax brackets and from the impact of large increases in social security taxes scheduled under current law particularly in calendar years and The unified budget would therefore move from a deficit of $ billion in fiscal to a surplus of $ billion by fiscal TABLE Federal unified budget receipts and outlays under current policy budget fiscal years [ Fiscal years ] Item J Billions of dollars : Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Percent of GNP : Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) ) ' Less than percent Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget A Federal surplus of that size combined with a State and local surplus of three-fourths of percent of GNP would imply an overall government surplus equal to percent of GNP wrhich is much larger than we have usually seen during periods of high employment. Maintaining a strong growth of economic activity under such circumstances would require a substantially larger excess of private investment over private saving than has been typical of past periods of high employment Table shows the balance between investment and saving in the private sector for selected periods of relatively high employment : and the past years. The forecast for is also presented. The difference between private saving and investment in periods of high employment has varied considerably but the excess of private saving over investment has not been more than * percent of GNP. A large surplus in the governmental sector would of course provide ample funds for financing investment outlays and thus tend to encourage a high rate of private invest- ment. But past experience suggests that an excess of private investment over private saving equal to percent of GNP would not be realized even under the best circumstances TABLE Private net saving and investment and the unemployment rate Excess of business investment over personal saving Business net investment Personal saving Period Billions of dollars Percent of GNP Billions of dollars Percent of GNP Billions of dollars Percent of GNP Unemployment rate ( percent ) average. average. average. average. 1977__ * _ average Preliminary * Forecast Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Viewing the issue from a somewhat different vantage point the rise in Federal tax receipts from percent of GNP in fiscal to nearly percent years later would represent a record peacetime increase in the burden of taxation on the private economy. Maintaining strong growth in private consumption and investment in the face of such an increased fiscal drag would be virtually impossible. Adjustments of fiscal policy from the current Administration policy budget would be needed to keep the economy moving forward steadily and strongly In principle a lessening of restraint through fiscal policy adjustments could be accomplished either by increasing Federal outlays above the current policy base or by cutting tax rates. Relying mainly on reductions in taxes to promote growth in the private sector would be consistent with the objectives of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act and with the goals of this Administration. It would also prevent tax burdens from reaching an unprecedented level The appropriate magnitude and timing of such adjustments can not however be determined now. The fiscal policy needed to maintain a smoothly functioning economy from through will depend on spending propensities of consumers and businesses the amount of stimulus or drag on the economy from the foreign sector as well as from State and local government budgets in those years developments affecting wages and prices the course of monetary policy and so on. The stronger the autonomous growth in the non-Federal sectors of the economy the smaller the fiscal policy adjustments needed to keep the economy growing along the path described in Table and the more rapid the progress toward a balanced budget. Achieving a balanced budget is consistent with the principles of the new legislation. But the speed with which that objective can be realized will depend on developments that can not now be foreseen Achieving a balanced Federal budget and at the same time maintaining a high growth rate of real GNP do not appear to be inherently conflicting aims If the Federal budget were in balance in the excess of private investment over saving in would have to be roughly percent of GNP about equal to the probable magnitude of the State and local surplus Such a relationship is within the boundaries of historical precedent. It occurred in and again last year. And the forecast for and implies a continuation of private investment at a rate that would exceed private saving by only a little less than percent Factors Affecting Investment and Saving Demographic factors are likely to favor relatively strong investment growth over the next years. As noted earlier in this chapter the postwar baby boom will give rise to very large increases during the next years in the prime home-buying age group ( years ) The demand for housing is therefore likely to be robust in the years immediately ahead Demographic factors will also work somewhat to keep the personal saving rate low compared to the early 1970s. The Consumer Expenditure Survey data ( Table ) indicate that personal saving rates are about the same between the ages of and but persons in the age group save a considerably higher proportion of their income than others. The number of people in this age group will be rising at a much slower rate than the percent average increase for the group aged and over. Moreover the group aged and over will be growing somewhat more rapidly than the average and the typical saving rate for this group is comparatively low It is true that the population under will be declining during the next years and households with heads under tend to be dissavers. But the proportion of total income and saving accounted for by this group is not large TABLE Saving rate and population growth by age of household head [ Percent ! Saving rate * Age of household head ( years ) Under and over Distribution of disposable personal income Projected annual population growth rate to i Saving as percent of disposable personal income Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) A substantial increase in business investment in the period ahead would be required to improve productivity. Growth in the ratio of capital to labor inputs has been declining since the late 1960s ; in recent years in fact the ratio of capital to labor inputs has not increased at all : the labor force has expanded rapidly while growth in the capital stock has slowed. This decline in capital intensity has been one cause of the lower rate of productivity growth typical of this period. Over the next years business fixed investment will have to increase rapidly if the aggregate capital-to-labor ratio is not to fall even further High investment requirements do not of course translate directly into incentives for businesses to press forward with investment programs to ensure satisfactory growth in the stock of capital. Making certain that the incentives to invest in plant and equipment will encourage the needed rate of capital expansion must be a fundamental aim of economic policy. Policies toward this end are discussed more fully later in this chapter Perhaps the most important single contribution to this objective would be lower inflation. Expectations that the inflation rate will decline steadily over the next years would directly attack one of the obstacles to the recovery in business investment since the uncertainty faced by business has been an important deterrent to investment planning. Indirectly reduced inflation would have even larger effects on financial markets. With declining inflation we could look forward confidently to a marked fall in short- and long-term interest rates to strongly rising stock prices and hence to a reduction in the cost of both debt and equity capital. Thus if inflation can be steadily reduced over the next years prospects would be much improved for achieving a healthy growth in business investment ATTAINING THE GOALS FOR UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION The most difficult problem we as a Nation will face in reaching the goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation is to reduce unemployment to percent and simultaneously lower the rate of inflation to percent. Although our economy was operating at a level somewhat below potential in intensified pressures on wage rates and prices have already appeared The Humphrey-Hawkins Act recognizes that we can not reach the goals for unemployment and inflation simultaneously by relying solely on monetary and fiscal policies. The Administration shares this view. As Chapter indicated the anti-inflation program announced by the President on October is based on the premise that braking the momentum of inflation will require widespread compliance by business and labor in reducing the rate of private price and wage increases. Success in that endeavor is critical to our ability to attain the unemployment goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act as well as the inflation goal. As noted earlier continuation of inflation at a high rate could seriously jeopardize the prospects for maintaining a strong economy Unwinding the inflation inherited from the past will not remove the risk that new inflationary forces might develop in the future. Prudent fiscal and monetary policies will be needed to avoid an emergence of excess demand Improved structural policies will also be required. It will be particularly important to find ways to curb the inflationary effects of substantial future reductions in unemployment from present levels The current structure of labor markets in our economy makes it especially hard to reach percent unemployment and reduce inflation substantially at the same time. Unemployment varies widely across demographic groups. Measures to address the structural sources of unemployment have been an ingredient of government economic policies for more than a decade but differential unemployment ratios among groups in the labor force are greater today than they were years ago. Unless these differentials can be reduced the prospects are dim for making substantial further reductions in the unemployment rate without creating additional inflationary pressures The uneven incidence of unemployment among groups in the labor force is shown in Table for the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of In the earlier period the unemployment rate for adult white males ( aged and over ) the most experienced group of workers in the labor force. was about the same as it was in late Over the past years the unemployment rate for almost every other group has risen relative to the rate for adult white males. This widening of unemployment rate differentials has been caused in part by the fact that other groups which have relatively high unemployment rates are growing faster as a share of the labor force than adult white males TABLE Selected unemployment rates fourth quarter and fourth quarter [ Percent ; seasonally adjusted ] Group All civilian workers White years and over Males.. _ Females Black and other years and over. Males.. Females Teenagers ( years ) White... Black and other Males years and over Females years and over Veterans years Both sexes years and over Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics In well-functioning labor markets some differences among the unemployment rates of various demographic groups can always be expected Teenagers and young adults tend to change jobs more frequently than older workers as they try new occupations and search for long-term careers Short spells of unemployment when they first enter the labor market or while they look for better jobs keep their overall unemployment rate above the average for older workers. Women particularly during child-bearing years tend to move into and out of the labor market more frequently than men The proportion of women and teenagers in the labor force has grown substantially since the earlier postwar years and both of these groups have higher unemployment rates than average. In the overall unemployment rate was percent. If the unemployment rates of each of the various age and sex groups in the labor force today were the same as in the overall rate would be percent. Changes in the demographic composition of the labor force since have thus added about one-half of percentage point to the unemployment rate. Between now and the structure of the labor force is likely to change somewhat bringing a lower proportion of teenagers and a higher proportion of women. However the effect of this change on the overall unemployment rate will not be large. If unemployment rates of each major demographic group in were the same as in the overall rate in would still be percent. Achieving an overall unemployment rate of percent at any time within the next years would therefore require that the jobless rates of many groups within the labor force be brought well below the levels associated with full employment in earlier years Although part of the difference in unemployment rates can be explained by differences in voluntary job turnover and entry and reentry into the labor market major structural obstacles also confront many groups of workers especially but not exclusively minorities. Many potential imbalances in labor markets disappear as workers move from sectors offering relatively poor prospects for employment and earnings to sectors offering better opportunities. But in many instances this process may be blocked by the difficulty of acquiring skills wage rigidities that discourage employers from hiring less productive workers and various sorts of discrimination. As pointed out in Chapter the structural rigidities and uneven incidence of unemployment make it very hard under current circumstances to reduce the overall rate of unemployment substantially below the present level without encountering labor shortages in some markets. As the overall unemployment rate declines demand for skilled prime-age workers exceeds supply of those workers and puts upward pressure on their wages even though unemployment among minorities teenagers and women may remain unacceptably high. The inflationary pressures in the tight labor markets carry over into the rest of the economy contributing to general inflation Chapter also noted that improvements in various income maintenance programs may have increased the time during which individuals search for better jobs thus raising the unemployment rate associated with excess demand in labor markets. The primary focus of labor market policies in the United States has been on manpower training programs public service employment and the provision of labor market information. This Administration has maintained a strong emphasis on these traditional programs but it has also provided resources for new programs aimed specifically at creating work and training opportunities for youths and the poor Achievement of substantially lower rates of overall unemployment in a noninflationary environment will hinge on whether governmental policies can effectively reduce the structural sources of unemployment. Toward that end the Administration is pursuing several strategies First strong efforts are being made to target public service employment programs and to reduce the degree of substitution. In the past the net employment gains attributable to public service employment programs have been considerably smaller than the number of available jobs because some government units used funds from that source to pay for work that would have been done in any case. Amendments to the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ( CETA ) in late were designed to direct public service jobs more effectively toward the unemployed. As the number of these jobs was expanded in and early the Department of Labor took steps to create as many net new jobs as possible with available funds and to eliminate fraud in the program. In a new structural employment component was added under Title II of the act establishing a category of public service jobs specially targeted for the disadvantaged and the long-term unemployed. Under the new Title II program State and local governments are prohibited from supplementing the wages of public service employees During and the Administration emphasized the use of public service jobs to promote recovery. With the economy now closer to high employment the Federal budget for provides funds to support public service jobs under CETA at the end of fiscal An increased share of the jobs however are being designated for the structurally unemployed under Title II. The more specific targeting and the prohibition of supplementation should improve the net job-creating impact of the program Second in the Administration will propose a major incremental welfare reform plan. If enacted promptly this plan will be fully effective in fiscal The Administration 's plan will reform cash assistance programs and further develop the use of CETA to combat structural unemployment The plan will expand Title II of CETA and direct more of the jobs to principal earners in families eligible for cash assistance. The exact number of new Title II jobs in will depend in part on what we learn about CETA in the next years and in part on the budgetary and economic situation in Third special employment programs that are established for youths under the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act and other legisla- tion will continue to pay particular attention to the needs of the disadvantaged. Total funding for these programs in fiscal will be held constant at the fiscal level Fourth the Administration has devoted substantial new resources in and to promoting employment opportunities for the disadvantaged in the private sector. As requested by the President the CETA legislation provides authority for a special private sector employment and training initiative that will finance new job training slots in private business. Under this program private business will join with the Federal Government State and local CETA programs and the U.S. Employment Service to increase permanent private sector jobs for the disadvantaged In addition funding is being sought to create about opportunities for training and work experience that will be available to the disadvantaged under other parts of CETA. The targeted employment tax credit which was enacted in the Revenue Act of provides an income tax credit of percent of the first $ of wages in the first year of employment and percent in the second to encourage the employment of disadvantaged persons particularly youths between the ages of and Although this approach to structural unemployment is new to the United States selective employment subsidies have been tried in a number of European countries including France West Germany Sweden and the United Kingdom In various ways these programs directed toward the problem of structural unemployment can reduce the labor market shortages and inflationary pressures that would otherwise be associated with achieving a low overall rate of unemployment. To the extent that training programs provide skills for disadvantaged groups they increase the supply of workers available to fill some of the skilled and semiskilled jobs that are * created in a rapidly growing economy. Evaluations of the success of Federal training programs for the disadvantaged provide mixed results. But there is some evidence that training programs increase the employability and earning power of trainees by an amount that exceeds the cost of the programs. The extent to which these programs could be expanded significantly and still retain their effectiveness is uncertain Public service employment programs can in principle help the unemployment-inflation tradeoff. If carefully concentrated on the structurally unemployed they can add to total employment without substantially increasing upward wage pressures in the labor market. And to the extent that they inculcate better working habits and skills among those who would otherwise be chronically unemployed they act as a training program with the advantages described above. But several limitations restrict the usefulness of public service employment in dealing with the unemployment-inflation tradeoff. In periods of tight labor markets when the tradeoff problem is most serious a public service jobs program that pays relatively attractive wages may encourage workers who would otherwise be available for private employment to take public service jobs thereby adding to upward wage pressures. On the other hand if public service jobs paid relatively low wages they might attract very few workers during periods of tight labor markets While carefully designed public service employment programs can help provide jobs to the disadvantaged reduction of structural unemployment by enough to achieve the Humphrey-Hawkins unemployment and inflation goals will require the use of other programs as well The more recent additions to our armory of weapons against structural unemployment are the special private sector employment initiative and the targeted tax credit. These have the advantage of directing the structurally unemployed to the private sector where the bulk of new jobs will be forthcoming. They may make an important contribution to improving the tradeoff between unemployment and inflation but they are too new to have been fully evaluated Industrial Capacity and Sectoral Problems At the present time the utilization of industrial capacity is below but not far below the peak levels reached in At that time pressure on capacity especially in raw materials industries began to develop adding to inflationary pressures. To avoid similar problems in the future industrial capacity over the next years would have to expand about as fast as output Last year the Council of Economic Advisers investigated the relation between output investment and capacity expansion. The conclusion was that a fairly rapid expansion of output percent a year between and would raise the capacity utilization rate. The rate would remain however below inflationary levels if there were a substantial expansion of investment similar to that in when both capacity and output grew rapidly. In and the growth of output is forecast to be slower than in Capacity utilization over the next years is therefore unlikely to rise and it might fall somewhat. As a consequence there appears to be little risk of widespread major capacity shortages in this period But in the subsequent years achievement of the Humphrey-Hawkins goals for unemployment would require growth in output averaging about % percent a year or only slightly below the percent growth rate analyzed in last year 's capacity utilization study In general therefore the conclusions reached in last year 's study are applicable to the period. If real GNP grew at a * percent average rate a rapid growth in investment would be necessary to hold the capacity utilization ratio to levels that did not threaten inflation An earlier section of this chapter discussed the relationships between saving investment and the government budget that would be needed to achieve the Humphrey-Hawkins goals for output and employment and still move toward a balanced Federal budget. The analysis showed that a substantial expansion in private investment relative to private saving would be needed. Investment would have to grow at rates approximating those of the period a difficult but not unattainable goal. If that occurs the requisite capacity expansion would be forthcoming There are other ways in which aggregate demand could expand rapidly in the period. Large consumption-oriented tax cuts for example would result in a faster expansion of consumer outlays but a slower growth in private investment than if tax cuts were oriented more toward stimulating capital formation. Consumption-led growth would create a danger that capacity would not expand fast enough to avoid inflationary pressures. Such an outcome would not only defeat the Humphrey-Hawkins goal of reducing inflation but also threaten the possibility of maintaining satisfactory economic growth and achieving a substantial reduction in the rate of unemployment SUMMARY The aspects of economic performance that are critical for the achievement of our longer-run economic objectives were discussed above Growth in aggregate demand sufficient to reduce unemployment to the levels set forth in the act would require fiscal policy adjustments after which could be accomplished within the framework of balancing the budget and reducing Federal outlays as a share of GNP by reducing taxes. A strong growth in private investment would be needed. Business investment would have to be particularly strong but not out of line with performance during other times in the postwar period. Without progress in reducing inflation however this outcome is unlikely to be realized The most difficult obstacle to achieving the goals arises from the potential inconsistency between the objectives for growth and unemployment and the need to reduce inflation. Aggregate demand policies must be framed to take this problem into account. Economic policies for the next years are designed to avoid any acceleration of inflation from the demand side and to use macroeconomic instruments together with the pay and price standards to unwind the inflation inherited from the past. It is clear however that the task of reducing inflation to an acceptable pace will not be completed by We should not commit ourselves now to highly stimulative macroeconomic policies in the years after ; to do so might result in an acceleration of inflation thereby threatening the maintenance of stable economic growth Our prospects for achieving the goals depend upon finding ways to reduce the divergence of unemployment rates among various demographic groups. With the current structure of labor markets reducing the overall unemployment rate to percent and the unemployment rate for adults to percent would require that unemployment rates for experienced adult workers be brought down to extremely low levels. There would be a very substantial excess demand for those workers giving rise to inflationary wage and price increases. The Federal Government has a number of programs in place and is inaugurating several new ones aimed at reducing structural unemployment. At the present time however we can not be sure that continuing or even rapidly expanding these programs would make possible an overall percent unemployment rate without accelerating inflation. Much work needs to be done to improve existing employment programs and discover new approaches to structural problems if the goals of the act are to be realized INVESTMENT POLICY REPORT The Humphrey-Hawkins Act puts considerable emphasis on the importance of capital formation in achieving our national economic goals. One of its requirements is the inclusion of an Investment Policy Report in this Economic Report Private investment during the coming years will play two important roles in shaping economic developments. A strong rise in business fixed investment will be required to achieve sustained economic growth and declining unemployment. Substantial growth in the capital stock will also be needed to expand our capacity to produce. Only by devoting a significant share of current production to replace modernize and expand the capital stock can we hope to maintain adequate growth in productivity Growth in the capital stock will be of strategic importance in particular sectors of the economy. If growth of productive capacity were to lag in sectors producing supplies that were of critical importance in other industries bottlenecks would develop restricting overall growth and adding significantly to inflationary pressures in periods of high demand. This is particularly true of the basic materials and energy-producing industries where substitutes exclusive of imports may be difficult to find Our competitive position in world markets will also depend heavily on whether or not business fixed investment grows at an adequate pace. Most other industrial countries devote a larger share of output to investment than the United States does and their growth rates of productivity have also been higher than ours. Increasing the growth of productivity in the United States would help significantly to improve the outlook for our foreign trade balance and to strengthen the dollar in foreign exchange markets POSTWAR TRENDS IN INVESTMENT AND CAPITAL FORMATION Business fixed investment has been quite volatile historically fluctuating in absolute level and as a percentage of GNP in response to a number of factors : prospects for future output growth and profits the degree of uncertainty about the future growth rates of population and the labor force relative costs of capital and labor and the speed of innovation. As shown in Chart business fixed investment since has ranged between 8/ and percent of real GNP. Although there is no obvious sustained trend in this ratio it tended to hover close to percent in the 1950s and early 1960s and then moved somewhat above percent from to Chart Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real GNP PERCENT o i * i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i * i i i I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE The recovery of investment from the recession was slow. The percent investment share for the third year of recovery was only midway between the low of percent registered in and ( all but being recession years ) and the high of percent scored in Last year investment regained a percent share of GNP If a rough estimate of the investment contributed by the public sector is added to private investment the investment share of GNP is increased. Although differences in statistical measurement and in industry structure make international comparisons imprecise the evidence ( Table ) suggests that the share of investment in gross domestic product is lower in the United States than in other industrial countries. In the years following World War II such differences were explainable by the need in Japan and in European countries to replace productive capital destroyed in the war More than years after the war this explanation can no longer be valid International comparisons are not the only or even the most important indicator of the adequacy of investment. Achieving the objectives of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act over the next years would require strong investment to support the expansion of private demand to equip an increasing number of workers to improve productivity growth and to meet environmental and social goals. The precise amount of capital required to equip a O TABLE Real nonresidential fixed investment as percent of real gross domestic product Country Percent of GDP United States Canada France ' West Germany _ _ Japan United Kingdom- i1970-75 Note. Data are on an OECD basis Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development worker is of course variable. Alternative technologies exist or can be devised to produce the same output with differing ratios of capital to labor and shifts between industries can also change the overall ratio since capital-labor ratios differ across industries. Because growth in the civilian labor force over the past decade has been more rapid than in the preceding years ( percent compared to percent ) an acceleration in investment would have been needed to maintain the rise in the capital-labor ratio achieved earlier. More rapid growth of employment in less capital-intensive sectors ( government trade finance insurance and real estate and some services ) than in manufacturing utilities communication and transportation however has perhaps reduced the need for this acceleration The capital-labor ratio has typically shown a long secular upward trend in all the major industrial countries. This has coincided with improvements in the health and education of the work force and substantial technological change. The precise roles and interactions between these forces in contributing to the secular growth in productivity remain subject to considerable debate and are difficult to verify quantitatively. It is worth noting however that the U.S. capital-labor ratio grew at an average annual rate of nearly percent between and Since then the growth of this ratio has declined more than percentage point. These developments coincided with a decline in the trend rate of growth of productivity in the private nonfarm economy from percent between and to under V/2 percent over the past years. Restoring the earlier trend in the ratio of capital to labor input would make an important contribution to greater productivity growth but such an increase will require devoting a larger share of our national output to business investment than has been characteristic of recent years A number of other considerations suggest that society would benefit from stronger investment than has occurred in much of the recent past. To expand our production of domestic energy at least in part from new sources will require large outlays at some future time. In addition society is demanding protection from environmental pollution occupational hazards and product deficiencies. Achieving these social goals which are not part of output as conventionally measured entails additional investment. Business expenditures for pollution abatement have risen to a significant fraction of total business fixed investment in recent years an estimated percent in and percent of total planned investment in Table illustrates the substantial variation among industries in these outlays. For some the percentage of total investment is more than twice the national average. Investments for pollution abatement and other social objectives may to some degree displace investment that would expand capacity. Consequently higher total investment will be needed if we are to meet both output goals and social objectives TABLE Capital expenditures by business for pollution abatement by industry [ Percent of total capital outlays by business ! planned Industry Total Water Solid waste All industries Manufacturing Durable goods Primary metals Electrical machinery Machinery except electrical Transportation equipment Stone clay and glass Other durables Nondurable goods. Food including beverage. Textiles Paper Chemicals Petroleum Rubber Other nondurables Nonmanufacturing. Mining Railroad Air transportation Other transportation Public utilities Communication commercial and other i Air lb.7 Consists of communication trade service construction finance and insurance Note. Excludes agricultural business ; real estate ; medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations. Pollution abatement operating costs are also excluded Data for are based on the survey conducted in November and December Data for and are based on the survey conducted in November and December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Econcmic Analysis INVESTMENT INCENTIVES The most important inducement for investors is the prospect of future profits from future sales. These profits may come from increased sales activity reductions in production costs or improvements that allow a higher price for the product or attract more buyers of the product. The principal indicators of the profitability of investment are the rate of growth of output the percentage of current capacity that is utilized and the rate of return on the existing capital stock. Costs of investment are also important of course These include the price of physical units of capital and the costs of financing investments. Financing costs depend on the after-tax real rate of return required in capital markets by those who provide funds for investment. Various measures are used for this required rate of return. One is the long-term corporate bond rate adjusted for inflation. The required rate of return could alternatively be captured by the earnings-price ratio in the stock market. The price of physical capital and the effective rate of return required by investors can be combined into a single measure the ratio of the stock market value to the replacement cost of corporate net assets. When investors ' required rate of return rises relative to firms ' current earnings the market value of corporate stock declines relative to its replacement cost Some of the major measures of the profitability and cost of investment are summarized in Table TABLE -Determinants of businessfixedinvestment [ Percent ] Nonfinancial corporations Ratio of real Capacity utiliinvestment to zztion rate in realGNP manufacturing1 Year Cash flow as percent ofGNPJ Rate of return Rate of return Ratio of market on depreciable on stockholders ' value to replacement cost assets equity * of net assets ' L. ? S7 L [ ] L.091 _ _ _ _ average average Federal Reserve Board index Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost * After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth ( physical capital component valued at current replacement cost ) * Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets * Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers A year a ^ o the Economic Report noted that the recession and the period of price controls in had severely depressed investment incentives. As was also noted measures of investment incentives were recovering and continued expansion and rising utilization rates held the promise of further improvement Table presents preliminary data for indicating substantial further gains in capacity utilization and in the rate of return on stockholders ' equity The latter measure the ratio of after-tax economic profits to net worth was boosted by the effect of inflation in reducing the real burden of corporate debt. Furthermore the improvement in the rate of return on stockholders ' equity relative to earlier periods partly reflects a shift in the structure of corporate financing of investment from equity to debt issues The rate of return on all depreciable assets ( profits before tax plus capital consumption adjustments and interest paid ) maintained the level it had achieved in but did not increase further. The rate of corporate cash flow was slightly depressed because profit growth slowed somewhat ; although profits measured in book value terms were strong a significant part of this strength was attributable to capital gains on inventories and to underestimation of depreciation both resulting from the increase in inflation The weakest of the determinants of investment in was the ratio of market value to replacement cost of capital which fell in response to the weakness in stock prices. Equity values have risen relatively little during this cyclical recovery for many reasons : uncertainties engendered by the depth of the recession the sharp disruption caused by higher energy costs fluctuations in the exchange value of the dollar and a volatile inflation rate Of the four measures of profitability shown in Table only one the rate of return on stockholders ' equity has regained the average The other three are well below the average and still further below the average for when investment outlays rose very strongly In view of the possible increase in the perceived risks of investment since the early 1970s one might surmise that businesses have begun to respond differently to the usual measures of investment incentives. During the past year the Council of Economic Advisers extended its earlier analysis of this subject. Economists have suggested several alternative formulations or models of the determination of investment which emphasize to various degrees the influence on investment of growth of output variations in capacity utilization changes in cash flow and in the rental price of capital and the ratio between the market value of capital and its replacement cost. All involve substantial margins of error The Council has not attempted to choose between these different formulations. It has tested for each model whether the statistical relation between investment and those factors that determine investment in the model differ significantly in the various periods covered by the examination This analysis suggests that the behavior of investment in equipment has not changed significantly during the years since in comparison with earlier years. Variations from year to year in the strength of investment in equipment relative to the forces expected to determine it have remained within the normal margin of error. Indeed if there has been any point in recent years at which the pattern of investment in equipment seems to have changed the most likely time would have been in This period also marked the beginning of a slowdown in the growth of the capitallabor ratio Most formulations indicate that investment in structures was unusually slow following the recession and that the substantial recovery last year was not explained by reference to previous relationships. Quite possibly special factors affecting particular industries may underlie this structural change. For example early in the recovery the impact of environmental regulations on the steel industry was very heavy at a time when capacity utilization and profits were exceptionally low both here and abroad and foreign competition was particularly severe. Similarly uncertainties about energy prices may have had a perverse effect on investment by utilities before the enactment of the energy bill This analysis suggests tentatively that some weakening of the demand for equipment may have occurred at the end of the 1960s or early in the 1970s in response to greater perceived risks and that a variety of special factors may have disrupted the normal pattern of investment in structures. Moreover as noted above the profitability of investment has not yet regained the high level prevailing in the early 1960s. If the investment needed to reach our economic goals in is to be realized policy actions are required that will strengthen investment incentives and reduce investment costs and risks Tax policy is one instrument that can encourage investment by lowering the rental cost of capital or raising its after-tax rate of return. The Revenue Act of contained important measures toward achieving this end The corporate tax rate was reduced by lowering the top rate from percent to percent and by scaling the rate up more gradually across four brackets instead of two so that the top rate is paid on earnings over $ rather than $ The act also made the investment tax credit permanent. The limitation on the amount of tax liability that could be offset by the credit is to be raised from to percent by percentage point increments from to ; the credit is extended to cover rehabilitation of nonresidential structures and single-purpose agricultural and horticultural structures ; and it is liberalized for certain pollution control facilities Selected tax treatment of small businesses was also liberalized. Finally taxes on capital gains were reduced. The proportion of net long-term capital gains that can be excluded from an individual 's taxable income was raised from percent to percent. The alternative tax of percent was dropped and the excluded portion of capital gains will no longer be counted as a preference item subject to the minimum tax. A new alternative minimum tax was introduced however with a maximum rate of percent These changes reduce the effective tax rate on capital gains by about one-third All of these tax changes result in a lower rate of taxation on returns to corporate capital the key sector for productivity-raising investment since it produces percent of total private output. The corporate rate reduction and the investment tax credit will have the greatest effect because they are concentrated directly on the corporate sector and on the relatively heavily taxed capital-intensive industries in that sector. The reduction in the capital gains tax may also be helpful in encouraging the supply of risk capital but lowering capital gains taxes is not an efficient means of promoting investment Only one-third of taxable capital gains accrue on corporate stock or on assets owned by corporations. Only two-thirds of capital gains accrue on reproducible long-lived assets used in production. The part of the tax advantage that accrues to other sectors ( for example capital gains on land ) may have no investment effect. Furthermore a significant fraction of gains accrue in already lightly taxed industries. As a result this tax change conflicts with the objective of equalizing taxation across industries and thus distorts the efficiency with which markets allocate resources Further tax reductions designed to strengthen investment incentives may well be needed in the years ahead to encourage a high rate of investment in new plant and equipment. Given the budgetary constraints required in the near future to reduce inflation there is no room for additional tax cuts now. Over the longer term however opportunities for further general tax reduction will emerge. As they do reductions carefully designed to strengthen incentives for business investment should be given high priority Other public policies have a substantial influence on investment incentives Pollution abatement requirements and other forms of social regulation pertaining to health and safety impose costs on private industry both current operating costs ( for example by requiring extra workers for waste treatment processes ) and capital costs ( covering such items as extra equipment for safety and pollution control ) Industries like steel coal chemicals and electric utilities have been especially affected As discussed in Chapter the Administration is working to make the regulatory process more rational. A strong and successful effort in this direction offers promise of reducing significantly the costs of regulation relative to its social benefits. In turn this should reduce the effective capital costs of investment projects and thereby strengthen investment incentives Furthermore removing some of the uncertainty regarding future regulations will facilitate business investment decisions Other policy measures should also help to reduce the risks faced by those responsible for making investments. The energy legislation enacted last year will make the relative prices of various types of fuels more predictable. Coordination of Federal efforts to improve productivity is being undertaken by the National Productivity Council a cabinet-level group. A major effort is also under way to promote more rapid innovation through increased emphasis on research and development RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Research and development expenditures are a form of investment on which the returns are very uncertain especially in the case of basic research In some instances society as a whole may benefit from research that adds nothing to an individual investor 's profits : for example, when it is discovered that a theory does not work. Moreover the investor is usually unable to capture all of the returns from research even when the results are directly useful. The limited life of a patent and uncertainties about patent rights and the enforcement of patents have deterred investment in research and innovation The slow growth of research and development expenditures in this country in recent years may account for a part of the low productivity growth of the 1970s. After correction for inflation expenditures for research and development in were only percent above their level in This slow growth was largely due to the decline in space-related research ; private expenditures for research and development grew at roughly the same pace as the economy. In contrast to the trend over the past decade real Federal support for research and development rose by percent in and by percent in while total spending for this purpose increased to and percent respectively in these years. This amounts to a 2-year gain almost three times as great as the rise in the previous years Recognizing the importance of basic research to innovation and the high risks of conducting such research in the private sector the Administration initiated a significant expansion of obligating authority and outlays for basic research and development in the fiscal budget. Outlays this year in current dollar terms will rise by almost percent from fiscal levels and they are scheduled to increase by an additional percent in fiscal The President has also begun a comprehensive interagency review under the leadership of the Secretary of Commerce of all Federal policies bearing on the process of industrial innovation. This review will rely on assistance from relevant Federal agencies representatives from business and labor and other interested parties. Its scope is not limited to the influence the Federal Government exerts through direct expenditures and grants for research ; it will also consider the effect of patent antitrust procurement and other governmental polices that bear indirectly on research and innovation THE SUPPLY OF INVESTMENT CAPITAL The supply of resources available for business fixed investment is limited by the capacity of the economy to produce goods and by the amounts of those goods that are preempted for other public and private uses. When substantial slack remains in the economy expansion of public spending or private consumption has little or no adverse impact on the supply of investment goods. In fact an expansion of public spending or consumer demand is likely under those circumstances to increase investment by improving the perceived profitability of investment When the economy is operating close to capacity however increases in public demand or private consumption will adversely affect business fixed investment because prices of capital goods are bid up and the cost of borrowing rises. One aim of Federal policy must be to avoid excess aggregate demand and the inflation and credit market tightness that it generates. A second aim must be to analyze carefully the social costs and benefits of Federal programs in order to control the share of the Nation 's output absorbed by the government. Achieving this goal in the context of favorable tax and monetary policies will help provide the real resources credit market conditions and incentives needed for rapid growth of the capital stock As the Federal budget is moved toward balance in the context of continued economic expansion and as growth in the government share of total output is curbed in the years ahead more resources will be available for business fixed investment. The combination of this fiscal policy with successful steps to reduce inflation will create the environment in which monetary policy can offer more encouragement to investment Financial capital in recent years has been available at attractive real interest rates although nominal rates have remained high. Nonfinancial corporations have raised substantial amounts of funds in credit markets. The ratio of funds raised in credit markets to total capital expenditures began to rise rapidly in late and reached a peak in the first quarter of last year after which it tapered off. The first quarter peak was surpassed historically only in isolated quarters during the investment boom A similar pattern appears in the nonfarm noncorporate sector. For farm business on the other hand growth of credit use was more modest than in other sectors during but it accelerated sharply in the second and third quarters of last year to a pace more than percent above the average These relatively high rates of business credit expansion were facilitated by the steady flows of funds to those financial intermediaries that are important for business lending particularly life insurance companies and pension funds. Growth in pension fund reserves a means by which households indirectly provide loans to businesses and governments rose by a dramatic percent between and In the second and third quarters of last year the average growth in these reserves was percent above the pace The cost and availability of equity capital are more volatile than is true of debt capital since they depend on the expectations of the public as reflected in stock prices and on the willingness of private and institutional investors to accept equity market risks. In periods when credit markets are weak firms may thus be forced to accept a higher debt-equity ratio than they would prefer. This is particularly likely in periods when the flow of internal funds is small relative to desired investment. It probably happens also to firms in cyclically sensitive industries that do not have exceptionally strong growth trends and to newer businesses that have not yet established strong earnings records. In and the first half of new issues of common and preferred stock accounted for only percent of the gross proceeds of stock and bond issues. The lagging recovery of the stock market during the current expansion is undoubtedly a major reason why this ratio is lower than in the mid-1960s when stock prices were high SMALL BUSINESSES The availability of capital and particularly equity capital to small businesses is a fundamental concern. The data at hand suggest persistently higher debt-equity ratios for small corporations ( those with assets under $ million ) manufacturing nondurable goods than for larger ones. For small manufacturers of durable goods the ratio of debt to equity has been higher than for large corporations in all years since except in the period from to when borrowing by large corporations rose sharply These higher debt-equity ratios and a corresponding heavier reliance on bank credit are partly due to the fact that small businesses tend to have a higher proportion of assets invested in inventories and a lower proportion in plant and equipment. This in turn may be caused by a differing distribution of large and small firms within various industries. It may also however be a symptom of imperfections in capital markets that limit the availability of equity capital Programs of the Small Business Administration ( SBA ) are designed to increase the financial capital available to small firms. In the number of direct loans approved by the SBA rose percent and the dollar value of new loans rose percent. In addition to the direct loan program the SBA also licenses regulates and provides financial assistance to small business investment companies ( SBICs ) The privately owned SBICs pool public and private funds in order to provide equity and long-term debt capital to newer small businesses. These latter firms in contrast to those financed by other SBA programs tend to operate in new markets or with new technology. At the end of there were SBICs making use of $ million of private capital and $ million of funds from the SBA. The volume of new financing arranged during fiscal was $ million a percent increase from the preceding year. In order to provide special attention to the needs of businesses owned by socially or economically disadvantaged persons the SBA administers a parallel program of SBICs for minority enterprises. The volume of loans under this program grew percent in fiscal CHAPTER The World Economy Managing Interdependence F ROM THE EARLY 1950s THROUGH THE LATE 1960s growing economic interdependence provided the major impetus toward sustained rapid growth in the world economy. Just years ago in his last Economic Report President Johnson wrote : In the past two decades enormous progress has been made in building a closely knit international economy. Remarkable growth in the volume of international commerce has gone hand in hand with sustained world prosperity ; each has contributed to the other. At times deep and obvious strains in the international monetary system have imperiled this progress but these financial difficulties have been weathered without a serious setback in economic growth or world trade Much has changed throughout the last decade. In some areas the momentum of the 1960s has continued : an ever-growing share of world production is devoted to international trade. Financial markets have become more integrated internationally and have adapted to the task of recycling unprecedented flows of funds from surplus to deficit countries. For a few countries of the Third World and the southern tier of Europe rapid export growth and particularly the shift in the composition of exports toward manufactured goods have occasioned rapid rises in income growth and production There have also been fundamental changes in the international economic system. The most dramatic change of course was the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange rates and its replacement by a system of market-determined flexible exchange rates. This change has by and large helped the world economy to adjust to the severe problems confronting it in the past years the rise in oil prices and the poor harvests of the subsequent serious recession persistently high and divergent rates of inflation in most industrial countries and the hesitant economic recovery outside the United States The evolution of the floating rate regime has given individual countries more elbow room for steering their economies in different directions. The extent of independence however is limited and the need for some coordina- tion of economic policies remains. Indeed to some extent the major lesson of and is that policy divergences produce severe strains : the rapid expansion in the United States relative to other major industrial countries triggered a large and potentially destabilizing depreciation of the dollar during The rise in U.S. inflation and the depreciation of the dollar led the United States to implement a policy of monetary and fiscal restraint in coordination with a cooperative action to deal with exchange-market disturbances A second major change from the picture years ago and one which has been appreciated only slowly is the pronounced decline in growth dynamism of the industrial world. Growth of potential output has been retarded but growth of actual output has fallen even further. Aggregate demand has been sluggish throughout the industrial world outside of the United States since Weak investment and cautious consumers generally slowed private demand. Yet the need to reduce inflation and the large external and public deficits made policy makers cautious. As a result the overall growth in the countries making up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) slowed to an average of percent over the period compared to percent in the preceding decade The reasons for the slowdown of potential output are not fully evident The slowing of investment virtually everywhere has resulted in an aging capital stock. The growth of trade has slowed and the earlier economic gains from economic integration have not been repeated. In many countries the hidden unemployment in agriculture has largely disappeared leaving little of the productivity bonus that accompanies a declining primary sector Clearly the sharp rise in the cost of energy has led to some costly substitution To a lesser extent generally higher and more volatile commodity prices may have retarded some productive sectors Finally both actual and potential output growth has probably been restrained because of new views concerning the value of change and economic growth. Occasionally a new spirit of " preservationism " has created pressures to protect the existing structure of jobs and wages and bolster weak sectors In part this spirit is a reaction to acute problems in key industries : excess capacity in steel shipbuilding and textiles for example burdens many economies. But a more cautious attitude has also increased the difficulties of shifting resources from declining to expanding sectors. Preservationist pressures encourage protectionist trade measures or internal subsidies that could make the world economy even less dynamic and more prone to inflation The adventurous spirit that once characterized much industrial activity and is vital to rapid structural and economic change may have been suppressed at least temporarily by the uncertainties of the recent past Managing interdependence today is a major challenge. We have been through a period in which in contrast to the robust postwar expansion growth potential has declined and inflationary pressures have increased. To some extent these conditions may prevail for a number of years. In the past numerous structural factors favored rapid expansion and rising productivity : relative commodity and energy prices fell trade barriers were lowered new technologies came in quickly and economies of scale were realized. These favorable factors have been weakened or reversed. The challenge to policy at home and abroad is twofold : to steer our economies safely through these more hazardous waters and to create conditions that favor sustained economic growth. Improved international coordination of domestic policies will be essential to accomplish both of these tasks THE GLOBAL ECONOMY : DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS In many ways can be seen as a year of transition for industrial countries. Here in the United States economic growth began to slow after a strong recovery earlier. In the other major industrial countries where recovery had been hesitant growth accelerated somewhat though not enough to reduce excess capacity substantially or to prevent a continued upward drift in unemployment ( Chart ) The inflation rate accelerated in the United States. In most other industrial countries inflation rates which on average exceeded those in the United States during continued to decline. As a result the rate Chart Unemployment in the U.S. and Five Major Industrial Countries PERCENT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED UNITED STATES IG FIVE ' l i l l i I I I i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I II II II I I I I III II I I I1 I y JAPAN. GERMANY FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM AND CANADA. DATA ARE GNP-WEIGHTED AVERAGE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I I I I I I I I I I of inflation in the United States in was higher than the average level for the major foreign countries ( Chart ) External positions also changed markedly during For the OECD countries as a group the combined current account deficit declined sharply The deficit of the United States widened somewhat but this was more than offset by the large rise in the combined surplus of the other major countries especially Japan and a marked decline in the combined deficit of the smaller OECD members. Nevertheless as the year progressed there were increasing indications that the major imbalance between the positions of the United States and Japan was beginning to be reversed. Both the Japanese surplus and the U.S. deficit were smaller in the second half of than in the first half The year should see some correction in the cyclical divergence that has arisen since the oil crisis. As shown in Table the anticipated slowing of growth in the United States is matched by an expected slight rise of growth abroad. For the first time since growth abroad is likely to exceed growth in the United States. ( It should be noted that the growth rates presented here are year over year rather than fourth quarter over fourth quarter as generally presented elsewhere in this Report. ) Chart Consumer Price Inflation Rate in the U.S. and Six Major Industrial Countries PERCENT- ^ ANNUAL RATES UNITED STATES i ^ PERCENT CHANGE FROM PRECEDING QUARTER AT ANNUAL RATE i/JAPAN GERMANY FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM CANADA AND ITALY. DATA BASED ON GNP/GDP WEIGHTS AND EXCHANGE RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND NATIONAL SOURCES TABLE Annual growth in real GNP in the United States and other major industrial countries [ Percent change ] Country CO CO United States Big Six average Preliminary Forecast Japan Germany France United Kingdom Canada and Italy ; OECD estimates. For average based on GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates ; for based on GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers Inflation rate differentials are also expected to narrow somewhat during in line with the anticipated slowing of inflation in the United States and a possible increase in inflation in some foreign countries. Trade and current account imbalances are expected to diminish further as a result of the shift in relative growth and of the large exchange rate movements during GROWTH AND INFLATION In the major foreign countries there was a modest rise in the growth of gross national product ( GNP ) in Table records the growth rates of GNP during and for each of the major foreign countries and the United States. Also included are two columns showing the average annual growth of GNP prior to as well as the average rate of growth since then TABLE Annual growth in real GNP in major industrial countries [ Percent change except as noted ] Country United States... Japan Germany France United Kingdom_ Canada Italy average average ' GNP shortfall in ( percent ) * Preliminary Difference between actual GNP and the level that would have been reached if growth since had equaled its trend rate expressed as a percent of actual GNP Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers The final column shows the percentage difference between the actual GNP in and the level of GNP that would have existed in if growth had proceeded after at its trend rate. The gap recorded in the last column is not meant to indicate the precise difference between actual and potential output. Few deny that potential output growth has slowed everywhere in recent years and in some cases sharply although considerable uncertainty remains about the current underlying trend for potential output What the gap does indicate is that for whatever reasons the major indus- trial countries outside the United States have witnessed a dramatic reduction in growth since the oil crisis Evidence that at least part of the slower growth is due to a slowdown in potential growth is shown in Table Each of the large industrial countries has shown significantly lower productivity growth in the last years compared to the earlier period. Clearly part of the poor productivity performance is due to low utilization rates. Even after correcting for utilization TABLE Annual growth in GNP per employed worker in major industrial countries ( Percent change ) Average Country United States Japan. Germany France United Kingdom. __ Canada Italy __ ni ? n n i Estimate Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and recognizing analytical shortcomings in the productivity measure however some slowdown is evident. The largest absolute decrease occurred in Japan where growth in GNP per worker slowed from to percent annually Whatever the new rates of potential growth may be the actual GNP growth outside the United States was apparently not above the underlying potential growth in and In the fifth year after the onset of recession recovery toward a fuller utilization of potential among countries outside the United States continues to be extremely hesitant and incomplete To some extent the slowing of potential growth and the weakness of actual growth relative to potential since are tied together. In Japan for instance the sharp fall in potential growth reduced capital requirements and hence reduced required investment as a share of output. Because this fall was not matched by a decline in the personal saving rate a problem of excess saving emerged. This imbalance was absorbed partly by the rise in the external surpluses and government budget deficits and partly by the decline in income and production relative to potential output. In Japan as in other countries low rates of actual investment constitute a major reason for the hesitant recovery of demand. At the same time as mentioned earlier sluggish investment has led to a marked aging in the capital stock and has further checked the growth of potential output by limiting productivity increases The principal factors constraining more expansionary policies during the current recovery have been persistently high rates of inflation in most countries and the resulting judgment that relatively cautious fiscal and monetary policies were needed. Even in those countries making notable progress in reducing inflation by particularly Germany and Japan fear of renewing inflation continued to dampen enthusiasm for more expansionary fiscal and monetary policies In constraints on policies eased somewhat outside the United States as rates of inflation declined almost everywhere ( Table ) For the United Kingdom and Italy where the rates had been highest the decline was impressive. As a result of relaxed constraint fiscal policies also tended to TABLE Changes in consumer prices in major industrial countries [ Percent i ] Country United States... Japan Germany France United Kingdom Canada Italy Changes measured from year average to year average Estimate Sources : Department of Labor Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers become significantly more expansionary in the major foreign countries : according to OECD estimates the direct impact of fiscal policy shifts in amounted to over one-half of percent of GNP for the major foreign countries excluding Japan and to over percent for Japan The pattern of changes in growth and inflation rates was heavily influenced by the marked decline of the dollar and the consequent appreciation of most other major currencies. In countries where exchange rates appreciated it is broadly true that GNP growth lagged behind the growth of domestic demand and that inflation rates declined. In this environment fiscal policy became more expansionary during the course of the year. These shifts in fiscal policy were both necessary and appropriate. They were necessary because extra stimulus was required to offset the negative effect on GNP of the adverse shift in real net exports. And they were appropriate because the reduction in inflation due to currency appreciation gave policy makers breathing room to shift toward more expansionary policies. Moreover in Germany and even more in Japan a reduction in the current account surplus required a shift in policy to make sure that shifts in export and import volume would eventually become large enough to offset the effects of the currency appreciation on terms of trade For the United States the opposite set of circumstances prevailed. A weak external sector accelerating inflation rapidly declining unemployment and a depreciating currency made it necessary to shift toward a more restrictive fiscal and monetary policy. Indeed this shift occurred during the year The need to realign and coordinate economic policies both in the United States and abroad so as to promote external adjustment and reduce diver- O gences in economic performance across countries was increasingly recognized during In the course of meetings that culminated in the Economic Summit at Bonn in July a significant degree of coordination was realized. At the Bonn meeting the leaders of the seven largest industrial countries discussed the major goals and problems in the world economy and a Concerted Action Program was devised in which each country made appropriate specific commitments The Bonn Summit marked a turning point particularly for the United States. The United States noted that curbing inflation has become the top priority of economic policy. The President therefore pledged to take specified actions to reduce the U.S. inflation rate obtain a more rapid reduction in our current account deficit and adopt an energy policy which would by cut our imports of petroleum by million barrels per day In addition Germany and Japan proposed steps to increase growth and thus reduce external surpluses : Germany to provide additional fiscal stimulus totaling percent of GNP ; Japan to achieve a percent growth in real GNP between March and March The other participating countries ( France Italy the United Kingdom and Canada ) whose high rates of inflation provided less scope for specific action made broadly complementary commitments. At the same time each country recognized the overriding importance of not allowing sluggish growth sectoral difficulties or trade imbalances to serve as pretexts for actions that would undermine the framework of free trade among nations. A joint commitment covered more fully later in this chapter was adopted to secure a rapid and successful outcome for the Multilateral Trade Negotiations Considerable progress has been made in meeting these commitments. As discussed earlier in this Report the United States has in place a major anti-inflation program and has shifted both fiscal and monetary policies toward restraint. The National Energy Act signed at year 's end establishes a comprehensive framework for rationalizing energy policy and reducing oil imports along the lines discussed at Bonn. Germany completed legislation in December that fully implements its own commitment Although Japan began in September to carry out a supplementary fiscal program to stimulate growth it now seems likely to fall well below the percent growth target The Concerted Action Program adopted at Bonn marks an important step in international economic cooperation. On a substantive plane the measures taken helped put the major economies onto more balanced and sustainable paths. More important is the symbolic significance : it is now clearly recognized at home and abroad that in a world where countries are interdependent policy choices by one nation directly affect economic performance in others. If some countries grow very slowly their trading partners will be forced to abandon dynamic export industries ; if one country attempts to protect its industries at the border or by domestic subsidies others will have to retrench ; if one nation pursues extremely rapid growth or inflationary policies the resulting exchange rate depreciation may lead to uncertainties and market disorders. Increasing awareness of these linkages and acceptance of the responsibilities they imply represent the goal of policy coordination exemplified by the Summit PROSPECTS Although the shift toward more rapid growth abroad is a welcome development the world economy continues to face difficult challenges. GNP growth while expected to maintain the rates will remain low by the standards of the 1960s and it will be hard to generate enough jobs to redyce unemployment. In some countries more extensive use of specific job programs and special incentives to reduce structural unemployment of young workers must effectively supplement demand management policies if further increases in unemployment are to be avoided Most economies also face excess capacity in basic industries such as steel textiles and shipbuilding. The consolidation of these sectors by reducing capacity and the resulting loss of jobs aggravate labor market problems Ways must therefore be found to smooth the transfer of workers from declining to expanding sectors. Securing a more rapid rate of job creation is made harder by continued low rates of investment in plant and equipment. While some growth in investment occurred in the basic circumstances have not changed substantially. Excess capacity remains large and prospects indicate only a moderate growth in demand. In this environment a sharp acceleration of investment during is not foreseen While faster growth would greatly benefit most foreign economies inflation rates in all but a few OEGD countries remain too high for governments to pursue policies that are significantly more expansionary. Even relatively restrictive macroeconomic policies will bring only a gradual decline in inflation. In some countries inflation may accelerate again as the favorable effects of exchange rate appreciation and commodity price declines wear off Thus despite some easing of constraints on policy in countries outside the United States the economic environment presents difficulties. Few easy solutions are available ; and according to an increasing number of observers it will take a continued effort to bring about conditions more favorable to sustained economic growth CURRENT ACCOUNT DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS In there were marked changes in global payments positions ( Table ) First the large current account surplus of the countries making up the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) diminished sharply and unexpectedly from about $ billion in to an estimated $ billion in TABLE World current account balance,11975-78 [ Billions of dollars ] Country OECD countries United States Big Six and Switzerland OtherOECD OPEC countries Non-oil developing countries Other * OECD basis Estimate Japan Germany France United Kingdom Canada and Italy Reflects errors and asymmetries as well as balances with omitted country groups Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers This remarkable decline resulted from volume and price effects in about equal measure. The volume of OPEC oil exports actually fell somewhat in ; a consequence of the slackened pace of growth in energy demand in the industrial countries and the rapid expansion of other sources of oil. North Sea Alaskan and increased Mexican production accounted together for a rise in production of million barrels per day or roughly percent of total OPEC production At the same time the volume of imports into OPEC countries continued to grow at a significant though slowing rate a result of the momentum of ongoing development plans in a number of OPEC countries. Price movements have also been important in reducing the OPEC surplus. The dollar price of oil remained roughly constant while import prices rose Second in the so-called non-oil developing countries ( that is the poorer countries outside of OPEC and the OECD ) the combined deficit expanded considerably last year. The terms of trade which had been generally favorable in turned against such countries in late and early Late last year however the terms of trade again strengthened appreciably. Borrowing conditions for most of these developing countries remained favorable and many of them borrowed substantial amounts to service outstanding debt maintain the growth of their imports and increase their gross reserves for the third consecutive year The most striking change in however was the disappearance of the OECD deficit. The aggregate deficit of the OECD countries $ billion in gave way to a small surplus in This turnaround was the second largest recorded year-to-year change in the OECD external position ; it was exceeded only by the large shift from surplus to deficit which followed the OPEC price rise. It was surprising that the decline passed virtually unnoticed and had little effect on developments during the year compared to those occurring in the period The OECD can be usefully divided into three groups. The first comprises countries in surplus ; the second contains small countries chiefly in deficit ; and the United States is the third. Starting with the surplus countries one should note that the largest part of the decline in the OECD deficit is accounted for by the rise in the combined surpluses of Japan Germany France Italy and Switzerland. These countries along with the United Kingdom experienced strong gains in their terms of trade that is the prices received for exports rose more rapidly than prices paid for imports principally because of appreciation in their exchange rates A gain in the terms of trade affects the favored country in two ways. First it increases income and thus tends to have a stimulating effect on aggregate demand similar to that of a tax cut. Second after some time however the higher export prices tend to depress the volume of exports while the lower import prices tend to raise the volume of imports thereby reducing aggregate demand. Table records the movement in current account balances for each of the countries named above except Switzerland and shows the relative size of the two different effects in : the ratio between the gain in terms of trade and domestic demand and the ratio between the change in the volume of net exports and GNP TABLE Current account balances for selected major industrial countries Current account balance * Country Billions of dollars Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy Gain in terms of trade as percent of domestic demand Change in volume of net exports as percent of real GNP Percent OECD basis Estimate The gain in terms of trade is the percent change in export prices times export value minus the percent change in import prices times import value Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers Even though estimation of gains in terms of trade is subject to a considerable margin of error because of serious measurement difficulties the results are striking. These five countries experienced very large gains in income from the terms of trade in and excepting the United Kingdom had little or no offset from the declining volume of net exports. The income gains however do not appear to have been matched by a corresponding rise in the growth of real output especially when allowance is also made for the expansionary shifts in fiscal policy. A possible explanation for this relatively weak multiplier effect is that because these income gains were perceived to be transitory they were largely absorbed in increased household and corporate saving rather than in increased expenditures The second group of OECD countries comprising the smaller nations in the aggregate reduced their deficits in by about $ billion. This reduction was especially welcome in view of the very large deficits these countries had run from to when their net indebtedness grew by close to $ billion. Indeed external positions had become unsustainable for a number of countries in this group and severe retrenchment was necessary. Stabilization programs were developed in connection with upper credittranche drawings from the International Monetary Fund for Portugal and Turkey. Governments in the Scandinavian countries acted to forestall further accumulation of debt that might well have become a source of difficulty in a few years. For still others the extent of improvement in their current account was limited by adverse shifts in the terms of trade stemming from the fall in a number of raw materials prices. For the group as a whole the decline in current account deficits can be explained almost entirely by the reduction in import volumes relative to export volumes The United States stands alone in the third category. Throughout the postwar period the growth of U.S. imports tended to be greater in relation to domestic growth than the growth of exports in relation to growth abroad Until a rough balance between import and export growth was maintained by the fact that growth abroad tended to exceed U.S. growth. From through however growth in the United States surpassed the average growth abroad. As a result the current account of the United States shifted sharply. In a year in which U.S. economic growth exceeded that of its trading partners by about V/2 percentage points the U.S. current account shifted by almost $ billion from a surplus of $ billion to a deficit of $ billion. Roughly three-fourths of this shift is accounted for by the more rapid growth of merchandise import volumes compared to export volumes. The remainder of this shift reflected changes in the terms of trade and in the composition of trade only partly offset by gains in service transactions On the basis of preliminary estimates the current account shifted toward deficit in by a further $ billion. There was however substantial improvement from the first half of the year to the second when growth in export volume picked up and import growth began to moderate. Despite the depreciation of the dollar during this period the expected adverse shift in the terms of trade was restrained to a significant degree by the constancy of the price of oil imports'and by the general increase in the prices of manufactured goods relative to the prices of primary commodities The shifts that occurred in in current account positions among the countries of OPEC the non-oil developing countries and the OECD countries are not likely to be reversed in The large oil price increase announced by OPEC last December will seriously complicate the task of economic management in the industrial and non-oil developing countries This price increase is not expected to result in a substantial widening of the OPEC surplus from levels however since imports by OPEC will also continue to rise. It can be said that the industrial countries are now paying the " OPEC oil tax " largely in current goods and services rather than I O Us. As a result the so-called recycling problem has become much less troublesome though the surpluses of a few individual OPEC countries will continue for years to come. More generally the traditional pattern of resource flows between countries in which the major industrial countries are net capital exporters to the developing countries and to other poorer countries within the OEGD appears to have been firmly reestablished Barring a substantial run-up in commodity prices the deficits of the nonoil developing countries are likely to rise somewhat in Such a rise in deficits would appear to be consistent with the strong liquidity positions of many countries in this group the ability of a growing number of countries to borrow successfully on international financial markets at lower interest spreads and longer maturities and the apparent willingness of banks to increase their lending to developing countries despite a few isolated debt rescheduling problems during Among industrial countries of the OEGD a more balanced distribution of surpluses and deficits is likely to emerge in The U.S. current account deficit is expected to decline considerably from the levels at the end of dropping to about an annual rate of $ $ billion by the end of This reduction will result from two conditions : first the effects of slower U.S economic growth on imports ; and second a steady and vigorous growth in exports as markets continue to adjust to the improved price competitiveness of American goods and services that resulted from last year 's depreciation of the dollar Some decline too is anticipated in the surpluses of Japan and Germany Expectations for the decline of the Japanese surplus are grounded primarily in the anticipation of a further fall in the volume of Japanese exports. Import volumes rose only moderately in after allowance for large accounting transactions made under the emergency import program. They are unlikely to accelerate strongly this year despite the appreciation of the yen because of the relatively closed structure of many Japanese import markets This one-sidedness in adjustment by Japan is likely to intensify the difficulty of reducing the Japanese surplus to a sustainable level over a longer period The need for a sustained reduction of barriers in Japanese import markets is well recognized by Japanese officials and extensive discussion between Japan and the United States during has laid the groundwork for progress toward this end INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS For the international financial markets was a year of unusual instability. Serious questions were raised at home and abroad about the functioning of foreign exchange markets culminating at year-end with the charter of the new European Monetary System and with the dollar support measures of the United States. These developments were responses to increased volatility and to disorderly conditions in the foreign exchange mar- kets. In the case of the European Monetary System they arose also from concern about the undesirable side effects of a system of floating exchange rates for closely integrated economies and from the need to foster closer economic integration in Europe THE OPERATION OF FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES The developments of must be seen as a part of the continued evolution of international financial arrangements. It is therefore appropriate to begin this discussion by reviewing the role of floating exchange rates in macroeconomic adjustment over the period Floating Rates in Principle The role of floating exchange rates can best be seen in the need for adjustment among national economies. All countries are continually subjected to shocks that lead both to internal imbalances ( excessive or deficient utilization of domestic resources ) and to external imbalances ( foreign trade or capital flows at unsustainable levels ) A system of flexible market-determined exchange rates ( or in short " floating " rates ) allows more automatic external adjustment than a system of fixed parities and thus leaves more scope for domestic macroeconomic policies to adapt to the changing requirements for internal balance External adjustment occurs as exchange rates move to equilibrate trade and net capital flows. More precisely for a given change in official holdings the rate will move to a level that either brings the value of goods and services exported and imported into balance or induces changes in private asset holdings to finance the discrepancy The equilibrating mechanism works on both the capital and current accounts. For a country incurring a large current account deficit the currency depreciates to reduce the current account deficit by increasing the country 's price competitiveness. That process however takes time. In the interim currency movements will induce private holders of wealth to accumulate the country 's assets to the extent necessary to finance the deficit The second feature of an idealized system of floating exchange rates can be seen as a consequence of the first. Because floating rates tend to assure external equilibrium countries can enjoy greater independence of macroeconomic policies and performance. Under a regime of fixed exchange rates the extent to which a country 's macroeconomic policies could diverge from those of its trading partners was limited in important ways. Divergent policies would lead to trade imbalances with expansionary countries moving toward deficit and restrictive countries toward surplus. There was no automatic mechanism to generate the needed capital movements to support the imbalances. Indeed outflows of capital from countries pursuing relatively expansionary policies to countries pursuing restrictive policies sometimes exacerbated disequilibria in overall balance of payments positions. A coun- try 's freedom to engage in independent macroeconomic policies was thus constrained by its capacity to absorb or lose reserves Under a floating rate regime however wide divergences of macroeconomic policies would in principle be possible. For those countries pursuing rapid growth through expansionary macroeconomic policies or those accepting high inflation the presence of a depreciating currency would allow the balance of payments to remain close to equilibrium Critiques of Floating Rates For more than years the major economies have functioned under a floating rate regime. The new regime has been successful in permitting the industrial economies to absorb shocks that were unprecedented in the postwar period. At the same time overall economic performance and exchange market behavior have been much less satisfactory than was expected leading many to wonder whether the exchange rate regime was at least partly responsible for the poor performance Critics have argued that floating rates have had four failings : they have not eliminated balance of payments disequilibria ; they have not allowed the degree of policy independence that had been anticipated ; they have proved inflationary ; and they have introduced major new elements of instability and uncertainty to financial markets First floating rates clearly have not eliminated current account surpluses and deficits. These deficits and surpluses have not in general fallen from the levels of the late 1960s and early 1970s and on many occasions some have been even higher Such an observation however does not imply a failure of floating rates to perform their adjustment function. The imbalances that have occurred have not usually resulted from floating per se but from the greater divergence of macroeconomic performances and from the exceptionally large shocks to the international system such as OPEC price rises and large increases in agricultural and commodity prices. Exchange rate changes have generally responded well to these deficits and surpluses and have helped to move economies back toward external equilibrium even if not as quickly or as smoothly as originally hoped. A balance of payments equilibrium moreover does not necessarily require that the current ( or trade ) account should be balanced only that the current or trade account deficit or surplus be willingly financed. In fact deficits or surpluses on current account may well represent the equilibrating counterpart to structural or " autonomous " capital inflows or outflows In contrast during the final years of the Bretton Woods system balance of payments disequilibria that resulted at least partly from divergent macroeconomic performances led to several serious and protracted balance of payments crises. Normal trade and investment patterns were disrupted as governments responded to these disequilibrium situations by imposing trade and capital controls and other emergency measures before they were finally forced to change their exchange rate parities A second cause of concern exists because floating has led to less policy independence than had been anticipated. To be sure countries have been significantly more independent than in prior years especially in the realm of monetary policies. A good example lies in the ability of Germany during the early phase of the current expansion to pursue a relatively restrictive monetary policy while that of the United States was relatively expansionary Although independence has been greater than with fixed rates it has by no means been complete under floating. There have been obvious limitations to policy flexibility partly because exchange rate changes can not insulate national economies from their partners ' performance or from international economic shocks. We have learned that in an increasingly interdependent international economic system floating exchange rates do not free countries from the effects of their neighbors ' economic policies and performances. Similarly countries must recognize their responsibility to act in ways that do not inflict excessive adjustment costs on others The third major criticism of the floating rate system has been that it contains an inflationary bias. Two lines of argument have been presented to support this view : first that floating generates inflation because it fails to impose needed discipline on the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies ; second that because of asymmetries and ratchets the increased inflationary pressures associated with depreciation are not matched by commensurate downward price pressures in countries whose exchange rates are appreciating. Thus it is argued the net effect of exchange rate changes is inflationary for the world as a whole Neither of these arguments is entirely convincing. Regarding the first argument presumed lack of discipline it is important to note that even without external pressures there are clearly powerful internal forces which oppose inflation. Recent experience in the United States and some countries of Europe where large current account deficits and currency depreciations have led to quite restrictive economic policies indicates the extent to which difficult stabilization policies will be undertaken even in a flexible exchange rate system Moreover a regime of fixed rates allows inflation to spill over the borders Price rises originating in one country spill over into other countries directly if exchange rates can not shift. Indeed to the extent that inflation originating in one country is shared by others when exchange rates are fixed discipline in the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies may be weaker than under floating rates where the full inflationary impact of inappropriate policies is felt domestically The evidence to support the second argument that there are asymmetries in the effects of exchange rate changes on inflation is mixed. While it is true that there exists considerable evidence of increasing downward rigidity in the levels of prices and wages in a number of countries there is no comparable evidence that rates of inflation are less responsive to currency appreciation than to depreciation Finally factors other than floating exchange rates provide a more compelling explanation for the high and persistent inflation in the industrial countries : slower productivity growth excessive demand pressures external shocks such as those created by OPEC and structural changes and rigidities in domestic labor and product markets A final criticism of floating has been that it induces excessive volatility in exchange rate movements. Chart presents the path of the tradeweighted dollar since using an index of dollar movements against the major currencies and total multilateral trade shares as weights In addition to these longer-run swings in rates it is certainly true that dayto-day movements in exchange rates have been larger in the float than in the preceding Bretton Woods era. It is difficult to determine whether these movements have been excessive. In a fixed rate system such as Bretton Woods day-to-day variability is sharply reduced by the active intervention of central banks to keep the rate within a narrow range. Furthermore for as long as the range remains credible private actions tend to keep the rate within the range whenever transient factors lead to a rate movement to the upper or lower limit. Day-to-day variability is thus largely eliminated. On the other hand the fixing of exchange rates while economic conditions are changing makes it likely that exchange rates will increasingly Chart Weighted-Average Exchange Value of the U.S. Dollar INDEX. MARCH = SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM diverge from levels that would be consistent with underlying economic factors. Eventually the credibility of the range is challenged by market participants and potentially disruptive speculative attacks can then occur until rates are forced to new more appropriate levels In a floating rate system day-to-day variability of exchange rates is inevitable as market participants respond to new information about economic developments that alters their perceptions about appropriate exchange rate patterns. Indeed these day-to-day movements in principle constitute the means of accomplishing longer-run adjustment of exchange rates to changing economic circumstances. This fundamental role of exchange rate movements raises the question whether the observed short-run variability of exchange rates has been larger than was required to allow the necessary medium-term flexibility. This question is complex and has not been thoroughly addressed. A preliminary examination of recent experience and related studies by the Council of Economic Advisers has uncovered mixed evidence. In some cases short-run variability over the last years has been broadly commensurate with longer-run changes while in other cases shortrun changes have been less than might be consistent with the longer run. No cases of persistent excessive volatility were found There is a sense in which the floating rate system itself may have led to excessive volatility through the relaxed constraints on macroeconomic behavior. As noted above a floating rate system allows greater divergence in macroeconomic experience. Unfortunately when greater scope for divergent policies and performance is allowed market uncertainty about appropriate exchange rates is also increased. The uncertainty in turn can cause market exchange rates to move in an erratic and disorderly fashion as market participants react and overreact to transitory bits of information and rumors Greater exchange rate noise and uncertainty are among the costs of a floating rate system. Achievement of greater stability in exchange rate markets is dependent on the closer and more effective coordination of macroeconomic policies among countries and on the continuing efforts of each country to sustain macroeconomic policies that are consistent with internal and external adjustment In general however the evidence although not conclusive does indicate that floating has worked well over the long run especially considering the magnitude of the shocks to the international financial system. In fact given these shocks it is not clear that any system other than generalized floating would have been viable during the period. Exchange rate movements while large have broadly responded to economic fundamentals have facilitated adjustment and have tended to move the system toward rather than away from greater stability. If exchange rates are at present too volatile for some countries steps to increase the coordination of macro- economic policies could be helpful. Recognition of the current level of interdependence through improved coordination across countries may help to bring greater stability to the foreign exchange markets as well as to provide an international environment that is favorable to domestic policy goals IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS The summer and fall of marked the beginning of a protracted fall in the value of the dollar and an increase in the day-to-day volatility of exchange rates in general. Both of these trends continued through the first quarters of The Variability of Exchange Rates and Depreciation of the Dollar The extent of exchange rate variability can be seen in the average day-today change of major currencies. In general the daily variation in exchange rates decreased between and remained comparatively small from to about the middle of and then increased markedly in the second half of and in ( Chart ) The decline in variability from to the period is probably due to a lessening of shocks to the world economy and the gradually growing ability of market participants to work with a regime of floating rates. The Chart Monthly Average of Daily Exchange Rate Changes PERCENT CHANGE I i i i i I ~ WI I'I i i i i i I i i i i i i I i i ) i i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM source of the sudden increase since late is less clear. Only to a small extent can it be explained by the fact that the computed variability is somewhat amplified when the level of the exchange rate is moving sharply in one direction rather than fluctuating around a steady trend. A more plausible explanation was the heightened uncertainty about the dollar 's future equilibrium level in view of the growing current account deficit a subsequent acceleration in inflation in the United States and for a time uncertainty about the response of U.S. economic policies to these developments The value of the dollar also began to change dramatically in late Chart shows the trade-weighted value of the dollar against the major currencies for Two distinct periods can be identified during the recent experience. From September through March the dollar fell by percent on a weighted average basis against other currencies During this period the markets tended to focus on the rapid widening of the U.S. trade and current account deficits and their expected persistence. Even though a substantial portion of the deficits could be accounted for by the cyclical position of the United States relative to its major trading partners growth forecasts suggested that this cyclical divergence would not soon be eliminated After a brief period of leveling off in April and May a second dollar decline began in early June and carried through until the end of October Some part of this renewed decline can be accounted for by the acceleration and persistence of inflation in the United States which aroused much concern in international financial circles. From a purely technical point of view this is not a sufficient explanation however since the inflation rate in the United States while substantially higher than that in Germany Switzerland and Japan was not much higher than the average level among all our major trading partners. And the parallel shift in interest rate differentials in favor of the dollar was more than sufficient to offset the change in underlying inflation in the United States. Finally the dollar 's fall came in the face of increasing evidence that the U.S. current account position was improving markedly By the end of October then there was considerable evidence that the primary reason for the dollar 's fall was the uncertainty in foreign exchange markets. Little attention was paid to the anti-inflation message on October Market participants continued to shift out of dollars despite an apparent consensus of market expectations that the dollar was undervalued from a long-run point of view. Almost all market participants commenting in the press or in discussions during the fall of expected an eventual turnaround of the dollar. Only the timing and the duration of the expected recovery were uncertain. Market participants however were highly uncertain about the future course of U.S. macroeconomic policy and this uncertainty encouraged shifts out of dollars because it made the dollar a riskier and hence less attractive asset THE NOVEMBER INITIATIVE On November the Administration and the Federal Reserve implemented a strong dollar support program. Its basis was the judgment that whereas some of the earlier dollar decline had been necessary to correct the external disequilibrium the continued decline of the dollar had become disorderly and was not justified by fundamental economic conditions. On the contrary all the econometric evidence the government forecasts and the private forecasts indicated that the U.S. current account deficit was likely to narrow sharply in Indeed it had already fallen from the levels reached in the first half of The dollar depreciation from September through the summer of combined with U.S. economic policies recently put in place the National Energy Act a new national export policy the shift toward more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies and the other elements of the antiinflation program was thought likely to be effective in slowing inflation at home and bringing about a more appropriate external balance. Further dollar depreciation especially that induced not by fundamental economic factors but by uncertainty about future exchange rates or policies was therefore unnecessary for adjustment and would have led to a misallocation of resources at home and abroad possibly even to serious instability in the financial system. Such movements would have added further to U.S inflationary pressures and thus harmed the prospects for the anti-inflation program. They could also create the kind of instabilities in exchange markets that could threaten economic prospects in other countries In the light of these considerations the United States announced a dollar support package that contained two parts. First the United States mobilized $ billion in resources as its share of a joint intervention program with Germany Japan and Switzerland. Second the Federal Reserve tightened domestic monetary policy by raising the discount rate from 8J/2 to ^ percent and by imposing a percent supplementary reserve requirement on large time deposits. The Federal funds rate also rose from % to % percent on November The $ 30-billion intervention package comprised several different items : ( ) the Treasury 's drawings on our International Monetary Fund reserve position of $ billion and $ billion in Deutschemarks and yen respectively ; ( ) the Treasury 's sales of a total of $ billion of special drawing rights to Germany Japan and Switzerland ; ( ) a doubling of the Federal Reserve swap lines with Germany Japan and Switzerland to $ billion $ billion and $ billion respectively ; and ( ) the Treasury 's commitment to issue up to $ billion in foreign currency denominated securities in foreign private markets The markets responded favorably to the dollar support policy. By the end of the first week of the program the trade-weighted dollar was percent higher than it had been at its low point at the close of business on October By November it had risen an additional percent ; and while some declines occurred in December and early January principally with the news of the OPEC price increases and the instabilities in Iran by the middle of January it was again roughly percent above its October low. Thus the foreign exchange markets at the beginning of were clearly in a different condition from what they were in the summer and fall of The one-way speculation had largely ended and economic fundamentals appeared to be much more important market factors than they had been or months before. Market participants who had been primarily concerned about preventing further foreign exchange losses and uncertain about the specific timing of an expected dollar upturn were now taking a more healthy wait-and-see attitude about the future course of market fundamentals. The November action bolstered by the greater certainty that it generated appears to have achieved its basic purpose. In the period ahead the value of the dollar should depend on sustained progress in the U.S trade and current accounts and on the success of the new anti-inflation program rather than on the level of market uncertainty While the dollar 's decline in the fall of was an instance of a malfunctioning of exchange markets the overall history of exchange rates in recent years does not suggest that such malfunctions are chronic. Rather they are temporary but acute symptoms that are most likely to develop when general macroeconomic conditions are diverging or in transition thereby generating greater uncertainty about future economic conditions and policies and an increased dispersion in expectations about future exchange rates Conversely as general macroeconomic conditions and policy directions become better established exchange markets can be expected to perform more smoothly their function of adjusting rate levels to such economic divergences as remain between countries. Such a calming of exchange markets may take time and may require considerable further efforts toward coordinating macroeconomic policies across countries. Excessive market sensitivity built up during periods of disorderly movement is likely to induce continued higher than normal variability in rate movements until accumulated evidence of greater underlying stability becomes firmly established THE EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM The members of the European Economic Community reached agreement on a new European Monetary System expected to be implemented in The development of this system is consistent with the Community 's continued efforts to work toward economic and political unification and with its members ' concern about the negative effects on economic activity and investment of what they consider increasingly excessive and unnecessary volatility in exchange rates In the short run this new agreement amounts to adding France Ireland and Italy to the Snake arrangement of the Benelux nations Denmark and West Germany with Norway dropping out. There will be expanded credit arrangements and increased margins around parity changes ( up to percent for new members ) as well as greater flexibility for parity changes. The United Kingdom which initially will participate in only part of the system may become a full member later in The European Monetary System is considered by many participants to be an important step toward a fullfledged monetary union of the European Community countries with fixed exchange rates a European Currency Unit for use as a numeraire as well as for intra-Community central bank settlements and a European Monetary Fund with comprehensive credit facilities In the early part of its existence any system of fixed exchange rates must concern itself with the establishment of consistent rate patterns and adjustment mechanisms. Otherwise whenever rate patterns or fundamental economic conditions appear unsustainable market participants are likely to test the weakest and strongest currencies. Judging from past efforts governments can sometimes forestall such attacks by judiciously adjusting central rates when economic conditions warrant such action. The adjustment of central rates however can not be too frequent for then future changes would tend to become anticipated by the market and the self-stabilizing property of the system which is its major benefit would be dissipated On the other hand if rate adjustments become too infrequent fundamental disequilibria will become so large as to attract massive and successful speculative attacks To maintain a fixed-margin arrangement therefore it is necessary to forestall situations in which central rates cease to be credible and to do this by working actively toward convergence of macroeconomic conditions and policies. For the countries of the European Monetary System this necessity is clearly recognized. Indeed to some extent the European Monetary System was regarded as an instrument for achieving precisely this sort of convergence. Its success will depend in the shorter run on its flexibility the viability of its credit arrangements and the eventual full-time membership of all Community members and in the longer run on the convergence of member countries ' macroeconomic policies and economic conditions THE CHANGING ENVIRONMENT OF WORLD TRADE Until recently the postwar period has been one of very high growth of national economies and improved living standards. One of the major sources of this vitality has been the progressive dismantling of trade barriers. Each of the three major industrial regions ( North America Europe and Japan ) has experienced increased trade flows. This increase is due in large part to the vision of those who built the Common Market progressively opened up the Japanese economy and sustained the Kennedy Round of multilateral tariff reductions During the last decade however movement toward increased competition in international markets has flagged. Indeed since there has been some regression in trade policies. In response the United States along with governments of other major industrial countries has committed itself to pro- O moting free trade and reducing protectionist pressures around the world The aims of U.S. trade policy are to enable the United States and other economies to benefit from the most efficient allocation of worldwide resources and to channel U.S. resources into sectors of comparative advantage In the major activities of U.S. policy makers in this area involved the Multilateral Trade Negotiations in Geneva the determination of domestic trade policy and the development of the President 's National Export Policy In recent years the growing economic interdependence in the international community along with an increasing incidence of shocks and resulting adjustment policies has led to an increasing number of trade problems around the world and consequently to more cases of overt or indirect protection and reaction. These trade problems and increasing protectionist pressures have several causes : the emergence of newly industrialized nations who are competing to gain an increasing proportion of the export market for industrial goods ; the development of long-term structural problems in several sectors resulting from shifts in the pattern of world consumption and production ; the appearance of significant current account deficits after the oil price increase in ; greater skepticism about the functioning of the international trading system ; and above all the recession stagnant domestic markets and associated high levels of unemployment since Accordingly individual nations have taken several measures including safeguard actions ( protecting domestic industry against injury from imports ) antidumping proceedings and actions to offset export subsidies. These policies have been concentrated in certain industrial sectors particularly textiles automobiles steel and shipbuilding THE MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS The Administration in conjunction with its major trading partners and numerous developing nations is committed to resolving these trade problems through the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. The goals of these multilateral negotiations have been to relax tariff and nontariff barriers to trade to formulate rules for trade and codes of fair conduct to develop effective mechanisms for settling disputes and to allow nations to benefit from specialization without unduly losing control over the growth patterns of their own economies By the end of these goals seemed close to achievement when significant agreement was reached on the reduction of most of the tariff and nontariff barriers to trade. The trade package ( still subject to final agreement in early and to legislative approval later in the year ) includes codes on subsidies government procurement standards customs valuation and licensing. It also includes a package of tariff cuts by the United States with reciprocal cuts from our trading partners. The U.S. cuts are projected to average about percent. In addition negotiators agreed to remove several particularly burdensome industrial and agricultural nontariff barriers And finally the trade package provides measures to improve the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) framework for dealing with agricultural trade issues trade with developing countries balance of payments measures export restrictions and the general management of trade disputes Among the most significant areas of agreement for U.S. trade interests are the codes on safeguards on subsidies and countervailing duties and on government procurement. The safeguards code ensures that countries will observe international trading rules as set forth in the revised GATT Article XIX when they restrict imports of particular products in order to afford temporary relief to domestic producers from injurious foreign competition This revised article provides for a broad coverage of trade policies improved criteria and conditions for taking safeguard action more openness and due process in domestic safeguard procedures and better international surveillance. There is also likely to be some scope for selective action when an injury can be ascribed to imports from particular countries. Such selectivity would be subject to consultation and negotiation with the affected countries and to surveillance by a GATT committee of representatives from each of the signatories The agreement on subsidies and countervailing duties will limit tradedistorting subsidies and will enunciate more clearly a country 's right to take counteractions against such practices. Export subsidies will be defined more broadly than they have been in the past ( for example they can exist even if the domestic price and export price are the same ) ; they must be imposed and regulated with greater " transparency " ( that is so that they are more visible to the domestic and foreign public ) ; they will be prohibited on primary mineral products and nonprimary products ; and their use for agricultural products will require greater discipline. In addition signatories will agree to consider the impact on their trading partners when using economic subsidies in general. Countermeasures can be imposed if a subsidy causes injury to domestic producers the impairment of benefits from GATT concessions or serious prejudice to other signatories ( if for example it reduces a nation 's expected benefits from international agreements ) This particular code will be enforced through a tightly controlled process for settling disputes ( the recommendations of the international committee must be reported within days of a complaint ) The government procurement code is intended to reduce the scope for discrimination against foreign suppliers when governments purchase articles for their own use. It entails agreement on greater transparency in the bidding and awarding of government contracts for purchases of goods ; and since the elimination of all discrimination is unlikely it also requires agreement about the official entities that would be covered by the code. The latter problem is particularly difficult since many of the entities which are private in the United States are governmental in many foreign countries Nevertheless significant reduction of discrimination in government procurement subject to settlement of disputes by an international panel should be achieved Taken together the tentative agreements reached in the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations represent significant progress in our continuing efforts to reduce barriers to international commerce and to strengthen and expand international trading rules and they should contribute to an increase in trade and investment around the world. This agreement represents the first time since the 1960s that the international community has reduced the barriers to trade across such a broad spectrum of tariff and nontariff measures. For the United States in particular the lowering of our own import barriers should help reduce inflationary pressures by increasing the competitiveness of imports and of import-competing products. At the same time our export capabilities will receive a boost through the lowering of both tariff and nontariff barriers in our major export markets U.S. DOMESTIC TRADE POLICY Despite increasing trade problems and pressures for protectionist trade policies around the world the Administration remains committed to a free and open trading system. In many highly concentrated domestic industries foreign competition helps prevent market power from becoming excessive Nevertheless cases occur from time to time where under U.S. law import relief is necessary : where injury exists where imports are the major cause of injury and where such temporary actions can contribute to adjustment In the International Trade Commission investigated petitions for import relief by over industries covering imports valued at over $ billion The International Trade Commission recommended increased protection in the form of tariffs or quantitative restrictions on more than $ billion of trade in such goods as stainless steel flatware high-carbon ferrochrome CB radios refined copper industrial fasteners and bicycle tires and tubes Relief was granted in escape clause cases involving approximately $ million in imports ( for example CB radios high-carbon ferrochrome and industrial fasteners ) In these cases the Administration decided in favor of import relief because it would aid substantially in the development of more efficient industries and because the direct benefits of relief were sufficiently high to outweigh the costs to consumers and other sectors of the economy THE NATIONAL EXPORT POLICY Faced with the large external deficit and the need for action the Administration felt that increasing U.S. exports could be a valuable way to move toward adjustment. In the light of the weak dollar the deteriorating position of U.S. manufactured exports and the low profile accorded export efforts in the United States the Administration announced the National Export Policy on September This National Export Policy in conjunction with the successful conclusion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations will ensure a strong export industry and an environment for fair competition from imports for the period ahead Before the largest U.S. trade deficits for a full year were the $ 5.3billion deficit in and the $ 6.4-billion deficit in In comparison the trade deficits in and were $ billion $ billion and an estimated $ billion respectively. The U.S. share of total manufactured exports of industrial countries fell from almost percent in the late 1950s to percent in It rose to percent in but has declined steadily since then falling to percent by the first quarter of the lowest since mid-1972 ( Chart ) The outlook for and the early 1980s is much brighter. U.S. exports of manufactured goods have already shown a strong turnaround in This improvement and the favorable outlook derive from several factors First some of the trade deficit can be explained by our faster growth compared to that of our major trading partners. As their growth rates abroad increase in relation to ours in accord with recent trends and commitments made at the Bonn Summit our exports should increase relative to our imports. Second the depreciation of the dollar over the last months will provide a continuing spur to exports in the coming years. Third by reducing inflationary pressures the Administration 's anti-inflation program will improve our international competitiveness increasing our exports and reducing our imports. Fourth the successful conclusion of the Multilateral Chart U.S. Share of Fifteen Industrial Countries ' Exports of Manufactured Goods PERCENT ^ n l i i i i i i i i i i i i i : /U.S. EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURES AS PERCENT OF TOTAL INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES ' EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURED GOODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE i i i i i i I Trade Negotiations in Geneva will reduce tariff and nontariff barriers in our export markets and should improve our export capabilities Finally the Administration has committed itself to a stronger emphasis on foreign markets for U.S. goods by developing the National Export Policy This policy includes the following major provisions : an increase in the size and the flexibility of the Eximbank 's activities ; a commitment from the Small Business Administration to channel up to $ million of its loan guarantees to small export businesses ; an earmarking of $ million of the Commerce and State Departments ' budgets to assist small- and mediumsized businesses in their marketing efforts abroad ; an increase in the level of short-term agricultural export credits by almost $ billion ; and a decision to ask the Justice Department to clarify ambiguities about the enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the international application of our antitrust laws Perhaps the most important contribution the Federal Government can make to improving our trade position is to assure a more sensible regulatory environment. Too frequently obstacles to production or investment have raised domestic costs or encouraged imports. If agencies are required to take into account the effects on trade and other costs of regulations greater scope can exist for competitive forces thereby allowing domestic producers to gain a greater share of domestic and foreign markets Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS. Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Cordially CHARLES L. SCHULTZE Chairman LYLE E. GRAM LEY WILLIAM D NORDHAUS Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During With the enactment of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of the chartering legislation of the Council of Economic Advisers was substantially revised for the first time since the Council was created by the Employment Act of The new act which was signed by the President on October is better known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Act after the primary sponsors of the law Senators Hubert and Muriel Humphrey and Congressman Augustus Hawkins Under the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act the basic mission of the Council of Economic Advisers is unchanged. The Council is to continue to advise and assist the President in the formulation of national economic policies and in Presidential decisions on other matters that affect the economic life of the Nation. However the Humphrey-Hawkins Act creates an important new framework within which the government is to pursue policies designed to reach our economic objectives The act reaffirms and enlarges upon the commitment of the Employment Act of by declaring that it is a national objective to provide full opportunities for useful employment to all Americans willing and able to work. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act also legislates for the first time a national commitment to reduce the rate of inflation. The act recognizes as well the need for better coordination of monetary and fiscal policies and to that end establishes new procedures and requirements for the President the Congress and the Federal Reserve System The new law requires that the President each year set forth in the Economic Report of the President numerical goals for employment unemployment production real income productivity and prices during the next years. Short-term goals for these key indicators of the economy 's health are to be established for years and medium-term goals for the subsequent years The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act sets forth specific numerical goals for unemployment and inflation for the 5-year period now ahead. The act states that the goal for unemployment in should be percent overall and percent for workers aged and over. For inflation the act sets a goal of percent by and after that goal is achieved zero percent by These are highly ambitious goals that can not be realized solely through fiscal and monetary measures. The act recognizes this in two ways First it recommends to the President a wide range of policies that might serve to attack the problems of unemployment and inflation. The act does not require him to pursue any specific policies nor does it authorize spending on any new programs. If the President wishes to adopt policies mentioned in the act he must seek congressional authorization to fund the new programs Second the act authorizes the President beginning with the second Economic Report published after passage of the act to recommend goals for unemployment and inflation in that differ from those provided for in the act if economic circumstances make such changes necessary. The act provides however for continued commitment by the Congress and the President to the objective of reducing unemployment to percent as soon as feasible If the President recommends a change in the goal for reducing unemployment his Economic Report must designate the year in which he believes that the percent goal can be achieved. The Congress may then include in its first concurrent budget resolution its own timetable for attaining the percent unemployment goal. The budget resolution may also contain such a statement if the President should in subsequent years recommend a year for reaching percent unemployment other than that set in a future congressional budget resolution Each year the President is required by the new act to present budget recommendations for the years immediately ahead that are consistent with the short-term goals set forth in his Economic Report. He is also required to present projections for the budget in the subsequent years that are consistent with the medium-term goals set out in the Economic Report. Similarly the act calls upon the Congress in its consideration of the budget to take into account the economic goals recommended by the President. Every year when debate on the first concurrent budget resolution is begun in each House of Congress up to hours of debate are to be reserved for discussion of the economic situation and its implications for budgetary policy The Federal Reserve Board is required by the act to review the President 's budget and Economic Report and to report to the Congress regarding the President 's recommendations and the manner in which monetary policies are related to his goals. The Congress in its yearly deliberations on the budget is to take into account not only the President 's program but the views and policies of the Federal Reserve Board as well. Through this process the act should promote a better coordination of the Nation 's economic policies The Council of Economic Advisers played an active role in the development of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act. During the Council joined sponsors of the act in discussions that led to the legislation introduced in mid-1977 with the President 's full support and passed by the Congress in During congressional consideration of the act the Council worked closely with members of Congress their staffs and other government agencies to achieve passage of the legislation The Economic Report of the President and the Budget of the United States published in January will be the first issued under the new act and the first to set forth economic goals in the fashion required by the new act. They will also carry out the requirement of the HumphreyHawkins Act that each year the Office of Management and Budget review selectively a number of national priority programs and policies that can further the purposes of the act. The act particularly directs the Office of Management and Budget to study such significant issues as government policies affecting energy and agriculture the problems of urban areas and the expansion of exports. Similarly the act requires that the Economic Report of the President include a report on investment policy that discusses both the needs of businesses for investment capital and the government 's policies to support adequate rates of capital formation FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The Employment Act of challenged the government to pursue policies that would achieve maximum employment production and purchasing power. Recognizing the evolution of the economy since and the increasing importance of the inflation problem in today 's economy the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act adds to that mandate. The Federal Government still is to promote high levels of employment and production Now however the government is also called upon to pursue prudent budgetary policies to seek an improved international trading position for the United States and to take steps to assure reasonable price stability These new legislative objectives are fully consistent with the Council of Economic Advisers ' current role in the Administration a role that has grown steadily since as new economic problems placed new demands on the Council and its staff. Today the Council is responsible for advising the President on such widely differing matters as Federal fiscal policies efforts to reform the Federal regulatory system and the international economic policies of the U.S. Government MACROECONOMIC POLICIES From the outset the Council 's fundamental role has been to advise the President on comprehensive economic policies designed to achieve the government 's objectives for employment output and price stability. To fulfill this responsibility the Council develops economic forecasts several times each year with the assistance of an interagency forecasting committee. The members of this committee include in addition to the Council representa- tives from the Office of Management and Budget and the Departments of the Treasury Commerce and Labor. This group which is chaired by a Member of the Council meets to analyze the outlook for individual sectors of the economy and to develop detailed economic forecasts for the period immediately ahead. The Chairman of the Council presents these forecasts to the Economic Policy Group ( EPG ) made up of the President 's principal economic advisers which meets each week to discuss and develop the Administration 's economic policy proposals. The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers is a member of the EPG and of its steering group In the final months of each year during the preparation of the President 's annual budget the Council also presents to the Economic Policy Group and later to the President proposals for Federal fiscal policies during the coming fiscal year. The development of advice to the President on macroeconomic policy thus remains one of the Council 's major responsibilities The Council also worked actively during with the Council on Wage and Price Stability to develop and apply measures to combat inflation including the program that the President announced to the Nation on October The Council on Wage and Price Stability was chaired by the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers Charles L. Schultze until October when Alfred E. Kahn was named Advisor to the President on Inflation and Chairman of the Council on Wage and Price Stability MICROECONOMIC POLICIES In addition to its work on overall economic policies the Council of Economic Advisers is increasingly involved in the analysis of microeconomic issues those policy actions and economic developments that affect individual sectors of the economy or even individual industries and markets. During the Council helped form the Administration 's policies regarding agriculture energy financial institutions health insurance welfare reform and other major issues. The Council and its staff were also actively involved in developing the tax program that the President submitted to the Congress in January During the Council continued to chair the interagency Regulatory Analysis Review Group ( RARG ) created late in to review selected analyses of the economic effects of major regulatory proposals. The President has ordered that each major regulatory proposal must be accompanied by a regulatory analysis. The analysis is to be developed by the regulatory agency originating the proposal and submitted for public comment before the final regulation takes effect. During the period for public comment the Regulatory Analysis Review Group evaluates the regulatory analysis and its appraisal is filed in the agency 's record of public commentary. In five major regulations were reviewed by the RARG : the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 's standard on workers ' exposure to acrylonitrile and its generic carcinogen policy ; the Environmental Protection Agency 's ambient air quality standard for ozone ; the Department of Transportation 's regulation on access to mass transit facilities for the handicapped ; and the Department of the Interior 's surface coal mining and reclamation regulations. At year 's end reviews were under way of the Environmental Protection Agency 's new source performance standards for steam-powered electric generating plants and the Department of Energy 's coal conversion regulations. The Council 's staff took an active part in preparing several of the review group 's comments on these regulations and in coordinating the activities of the RARG The Council of Economic Advisers continued during to participate in developing the Administration 's international economic policies. The Chairman of the Council also served during the year as the Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) In that capacity he chaired three meetings of the committee which consists of senior economic officials from OECD member governments The Council also participates in the working parties of the OECD Economic Policy Committee on inflation balance of payments adjustment and medium-term growth as well as the ad hoc group on positive adjustment policies. Council Members or staff economists representing the U.S Government attend periodic meetings of these working parties during the year PUBLIC INFORMATION The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act retained the requirement originally set forth by the Employment Act of that the President submit a report to the Congress each year on the state of the economy As noted earlier however the Humphrey-Hawkins Act requires new information to be included in the Economic Report of the President The Council assumes major responsibility for the preparation of the Economic Report of the President which also contains the annual report of the Council. This publication is the principal channel through which the public is informed of the Council 's work and views and it is of further importance in presenting and explaining the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. In recent years about copies of the Report have been distributed annually The Council prepares a monthly publication Economic Indicators which is a compendium of statistical information developed by the Council 's Statistical Office for the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Each month about copies of Economic Indicators are distributed Information is also provided to members of the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Chairman Members and staff economists of the Council. In the Chairman and Members made appearances before committees of the Congress to testify on the Administration 's economic policies. Among its publications this year the Council in- eluded a Staff Paper on the taxation of capital gains prepared by John Yinger a senior staff economist with the help of other members of the Council 's staff. Less formally the Council answered numerous requests from the press in and provided information on a wide range of economic topics in response to inquiries from individual citizens ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN Charles L. Schultze appointed Chairman of the Council in communicates the Council 's views to the President through direct consultation as well as through written reports dealing with particular economic developments programs and proposals. The Chairman represents the Council at meetings of the Cabinet and other official events COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members supervise the work of the Council 's professional staff. Members also represent the Council at meetings of public and private groups concerned with economic affairs and they assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement in the activities of the government that affect the economy. Lyle E. Gramley and William D. Nordhaus continued to serve as Council Members during Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Position Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling_ John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier.. Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley _ John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck _ Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers. William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel _ Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member. _ Member Chairman Member Member _ Member...._ Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member. Member. Member Chairman Member. Member _ Member Chairman Member Member.. Member Chairman Member. Member Chairman Member _ _ Member Member Member Chairman Member _ Member Separation date August August November May August May June September8,1952 _ March Septembers December April December May December November May January January January Augusts November May September November \ & Februarys February February July February February February January September March July October September June July November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January The Council staff is small enough to permit the Chairman and Members to work together as a team on most major policy issues. To facilitate coordination of the staff 's work however responsibility for the major economic topics of concern to the Council has been informally divided between the two Members. Mr. Gramley has continued to take primary responsibility in for macroeconomic analysis including the preparation of economic forecasts and for labor market policies. Mr. Nordhaus has supervised international economic analysis and microeconomic analysis including analysis of policies in such areas as energy agriculture social welfare and oversight of regulatory reform activities PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of the Special Assistant to the Chairman senior staff economists staff economists statistician and junior staff economists The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : Peter G. Gould Special Assistant to the Chairman Senior Staff Economists Thomas C. Earley Robert J. Flanagan Steven W. Kohlhagen Val L. Koromzay Susan J. Lepper David C. Munro David S. Sibley Lawrence J. White David A. Wyss John M. Yinger Agriculture and Food Policy Labor Market and Anti-Inflation Policies International Financial Developments and Trade International Financial and Economic Developments and Trade Monetary and Financial Policies Housing State and Local Finance and General Macroeconomic Analysis Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting Regulation Regulation Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting and Health Policy Public Finance and Income Maintenance Policy Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Staff Economists Robert E. Litan Regulation and Energy Michael J. McKee Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting O Junior Economists James P. Luckett Robert S. Lurie Frederick W. McKinney. Elizabeth A. Savoca Wanda S. Tseng Labor Market Policies Regulation and Energy Public Finance Income Maintenance and Health Policy Business Conditions Analysis and Forecasting International Economic Developments and Trade Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician is in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary responsibility for managing the Council 's statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of the statistical appendix to the Economic Report. She also oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro Earnestine Reid and Elizabeth A. Kaminski assist Mrs. Furlong From time to time during the year the Council calls upon outside economists to provide special assistance on projects relating to their particular specialty. During consultants to the Council included Peter K. Clark ( Stanford University ) Donald H. Fullerton ( Stanford University ) Frank S. Levy ( The Urban Institute ) and John B. Shoven ( Stanford University ) During the summer James R. Golden ( U. S. Military Academy ) was a member of the professional staff In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff. Also called on for special assistance in connection with the Report were Dorothy L. Reid and Dorothy Bagovich former members of the Council staff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers provides general support for the Council 's activities. Nancy F. Skidmore Administrative Officer prepares and analyzes the Council budget and provides general administrative services Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council handles general personnel management serves as Executive Secretary to the Regulatory Analysis Review Group and provides general assistance to the Council and to the Special Assistant in the management of the Council 's activities Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Patricia A. Lee Linda A. Reilly Florence T. Torrison and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were M. Catherine Fibich Bessie M. Lafakis Joyce A. Pilkerton Bettye T. Siegel Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M. Sturniolo Marie G. Boccucci provided secretarial assistance during the summer months DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff members most often are on leave to the Council from universities other government agencies or research institutions Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Senior staff economists who completed their appointments with the Council during the year were Roger E. Brinner ( Data Resources Inc. ) Peter K. Clark ( Stanford University ) Nina W. Cornell ( Federal Communications Commission ) George E. Johnson ( University of Michigan ) J. B. Penn ( Department of Agriculture ) Jeffrey R. Shafer ( Federal Reserve Board ) and William L Springer ( Data Resources Inc. ) Arthur E. Blakemore staff economist resigned to accept a position with the Council on Wage and Price Stability Junior economists who resigned in were Michael S. Golden ( Congressional Budget Office ) Howard K. Gruenspecht ( Domestic Policy Staff ) Richard I. Kolsky ( Yale University ) Richard A. Koss ( Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates Inc. ) Julianne M. Malveaux ( Rockefeller Foundation ) and Martha M. Parry ( Stanford University ) James W. Gatling and Frank C. Norman joined the new Office of Administration created in the Executive Office of the President as part of the President 's reorganization of his own staff offices Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l. Gross national product B-2. Gross national product in dollars B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross domestic product B-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars B-6. Gross national product by major type of product B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-9. Gross national product by sector B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars B l l Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business B-l2. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business B-l3. Personal consumption expenditures B-14. Gross private domestic investment B-l5. Inventories and final sales of business B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars B-l Relation of gross national product and national income B-l8. Relation of national income and personal income B-l9. National income by type of income B-20. Sources of personal income B-21. Disposition of personal income B-22. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars B-23. Gross saving and investment B-24. Saving by individuals B-25. Money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by race of head POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-26. Population by age groups B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B Selected employment and unemployment data B-30. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic B-31. Unemployment by duration B-32. Unemployment by reason B-33. Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-37. Productivity and related data private business economy B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy Page PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 PRICES : B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 Page Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade Manufacturers5 shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services Consumer price indexes for commodity groups seasonally adjusted Consumer price indexes for service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted Changes in consumer price indexes major groups Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing seasonally adjusted Producer price indexes by major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY B-59 B-60 B-61 STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : Money stock measures Commercial bank loans and investments Liquid asset holdings of private domestic nonfinancial investors B-62. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-63 Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-64. Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks B-65. Bond yields and interest rates B-66. Consumer installment credit B-67. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-69. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-71. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget B-72. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-73. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-74. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-75. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-76. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation GOVERNMENT FINANCE Continued Page B-77. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-78. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-79. Corporate profits by industry B-80. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-81. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-82. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group B-85. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-86. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-87. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-88. Common stock prices and yields B-89. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-90. Income of farm people and farmers B-91. Farm production indexes B-92. Farm population employment and productivity B-93. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices B-94. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-95. Balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-96. Exchange rates B-97. U.S. international transactions B-98. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use categories B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B International investment position of the United States at year-end B-101. International reserves and B-102. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and B World trade balance and current account balances and B Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-106. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : Preliminary __ Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE T A B L E B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Yearo r quarter Gross national product Personal consumption expendi tures Gross private domestic Net invest- exports ment Government purchases of goods and services Federal Exports Imports Total Tot< \ \ National Nondedefense fense i State and local Percent change from preceding period gross national product ' ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? f P ? II Ill IV '6.9 ? II III IV ? ? ? ? II III ? IV v ? This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Gross national product Year or quarter Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total P I L L,332.7 I I : II III _ IV : II III IV : II III IV See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment continued Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Fixed investment continued Residential Year or quarter Total NonFarm farm struc- structures tures Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Percent change from preceding period gross national product1 ? P _ : | | III... IV : II III IV..._ : II lll..__ IV P ._ Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-3. Implicit pries deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment * Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product * Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures v 1S76 : II III IV : II III IV : II III 1K7.1 See next page for continuation of table Producers ' durable equipment TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 continued Fixed investment continued Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services i Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Residential ProExFarm ducers ' ports durstruc- able tures equipment Imports Total Federal State and local Gross domestic prodGross uct nationa product implicit price deflator Gross domestic product implicit price deflator Total Nonfarm structures _ P : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross domestic product ^ [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Index numbers = Year or quarter Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross domestic product Gross national product FixedFixedFixedImplicit weighted Implicit weighted Implicit weighted price price index price price index price price index deflator ( deflator ( deflator ( weights ) weights ) weights ) l Gross domestic product Chain price index FixedImplicit weighted price price index ( deflator weights ) Chain price index L.6 L.6 L.7 l.l L.2 J.O J.O i1.4 L.7 L.2 L.5 L.3 L4 L.9 J.I J.I ) .O v .O a. I3.3 : II Ill IV : II III... IV... : II Ill IV p i U ) ) i Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published Indexes shown here. Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year Agriculture ConGross forestry strucnaand tion tional product fisheries Total TransGovportaerntion Whole- Finance insurment Non- comDusale ance Servand All rable durable muni- and and ices govern- other i goods goods cation retail real ment indus- indus- and trade estate entertries utilitries prises ties _. Mining rest of the world and residual ( GNP in dollars measured as the sum of final products less GNP in dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry ) Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O T A B L E B-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Durable goods Total Inventory change Total Final sales Inven- Final tory change sales Nondurable goods Inventory change Services Structures Auto output Final Inventory sales change p : II IIIIV. : II III. IV. : II III. IV * lr " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ~ TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Durable goods Total Inventory change Nondurable goods Total Services Structures Auto output Final Inven- Final Inven- Final Inventory tory tory sales change sales change sales change I960. " L V " 1976._ 1977_ v L ,'202.3 L : I.. II III. IV._ II IIL. IV : l._ II III. IV_ : Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ~ TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Government Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total i Net receipts Expenditures Surplus or PerPerdeficit Equals : sonal sonal Tax Less : Less : Equals : <- ) Less : Total conand naInter- exclud- sump- saving non- Trans- Equals : Total Trans- Purfers or fers chases tional ing inest tion interdistax Net exinterof interest paid exest rerependi- est goods come paid and pendi- saving ceipts and ceipts tures and and and and transtures or ac- subsubservprodfers transcruals sidies sidies3 ices uct acfers counts ___ * See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business International Net exports of goods Excess and services of Net net Gross Excess transtransGross pri- of earn- fers and fers revate ings or interand tained doof inest interearn- mestic vest- paid to Less : Equals : Exest Net ings invest- ment Imforor of exment5 ( ) eigners ports ports ports net ex6 ( ) ports Year or quarter Total income or receipts Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expenditure ( _ ) i _ i I960 y P Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Interest paid by consumers to business and net personal transfer payments to foreigners Government transfer payments to persons and foreigners net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals * Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements See Table B-14 Net transfers to foreigners by persons and government and interest paid by government to foreigners Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) less net foreign investment Source : Department ot Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-9. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Business Gross national product Year or quarter Total Total Nonfarm * Government * Statistical Farm discrepancy Households and institutions Total Federal State and local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross domestic product ? _ v lf II III IV : II III IV ^ I960 : II III IV v Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises ' Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here See Table B-l for percent changes in gross national product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Business Gross lational iroduct Total : esidl Nonfarm i Total Government lest useof the lolds world and State nsti- Total and jtions local ercent change from i receding period gross >mestic oduct * ! ! ! [ [ [ [ [ [ ! ! ! ! ! ! L31.7 i,325.3 : I II. III IV [ L45.4 : II III... IV : I II III IV * " ' v i Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises The difference between gross product in dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of gross product by industry Compensation of government employees * Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slig See Table B-2 for percent changes in gross national product in c " " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter CapGross ital itai doconmessumptic tion prod- allowuct ances of with non- capiTotal finantal lai cial cor- sumppotion rate adbusi- justness ment Net domestic product Domestic income Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Indirect business tax etc. * Compensation Total of em- Total ployees Profits before tax Inven- Capital Net tory con- intersump- est Profits ation tion Total tax Undis- adadliabilDivi- tribu- justTotal ity ment justdends ted ment profits Profits after tax -l.S " " S " * S ? ? ! ? I960. * : l-._ II. III.. IV.. : II. IV. : II.. III.. Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars I1 Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Cur1972 rent dollars dollars Total cost and profit Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc. CompenNet sation inof terest employees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Output Compenper sation hour of per all em- hour of ployees all em ( ployees dollars ) ( dollars ) Profits Profits tax after liability tax * p : I II.. III. IV... : II.. IIL IV.. : I I I I I __ Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies * With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-13. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods l Services I Household e CO a Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter fNondurable goods * operation1 | o ii | If I I I o " O c DO -o I j I i | * ? s n ? <H q ? U. ? v : II... III.. IV... : II III.. IV... II Ill IV * __ : Total includes " other " category not shown separately > Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-14. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in business inventories f ixed investmen t Gross private domestic invest- Total ment Year or quarter Nonresidential Structures Total Residential Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm Total Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Nonfarm Producers ' Total durable equipment Nonfarm ? " ? ? ? P " II : II lll.._- IV * " ~ : II ? ? ? Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories ! Year and quarter Total Nonfarm Farm Total Fourth quarter : Final sales : Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Total Other Nonfarm II Ill IV : II III IV : | | III IV v v _ End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classificaticn ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories Inventory-final sales ratio i Nonfarm Year and quarter Total Final sales > Total Farm Total Manufac- Wholesale turing trade Retail trade Nonfarm Other Fourth quarter : ? n L 4i.9 I L L _ p : II III IV : II III IV II III IVP End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Plus : Less : Subsidies Capital less consumpcurrent tion allow- Equals : Gross surplus Net national ances with national of governcapital product ment consump- product entertion adjustprises ment Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income 1951._ v L I t I L L L L L II Ill IV : II III ~ IV : n Ml IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis > L7 TABLE B-18. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Corporate profits with National invenincome tory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Plus : Net interest Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements Government transfer payments to persons Personal interest income Equals : Dividends Business transfer Personal Payincome ments _ b.2 L.2 _ * : l _ II III. IV. : l _ II IIIIV. l _ II III.. : IVP Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-19. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employee Farm Year or quarter National income i Total SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages and ries salaries Total Total Nonfarm Capital consumpIncome tion adjustment Total Income4 Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adadjustjustment ment v : II Ill IV : II Ill IV -L2 : II Ill IV v L See next page for continuation of table T A B L E B-19. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental i ncome of per- Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments SOnS WIIII cdfJiuii Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without car. ) ital consumption adjustment consumption adjustmen Total Capital conRental income sumption of persons adjustment Profits after tax Total Total Total ! ! ! ! ! ! _ p : II.. III. IV._ : II.. III. IV. _ : II.. III. IV P Capital Inven- consumptory tion valua- adjusttion Undisment Divitributed adjustdends profits ment Profits before tax Year or quarter Profits tax liability Total io ! ! ! ! ! Net interest National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-17 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workmen 's compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment * Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O T A B L E B-20. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements * Personal income Year or quarter Total Commodityproducing industries Total Manufacturing GovernDistrib- Service ment and utive indus- indus- government tries tries enterprises Other labor income1 Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm P : L. II III IV. : II III IV : L II III. IV p * See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental ncome of persons with Year or capital Divi- Personal quarter con- dends interest income sumpion adjustment Transfer payments Total Old age survivors disability and health insurance benefits Government Vetunem- erans ploybenement m- fits surance benefits Government employee retirement benefits Less : Personal Noncontrifarm Aid to butions perfamilies for sonal with de- Other social inpendent insurcome3 children ance ( AFDC ) 0.R l'.O ^ l.l L.4 L.5 I960... p.. a : II Ill IV : L II. III IV : II. III IV v \ l The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-19 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Persona ! income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages other farm labor income and agricultural net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-21. Disposition of personal income ( Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Personal income Year or quarter Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPer- Interest sonal Equals : Personal paid by transfer sonal conconpaysaving sump- sumers ments tion to to forexpend- busi- eigners itures ness ( net ) Personal outlays Total Consumption expenditures Personal saving v : l____ II.. III.. IV.. : II.. III.. IV.. : L I I I I I IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Total ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thou-1 sands ) Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars I960 L824 v : | | III IV : .__ | | III ___ IV II III IV P Current dollars dollars ' L i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are average for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B-23. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total v III IV.... : II : II.._ III... IV... : II III... IVP Gross Personal business saving saving > Gross investment Government surplus or deficit ( ) national Capital income and product grants accounts received by the Total United State States Fed ( net ) and Total eral local -j Statistical discrepancy l l l Gross private Net domes- foreign tic in- investvestments ment Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) except as noted in footnote s Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net * In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-24. Saving by individuals ( Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Net investment in Securities Currency Savand ings Gov- Corpo- CorpoTotal deacern- rate rate mand counts ment and deforsecu- eign equiposits rities * bonds ties * InsurNonance Con- corand Non- sumer porate pen- farm dusion homes rables business reassets serves ( * ) Less : Net increase in debt Mortgage debt Con- Other on sumer non- credit debt farm homes -4'. : l _ II.. III. IV.. : I II-. III. -j Sav i ng by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business * Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations * Includes investment company shares * Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves * Security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-25. Money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by race of head White Total Total number ( millions ) Median income M5.5 M6.4 M7.1 M7.5 _. M8.5 U9.2 ._ _. ___ __ $ Year FAMILIES 1/.2 lb.O Median income ill.l Ul U1.0 U2.5 U3.2 U3.9 U5.5 $ /.9 Median income over $ Percent with incomes $ $ Below pov- $ and erty over level Below $ povand erty over level Below pov- $ and erty over level Total numBelow $ ber ( milpovand lions ) erty level Below $ povand erty over level UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS _ * Total numBelow $ ber ( milpovand lions ) erty over level Black and other races Percent with incomes Percent with incomes $ Revised using population controls based on the census. Such controls are not available by race Based on revised methodology procedures Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflects different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family head and farm-nonfarm residence. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE E-26. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population i Employment Armed Forces i Total Total Nonagricultural Agricultural Unemployment Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian labor force ) Total Males Females Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian labor force participation rate * _ Thousands of persons years of age and over 1960s See next page for continuation of table TABLE E-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Employment Armed Forces Total Total Agricultural Nqnagricultural Unemployment Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian labor force ) Thousands of persons years of age and over July Aug.Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.Nov. Dec.. : Jan Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. Total Males Females Percent : Jan... Feb... Mar... Apr May... June_ : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr Apr May... Way June Civilian labor force participation rates i Not seasonally adjusted * Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural nsu l ,t empyment employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor l l k d H i i d d d b t t lti b t t l b force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-27 through B-32 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historic comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment Unemployment Males Females Males Females Year or month Total Total years years and over Total Total years and over years Total years years and over Total years years and over L 19601._ i__ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr May. June- 7,15l | ; July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec 624J3 5,964j2,965 : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr._ May.. June- July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec See footnote Table B-27 Note. See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-29. Selected employment and unemployment data [ Percent1 ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment rate ' Year or month All workers Both sexes years Employment as percent of population By selected groups By sex and age ExpeWomen FullMales Females rienced Marwho wage time ried head and years years and salary men * families workand ers over over workers Bluecollar workers < Total White Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployment as percent of civilian labo- force in group specified Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March s Data for are for May * Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Civilian employment as percent cf total noninstitutional population Note See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other White Female : > Males Males Females Year or month Total Total Total years Total years Total years Total years years and years and years and years and over over over over ? n3 ? ? : Jan Feb Mar... Apr_.. May... June.. July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug Sept Oct Nov... Dec.. i Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31. Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ' ] Year or month Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons years of age and ( ) ver I960 C J : Jan Feb Mar Apr May _ _ June. _ J C July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec S : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June C July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec i Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Unemployment by reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted * ] Year or month Total unemployment Job losers Job leavers Reentrants New entrants Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan. Feb. Mar AprMay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Percent of civilian labor force '.7 : Jan. Feb Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment1 Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) " Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ^ * Thousands I960... * p ; Insured unemployment M,806 lilOl June. July. Aug.. cf ! ; : Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.- Feb... Mar.. May. " June. July. Aug. Sfc Nov * D Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) * Weekly average ; thousands U,973 : Jan. Feb. Mar. Initial claims Exhaustions * T298 * * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) and SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment * Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts * Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year * For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration O TABLE B Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Mining Transportation and Conpubstruclic tion utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Government Federal State and local 1S58 _ _ v _ ^ i271 t,452 See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Government Construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Manufacturing Total wage and salary workers Federal State and local : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. N O V P Dec p July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Note Data in Tables B-34 through B-36 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-27 through B-32 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Total Whole- private Total Wholesale private Manu- ConManu- Consale non- factur- strucand nonag- factur- strucand riculretail agriretail ing tion ing tion cultural i trade trade turali Year or month $ % \ $ $ ? ? ? ? I960 v : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar May_ " ~ June July Aug Sept Oct NOVP... Dec * Index = Percent change from a year earlier * Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index ( revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used beginning ) * Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places Note-See Note,Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural i Current dollars Manufacturing dollars Construction Wholesale and retail trade Current dollars dollars Current dollars $ $ $ $ $ * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Dec v Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used beginning ) Based on unadjusted data Note. See Note Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Productivity and related data private business economy [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output * Year or quarter Private business sector Hours of all persons Nonfarm Private busibusiness ness sector sector Output per hour of all persons NonPrivate farm busibusiness ness sector sector Compensation per hour * Unit labor cost Implicit price deflator NonNonNonNonfarm Private farm Private farm Private farm busi- busi- busi- busi- busi- busibusiness ness ness ness ness ness ness sector sector sector sector sector sector sector I960 v : II Ill : II III IV IV : II Ill IV * i Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also i ncludes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed < Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business economy [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Hours of all persons ^ OutpuU Output per hour of all persons Compensation per hours Unit labor cost Implicit price deflator < rivate business sector Nonfarm business sector Private business sector Nonfarm business sector rivate business sector Nonfarm business sector I960. -L6 _ ~ L8 3.'5 P : It Ill IV : II III IV : I Year or quarter ML.. IVP L0 ! rivate business sector Nonfarm business sector Private business sector Nonfarm business sector Private business sector Nonfarm business sector Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars H ours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based pri marily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also inc ludes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-39. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable " " " ._ 90i9 proportion _ ._ -_ __ _ ___ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov __ _ _ Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June " " : " " : : : ' : : " " : : July Aug Sept Set Nov : Dec : : _- Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System except as noted TABLE R-40. Industrial production indexes market groupings ( = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Materials Consumer goodsl Total Total Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total Business Intermediate products Total Durable goods Nondurable goods proportion. __ I960. : Jan Feb. Mar Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov Dec. : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. { /fay June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Now Dec " " Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately * Also includes defense and space equipment not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-41.- Industrial production indexes selected manufactures ( = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Primary metals Year or month Fabricated metal products Nonelectrical machinery Electrical machinery Transportation equipment Lumber and products Print- ChemAn Aping icals parel and and prod- pubproducts lishing ucts Total Motor vehicles and parts __ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar.. May'.IIII June July.... Aug Sept... Oct Nov P Dec P Total Iron and steel proportion Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Foods TABLE B-42. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Commerce series * FRB series * Year or quarter Total manufacturing Primary processing Advanced processing 1961..._ Nondurable goods Primaryprocessed goods Advanced processed goods Total manufacturing Wharton series Total manufacturing Durable goods IV.. : I II.. ML IV. : I II.. III. IV. : L _ II III. P.. : I III. " IV. : I IV... : I III. " ! Durable goods Nondurable goods For description of the series see " Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization " February Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers " The Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization : A Ten Year Perspective " Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section American Statistical Association Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Wharton School of Finance TABLE B-43. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction * Residential buildingsl Total Public construction Total * New housing units Total Total Commercial Industrial Federal State and local * Other * L948 L949 1951.._ " I960.. _ 1929._ New series See next page for continuation of table T A B L E B N e w construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Residential buildings i Total Year or month new construction Total Total s New nousing units Finite Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction i Total Total Commercials Industrial Federal State and locals Other * : Jan Feb..MarApr-.. MayJune.. July May " " " June.. July Aug.._ SeptOct Nov * ._ Sept Oct Nov. " ' " Dec.. : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc * Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-44. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New housing units started Private and public Private New private housing units authorized Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Type of structure Nonfarm Total One unit I960 to units Type of structure units or more Total One unit to units units or more Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June L.088 July Aug. Sept Oct... Nov Dec L,821 L : Jan Feb Mar May. " " " " " " June July Aug Sept Oct NOVP Dec * Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; for ; for ; and prior to Not available separately beginning January Note. Only the series on private and public nonfarm housing units started is available prior to See " Economic Report " for this earlier series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-45.- Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates | Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Transportation Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Mining Railroad Air Other Public utilities Communication Commercial and others u L23 : I... II.. III.. IV : II3-- _ : l___ II.. III.. IV.. : l____ II.. III.. IV.. Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals nonprofit institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in late October-December Plans are adjusted when necessary for systematic bias Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-46. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjused ] Total manufacturing and trade Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Retail trade Year or month Sales i InvenRatios Sales i tories ^ Ratio s Inventories Ratio InvenRatios tories Salss i Sales I960. 101>,609 ! ' " ; May ~ _ ~ _II I I June ! Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June S5 ',676 350i " ~ l i,226 : I Nov p " Aug-._-_ Sept Oct " ' J July Feb Mar July Aug Sept Oct | " : Jan Dec * i Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory /sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade he inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories2 Shipments1 Year or month Total Durable goods industries Non durable goods Total industries Durable goods industries Total Materials and supplies Work Finin ished process goods Nondurable goods industries Total Materials and supplies FinWork ished in process goods 9,T " " " : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June.. 115i : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June.. 32L ; " ; July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... Nov p. ' July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec " " " " Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census O TABLE B-48. Manufacturers * new and unfilled orders ( Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders > Unfilled orders Unfilled ordersshipments ratio Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods industries nondtfense Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Ib3 : Jan. Feb. MarApr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct- 5C ? NOVP \ Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period * Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfitlsd orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-49. Consumer price indexes by expenditure classes = Year or month All items Total i : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Housing Food and beverages Food Total Rent residential Home ownership V Fuel and other utilities a Apparel and upkeep TransEnter- Other porta- Medical tain- goods and care tion ment services 11A Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately. Series beginning not comparable with series for earlier years Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and other utilities and public services Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-50. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups [ = Services Commodities Year or month All items Special indexes Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable Nondurable All services Rent Services less rent All items less food All items less shelter Nondurable commodities M.I 1976___ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June 1S6.3 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June lby.6 July Aug Sept Oct Nov \ July... Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage- earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-51. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services [ = ] Durable commodities Nondurable commodities less food Services less rent Other Year or month 1958._ : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr Apr... Vlay May... June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Total i New cars Used cars Total Apparel commodities coolant etc Total i Fuel oil coal and bottled gas Gas ( piped ) Transand portaTotal i election servtricices ity Wed icalcare services Gasoline motor Energy Includes other items not shown separately Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and gasoline motor oil coolant etc Not available Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commodity groups seasonally adjusted [ = seasonally adjusted ] Commodities less food All commodities Year and month Durable commodities Food Total Total i New cars Used cars Nondurables less food Total i Apparel Gasoline Fuel oil commotor coal and mod- oil cool- bottled ities ant etc gas l ? July Aug__ Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr.__ May June __ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July ._ Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1978-Jan Feb Mar Apr.. May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June 1977-Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June __ Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov i Includes other items not shown separately Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes for service groups and selected expenditure classes seasonally adjusted [ = seasonally adjusted except as notedj Services Selected expenditures classes Services less rent Year and month All services Rent residential Total i TransGas ( piped ) portaand tion electricity services MoHiral ivieuicai care services Home ownership Fuel and other utilities Household furnishings and operation Energy3 : J a n Feb Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.__ Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. 217'.7 July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Includes other items not shown separately Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and other utilities and public services Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and gasoline motor oil coolant etc. Index is not seasonally adjusted Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-54. Changes in consumer price indexes major groups ( Percent change ] Year or month Commodities less food Food All items Dec to Dec.i Year to year Year to year Dec to Dec. ' Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less food Services Dec to Dec.i Year to year Dec to Dec.t Year to year Change from preceding month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted L2 ! July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec 'A ~ '.S : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov : Jan. Feb. Mar June SeaUnsonally adj usted adjusted SeaUnsonally adjusted adjusted .'5 '.A ! '.7 .'8 ! '. % i Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Beginning January data are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Consumer foods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Total Total Durable Nondur able consumer Capital finished equip- goods ment1 _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June.. _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May. June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-55. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Foods Total and Other feeds Materials and components For manufacturing For construction Crude materials for further processing Processed fuels and lubricants Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other l ? i ? ? : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Formerly called producer finished goods Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Producer price indexes by stage of processing seasonally adjusted ^ ( = seasonally adjusted ] Finished goods Intermediate materi als supplies and components Finished goods excluding consumer Year and month ConTotal sumer finished fingoods ished foods Crude materUils for further proce ssing fnn/lo IUUUO Total Total consumer Consumer goods FoodCapifinFoods __ J ished Total and Other Total stuffs Other tal ana Non- equip- goods feeds feedTotal Dur- dura- ment i able ble stuffs : J a n Feb. Mar... Apr.._ May.. June July.. Aug Sept Oct. Nov... Dec.. : J a n Feb. Mar... Apr May.. June- July.. Aug Sept Oct. Nov... Dec.. : J a n Feb.... M a r May'. " " June... July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Formerly called producer finished goods Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides Fuels skins and leather related Chemicals and products and allied products1 related and products power1 : Jan. Feb Mar Apr. _ May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov. Dec__ : Jan Feb... _ Mar Apr May June.. _ July__ Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec- See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups Continued = ] Industrial commodities Continue * i Year or month Transportation Pulp equipFurniMetals Machin- ture and NonmeRubber Lumber paper ment : and and and ery and tallic and Motor houseplastic wood metal equipmineral vehicles allied hold products products products products ment and durables products equipment2 Miscellaneous products 1975._ : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-58. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer finished foods Total finished goods Consumer goods Total Year or month Dec to Dec * Year to year i Dec to Dec. * Year to year Dec to Dec * Year to year 195g I960 Year to year Capital equipment Dec to Dec. * Dec to Dec * Year to year Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adjusted justed adadjusted justed adadjusted justed justed justed justed justed : Jan Feb Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec _. _.l i.s L2 ! l'.4 * ! l .'6 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics * ! \ \ l L3 '.5 .'8 L3 ! L4 '.7 Mar '.6 ! " MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE T A B L E B-59. Money stock'measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] ( ) verall measures i Components and related items Deposits at commercial banks Year and month Other checkable Time bank deDeSavmand thrift posits ings a instituTotal Large ( unadtions * justed ) CDs Other Mi+ Mi M3 Currency .'3 July.. A u g Nov.. Dec p. : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec " " Dec.. Dec Dec Dec Dec " " : Dec.. Dec.. : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : J a n Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. ment deposits ( unadjusted ) ' Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec.. U.S Govern- : : : : : : : S : : Deposits at non- Time and savings Mi Mi is currency plus demand deposits ; Mi+ is Mi plus savings deposits at commercial banks and checkable deposits at nonbank thrift institutions ; M is Mi plus time and savings deposits at commercial banks other than large certificates of deposit ( CDs ) ; and M is M plus deposits at nonbank thrift institutions Negotiable time certificates of deposit ( CDs ) issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Includes negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts at commercial banks Average of the beginning and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks savings capital at savings and loan associations and credit union shares Includes negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts at thrift institutions credit union share draft accounts and demand deposits at mutual savings banks ( Deposits at all commercial banks. Includes Treasury note balances beginning November Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-60. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans End of year or month * : June : June Total loans and investments ' Total a Investments Commercial and industrial U.S. Treasury securities Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates M8.7 * S Seasonally adjusted I960 _ " : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May __ June._ July P _ Aug p Sept * > Oct p Nov v Dec p * Data are for last Wednesday of month or year ( except June and December call dates ) Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic interbank loans only beginning January * Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods * Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( then about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank ( then about $ billion ) are included in.other securities rather than in loans Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only e Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes ( then about $ billion ) are classified as other securities rather than as loans Beginning August reflects new definition of affiliates included and different group of reporting banks. Amount of total loans sold was reduced by $ billion Note. In addition to footnoted changes affecting comparability of the data comparability may also be affected by bank mergers liquidations loan ^ classifications etc Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-61. Liquid asset holdings of private domestic nonfinancial investors [ Average outstanding ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Year and month Total liquid assets Total Currency i Demand deposits i : Dec.. : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec.. : Dec : : : : : U.S. Treasury securities Negotiable certifiShortcates term of demarket- posit s able securities * Other private money market instruments Commercial banksl Nonbank thrift institutions Savings bonds3 _._ Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec. _ : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : Dec Dec Dec _ Dec p ____ : Jan Feb Mar. Apr. May..__ June _ _ July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov... Dec >.._ __ July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i Money stock components ( see Table B-59 ) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors * As published in money stock statistics Series E and H savings bonds other savings bonds and savings notes held by individuals * Short-term marketable U.S. Treasury securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings * Commercial paper bankers ' acceptances Federal funds security repurchase agreements and money market mutual fund shares held outside banks and other financial institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-62. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] U.S. Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Foreign Total funds raised Item ! Corporate equities Debt instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages _ Home.. Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households _ Nonfinancial business._ Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency, Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments _ Corporate equities Less security debt Other sources : Foreign funds At banks Direct. Change in U.S. Government cash balance U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-62. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows seasonally adjusted annual rates Item III III Treasury securities. Agency issues and mortgages U.S. Government Total funds raised Corporate equities K6 Debt instruments Foreign Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Foreign funds. At banks Direct Change in U.S. Government cash balance.. U.S. Government loans Private insurance and pension reserves Other.. Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate _ Total funds advanced to nonfinancial sectors. Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time and savings accounts At commercial banks At savings institutions. Credit market instruments net U.S. Government securities Private credit market instruments Corporate equities.. Less security debt Other sources : I Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total : : : : : : : * : : : : : ' I9601961 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Decp__ Feb Mar Apr May June Dec p Member bank reserves Member bank borrowings Total Other Total Required Excess Seasonal : Jan July Aug Sept Oct Nov U.S Government securities '826 * il,822 * Data are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Beginning November includes $ million of reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Beginning allowable deficiencies included are ( beginning with first statement week of quarter ) : first quarter $ million ; second quarter $ million ; third quarter $ million ; fourth quarter $ million. Beginning allowable deficiencies included are : first quarter $ million and second quarter $ million. Transition period ended after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-mcnth period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-64. Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ) Member bank reserves t Member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements2 Year and month Total Nnn borrowed Required Total Time and savings Demand Private U.S. Government * Dec I9601961 ' Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * : " Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : " Dec Dec Dec Dec 3.'2 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M Includes total time and savings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-65. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year or month Bills ( new issues ) ^ 3month 6month Constant maturities years years Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) /aa Baa HighNewPrime grade home comPrime munic- mortmerrate ipal cial gage charged bonds by yields paper ( Stand4-6 ard & ( FHLBB ) months banks ( ) Poor 's ) Discount rate Federal Federal Reserve funds rates Bank of New York * e fl l See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-65. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year or month Bills ( new issues ) Constant maturities Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Newhome mortgage yields FHLBB ) Prime comPrime merrate cial charged paper by banks * months Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York * Federal funds rate 6month years years 5M WAT &A WAT % ^ 5X6 May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec 7lA ~ 7lA WT-VA 7M- _ fi3/ ^ ^ 5M-5K : Jan Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. 5M-5K ^ J4 6J ^ 6M- % ^ July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov. Dec.. 6M- % % 7l 7H A- % * A-7 % ^ % : Jan... Feb..__ Mar.. Apr. May.. June. IVAT ^ ^ 6j ^ -63> ^ July.. Aug. Sept. Oct.._ Nov. Dec 3month : Jan Feb.. Mar.. ADr___ 6/4 % ^ ^ 6/4 % % % ^ ^ ^ -5K ^ -6M 53/_g 73X_ 73/ _ 8i/ ^ ^ ^ % 9/4-1034 ^ ^ HJ/2-11 % -7H 7H-7H % -Z -&A ! ^ Rate on new issues within period Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assumed on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates Average effective rate for the year ; opening and closing rate for the month Based on seven-day averages of daily effective rates for weeks ending Wednesday. Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred e From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-66. Consumer installment credit [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Installment credit extended Year or month Installment credit iquidated Net change in amount outstandin g Total * Automobile Revolving Total i -Automobile Revolving Total i Automobile Revolving : Jan Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Includes other categories not shown separately Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Note : Consumer installment credit consists of short- and intermediate-term credit extended through regular business channels to finance the purchase of goods and services for personal consumption or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid in two or more installments. Mortgage credit generally is excluded Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-67. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multi- Comfamily mercial prop- prop- Total erties erties i Conventional to 4-family houses Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : II I I I I V : II I I I : II III. IV..._ Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Other holders Mutual savings banks Commercial banks * Life Federal insurance and comrelated panies agencies2 Individuals and others I960 : _ II III IV S4.1 : | | III " : II III IV Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source- Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-69. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ) Receipts Fiscal year Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) 79,99& Transition quarter i I960 i Estimates Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions. Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds. _ OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other Gross Federal debt BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs General science space and technology... Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirementInterest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-70. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Transition quarter Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes _ Customs duties.. Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System. All other BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense International affairs.__ General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts. Total outlays Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement. Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The period July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-71. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals __ _ __ _ ._ Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Total budget receipts EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays _ _ _ _ _ _ __ Lending and financial transactions -_ __ Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment _ __ __ _ Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures__ Note See Note Table B-69 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-72. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures v Expenditures ( ) Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts national income and product accounts ___ __ _- : II III IV _ III IV v _ IV : | | _ Receipts II IN Surplus or deficit : Surplus or deficit <- ) national income and product accounts State and local government Federal Government Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E R-73. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Transfer payments Year or quarter Fiscal year : Indirect PerConPurGrantssonal Corpo- busi- tribuchases in-aid ness tax rate tax tions of to State and for TotaP goods To and Total non- profits and To tax non- social and local tax acper- forserv- sons eign- governtax insurre- cruals acance ices ments ers ceipts cruals l'.O : II III IV : II III IV V 1ncludes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget Calendar year : p Z.I Surplus Subsior dies defiless cit cur- ( ) rent Net nasurintionterplus al inest of come paid govand ernprodment uct enteracprises counts TABLE B-74. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Expenditures Subsidies Pur- Transndirect tontriPerless busichases Corfer sonal porate ness utions Fedof payNet current eral tax for tax >rofits Total i goods ments nterest surplus and social rantsgovand tax and paid ofernto ontax ccruals ontax nsur- n-aid servperceipts ance ment ccruals ices sons enterprises Surplus or deficit / \ national ncome and product accounts '5 i p : II III IV : II ill IV : II ill IVP____ _ Q n L.2 L.3 Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis i T A B L E B-75. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes General expenditures by function ReveIndi- Corponue vidual ration from All net Federal others income income taxes taxes Government Total Education Highways Public welfare All other < _ _ _ _ _ ~ ~ ~ \ Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures s Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-76. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation 1967-1S [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Fiscal year : Total interestbearing public debt securities Marketable Total Bills Non marketable Treasury Treasury notes bonds Total Foreign GovernU.S ment savings govern- account ment bonds series2 series Other < : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June C64 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 79,7S8 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series and foreign-currencyseries issues * Includes Treasury deposit funds and some special issues formerly included in " Other. " * Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks * Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) ' the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-77. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month Fiscal year : Totals Mutual savings State Miscelbanks CorpoCommercial and in- rations and local Indi- laneous govern- viduals * invesbanks * surance ments tors s. s companies _- _ _ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Held by Federal by Govern- Reserve Totah ment accounts Banks July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Held ? U.S. savings bonds series A F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value As of July public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the data in this table s For comparability with published data published data for have been adjusted to exclude notes of the International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in each year through These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department of the Treasury Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-60 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-78. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year cr month Maturity class Amount outstanding privately held Within year Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years g < Feb Mar Apr _ May June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _. _ _ Months C08 : Jan Average length U Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department cf the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE T A B L E B-79. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial ' Year or quarter Total Total Nonfinancial Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing Wholesale and Utilities Other retail trade Rest of the world l.i U l.i _. P ( ( : _ llf IV... : llf IV... : See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-79. Corporate profits by industry Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Financial Total Total Total Nonfinancial Federal Reserve banks Other Wholesale and retail trade Utilities Other Total Manufacturing Rest of the world v C : ll____ III.. IV... : IL___ III.. IV... : II-. III.. Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-80 for industry detail Consists of transportation communication and electric gas and sanitary services Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-80. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Durable goods Year or Total Electric Motor quarter manuFood Chem- PetroPrimary Fabri- Machinicals leum and and ery facturand and Other Total metal cated elec- vehicles Other except and ing Total kindred allied indus- metal electri- tronic coal prod- prod- prodtries products equip- equipucts cal ment ucts ucts ment l'.5 v 2.'l : ll__ ML IV. : IL III. IV. : II.. IIL- See next page for continuation of table M TABLE B-80. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with Inventory valuation adjustment Nondurable goods Year or quarter Durable goods Total nanuFood Chem- Petroacturicals leum Primary and ing Total kindred and metal and coal Other Total indusprod- allied prodprodtries ucts ucts ucts Electric Motor Fabri- Machinand ery cated elec- vehicles Other except and metal electri- tronic roducts equip- equipcal ment ment i L.5 L.8 p : L II III IV : L II III IV : II. Ill Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau cf Economic Analysis O TABLE B-81. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments I960 P : II III IV : II III IV : | | III _ _ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-82. Sales profits and stockholders1 equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Profits Profits Stock- Sales StockStockholders ' ( net ) Before After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Before After equity equity ( net ) income income equity > income income income income taxes i taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes : 1V : II Ill IV : | II Ill IV : | | III IV. : II III IV : IV New series : : II III In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Federal Trade Commission Source : Federal Trade Commission T A B L E B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all turing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent manufac- Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Year or quarter All manufacturing corporations Durable Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV New series : _ : IV : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IV _ : | | IV : _ II Ill _ i Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data jn millions of dollars See Note Table B-82 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Industry III IV III IV Instruments and related products.. Other durable manufacturing products All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals. Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical Electrical and electronic equipment Transportation equipment2 Motor vehicles and ei Aircraft guided missiles and parts Nondurable goods industries. Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products2 Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products II III Ratios based on equity at end of quarter Includes other industries not shown separately Source : Federal Trade Commission III T A B L E B-85. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rate ? ] Sources Uses E Ixterna Year or quarter Credit market funds Total Internal1 Total Total Long- Shortterm terms Other Total Purchase of physical assets Increase in financial assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) o : II.. Ill IV _ : II III _ * Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits Stocks bonds and mortgages Bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and Government loans Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-86. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter Total Current liabilities Net CurU.S Notes Other work- rent Notes Other Governand ing Inven- current Total and current capital ratios Cash * ment accounts tories accounts liabilsecuri- receivassets payable ities ties able All corporations4 SEC series : * > _ ___ __ Nonfinancial corporations SEC series : ? f> ? S L.548 ? IL Ill IV : IL FTC-FRB series : t Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Total current assets divided by total current liabilities Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Based on data from " Statistics of Income " Department of the Treasury Excludes banks savings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Based on data from " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " July for details regarding the series Note. SEC series not available after Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E B-87. State and municipal and corporate securities offered ^ [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Industry of corporate issuer Manufacturing ! Electric gas and water * Transportation * Communication Other : I.. II. III IV. : I.. Prior to also includes extractive radiobroadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues * Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues s Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " T h e Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-88. Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( percent ) * Common stock prices1 Year or quarter New York Stock Exchange indexes ( December = ) * Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance DowJones ndustrial average Standard & Poor 's omposite Dividendindex price = ratio ) * Earningsprice ratio ' Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of quarterly earnings after taxes ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day of quarter Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow-Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-89. Business formation and business failures Business failures l Index of net business formation ( = ) Year or month rations ( number ) ness failure rates Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures New business Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted ISO. S C Apr May June _ Mr a July Aug Sept Oct : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb i Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc > Failure rate per sted enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-90. Income of farm people and farmers [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income received from farming3 Personal income received by total farm population Year or quarter Gross income before inventory adjustment From From From nonall Total * farm farm sources sources sources2 Net to farm operators ProducCash tion exreceipts penses from marketings Before inventory adjustment After inventory adjustment5 Billions of dollars Net income per farm after inventory adjustment8 Current dollars dollars Dollars : __ IL_ III IV. : II _ ML IV 3.39C 08C : II III Net income to farm operators after inventory adjustment less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Estimated income of farm residents from nonfarm sources ; based on survey benchmarks with extrapolations to current year Includes government payments < Also includes government payments and nonmoney income and other farm income furnished by farms not shown separately Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year The farm definition is used Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-91. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Year 1944_- Farm output i Feed Total grains Hay and forage Livestock and products * Food Vege- Fruits and grains tables nuts Cotton Meat ToOil anibacco crops Total * mals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs 1945_. no no p. no i Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes sugarcrops hay seeds pasture seeds cover-crop seeds and some miscellaneous crop production notincluded in groups shown < Includes clipped wool mohair and beginning honey and beeswax rnot included in groups shown Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-92. Farm population employment and productivity Farm popula arm population ( April ) Farm employme ment ( thousands ) Farm output Per hour of farm work Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population Total Hired Family workers workers Per unit of total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre * Index = i * Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-29 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " < Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-93. ,Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and selected farm resource prices [ = except as noted ) Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm roducts Crops CMCM CMCO CN CN Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Ot c Nov Dc e : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Ot c Nov Dc e 1977-Jan Feb Prices paid by farmers All items Live- nterest Family stock taxes living and and items roducts wage rates I ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C3 ) ( ) Selected resource prices Tractors and Produc- selfprotion pelled items machinery Fertilizer Average hourly wage rate all hired farm workers Average farm real estate value per acre2 $ L L.33 ft * Without room or board Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through and for February beginning Monthly data are for first of month Series discontinued. Consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) substituted in calculating total prices paid Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-94. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Year Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Total hours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor Farm real estate MeFeed chaniseed Agrical and cultural livepower chemiand cals stock mapurchinery chases3 Taxes Misceland interest laneous _ * i Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens > Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE E-95. Balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Financial assets MaHousehold DeReal LiveTotal estate stock i chinery equip- posits and Cropss ment and motor and curvehifurnish- rency cles ings Pro1 nvest- Total Real Other prieestate debt tors ' U.S ments equidebt savings in coties bonds operatives 6L0 ? ? p _ _ * Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-96. Exchange rates [ Cents per unit of foreign currency except as noted ] Belgian franc Year and month Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen March rate : Mar June Sept : Mar June Sept Dec : MarJune _ Sept Dec ._ : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June. Sept Dec Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : : : : : United States dollar ( March = ) Netherlands guilder Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound Multilateral tradeweighted average Bilateral tradeweighted average March rate : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec__ : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar. June. Sept Dec.. : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec 21.6S0 : Mar June. Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-97. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Investment income Merchandise i Year or quarter Exports Imports Net balance Net military transactions Net travel Other and trans- services portanets tion receipts Receipts Payments l | ; 35f Nt e Balance on goods and services i Remittances pensions and other unilateral transfers i Balance on current account ; ; I960. _ 1969_ 1972_ 1973_ ! : II... III.. IV._ : I II IV.. -3,60i : II... Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the national income and product accounts although the two may differ because of revisions special handling of certain items etc ( See next page for continuation of table. ) TABLE B-97. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net ( increase/capital outflow ( ) l Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] Foreign official assets Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets Other U.S Government assets U.S private assets Total Total Statistical discrepancy Assets of foreign official reserve agencies Other foreign assets Allocations of Total special ( sum of drawing the rights items ( SDR ) with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy .-_.- : II... III.. IV : I I III... IV.... : l_ II--.- III p ' * s s Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for changes in U.S. official reserve assets U.S. private assets abroad and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use categories [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonagricultural Year or quarter Total Agricultural Non- petroleum Total Total Capital goods Other goods Petroleum and products Total Industrial supplies Other goods 7C : II Ill IV : II Ill _ Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions ot dollars ] Item Developed countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New South Africa Exports Zealand and Developing countries. OPEC2 Others Eastern Europe U24,047 Imports Developed countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New South Africa Zealand and Developing countries. OPEC 2_ Other 3_ Easte rn Europe. U72,945 First quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate ; preliminary. Detail will not add to totals because of seasonal adjustment discrepancy and rounding Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics otherWestern Hemisphere,and other countries in Asia and Africa,less petroleum exporting countries and the International Monetary Fund Includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund not in area detail Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-100. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Monetary Foreign official assets U.S. Government securities Other U.S. Government liabilities Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere _ Other official assets Other foreign assets Direct investments in the United States ( book value ) Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere _ U.S. Treasury securities Other U.S. securities Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S nonbanks Foreign assets in the United States Direct investments abroad ( book value ) Foreign securities Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S nonbanks U.S. private assets U.S. loans and other long-term assets _ U.S. short-term assets other than reserves Other U.S. Government assets U.S. official reserve assets Net international position of the United States U.S. assets abroad Gold Special drawing rights ( SDR ) nternational Reserve position in the Ir Fund ( I M F ) Foreign currency reserves Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks Note. Gold is valued at SDR35 per ounce throughout. The SDR value is converted to dollars at $ 1/SDR before December at $ 1.08571/SDR from December through January at $ 1.20635/SDR from February through June and as measured by the basket valuation of the SDR beginning July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-101. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country November Industrialized countries United States Canada Japan Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Norway and Sweden ) Switzerland United Kingdom Other Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Oil exporting countries Iran Nigeria Saudi Arabia All countries Venezuela Other * Other less developed areas Other Western Hemisphere Other Middle East Other Asia Other Africa _ Includes Includes Cuba Luxembourg Data beginning April exclude the foreign exchange cover against the note issue * Algeria Indonesia Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar and United Arab Emirates Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDR ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to ' December [ Millions of dollars ] > Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Investment in international financial institutions _ Total.net Under assistance programs net Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Net new economic and technical aid grants * Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Net new credits < s New credits Less : Principal collections Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Currency claims acquired Sales of farm products Second-stage operations Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country Other uses Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries * net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Developed countries net total Negative figures ( ) occur when the total of grant returns principal repayments and/or foreign currencies disbursed by the Government exceeds new grants and new credits utilized and/or acquisitions of foreign currencies through new sales of farm products July through December Yearly average is for ^ years s Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the special funds of the African Development Fund Asian Development Bank Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Development Association and International Finance Corporation Net new grants are not adjusted for settlements of postwar relief and other grants under agreements and net new credits exclude prior grants converted into credits. Repayments on these settlements are included in net new credits Outstanding credits on December totaled $ million representing net credits extended since organization of Export-Import Bank February less chargeoffs and net adjustments due to exchange rates ( $ million ) and excluding World War I debts. The amount repayable in dollars at U.S. Government option was $ mill i o n ; the remainder was repayable in foreign currencies commodities or services at the option of the borrowers ( See next page for continuation of table. ) TABLE B-102. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July. / to December Continued [ Millions of dollars ] > Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Under assistance programs net P Investment in international financial institutions Total net Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Net new economic and technical aid grants4 Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Net new credits New credits Less : Principal collections Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Currency claims acquired Sales of farm products Second-stage operations Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country Other uses Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries * net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Developed countries * net total. ill e Equivalent value of currencies still available to be used including some funds advanced from foreign governments and after loss by exchange rate fluctuations ( $ million ) was $ million on December i Includes foreign currencies acquired from triangular trade operations and principal and interest collections on credits originally extended under Public Law which since enactment of Public Law are available for the same purposes as Public Law currencies s Developed countries include Australia Canada Japan New Zealand Republic of South Africa and all countries in Europe except Cyprus. Gibraltar Greece Malta Portugal Spain Turkey and Yugoslavia. Developing countries include all other countries. This classification is on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Less than plus or minus $ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis based on information made available by operating agencies TABLE B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country Exports f.a.s 1978i United States Canada Japan European Community Developed countries France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries Developing countries OPEC5 Other... Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China TOTAL Imports c.i.f. United States Canada Japan European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom. Other developed countries Developed countries Developing countries. OPEC5 Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China TOTAL.. Preliminary estimates Free-alongside-ship value s Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately s Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Cost insurance and freight value United Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-104. World trade balance and current account balances and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country 1978i World trade balances Developed countries > United States Canada Japan European Community * ! '.Z * France West Germany.. Italy United Kingdom. -l ! Other developed countries Developing countries OPEC _ Other.. Communist countries * U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL * Current account balances8 ! l ! o ^ 8.'0 Other i TOTAL. OECD United States Canada Japan European Community * France West Germany.. Italy United Kingdom. Developing countries. OPEC _ Other.. -L6 _ i * Preliminary estimates Exports f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) less imports c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) s Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe * Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage classification timing and valuation in the recording of transactions by the countries involved OECD basis Consists of countries in footnote plus Bahrain and Qatar Includes Communist countries and non-OECD developed countries Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers T A B L E B Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ = ) United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Consumer prices : II. III IV " II III Hourly compensation ' _ _ _- fO. not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-106. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries91960-78 [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada European Community * Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) P : : M _ _ II III IV III IV v Unemployment rate ( percent ) _ _ ._ _ __ * : II Ill IV : | | III IV ' <5.5 i Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom and West Germany * All data exclude construction > Unemployment rates adjusted to U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland < 11-month average seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Economic Policy and Research ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] annual average Area and country OECO countries U.S. dollar value in ( billions ) France West Germany Italy _ _ United Kingdom Other OECD * M.I Less developed countries. OPEC Other European Community3 U.S.S.R Eastern Europe _ _ China .__ United States Canada Japan. Communist countries s TOTAL * Preliminary estimates Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for except for those of the Communist countries which were converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately * Growth rates are for OECD countries other than the Big Seven ( United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy and the United Kingdom ) Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately annual average annual average s Sum of OECD countries Communist countries and less developed countries plus a residual of $ billion attributable to non-OECD developed countries Note. For Italy and United Kingdom data relate to real gross domestic product. For France data relate to gross domestic product excluding nonmarket activity such as compensation of employees in the government sector Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O