Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Stock Number CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER THE ECONOMY IN CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK CHAPTER LONGER-TERM POLICIES FOR STABILITY AND GROWTH CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY TESTING RESILIENCE APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ( Ill ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : Last year world oil prices more than doubled. This increase will add some $ billion to the bill for imported oil paid by consuming nations. Higher oil prices were the major reason for the worldwide speedup in inflation during and the dimming of growth prospects for The United States was severely affected as were other oil-importing countries. Our share of the additional oil bill will come to almost $ billion this year. Partly but not solely because of higher oil prices inflation accelerated sharply. The consumer price index rose by over percent. The Nation 's output of goods and services which had been predicted in last year 's Economic Report to grow by 2V4 percent over the quarters of rose by less than percent Although growth slowed our economy offered strong resistance to the forces of recession. Despite virtually universal forecasts of imminent recession output continued to rise throughout the second half of last year. Housing sales and construction held up better than expected until late in the year. By reducing their savings consumers maintained spending in the face of the multibillion dollar drain of purchasing power from higher oil prices. Because business inventories have been kept remarkably lean declines in sales did not lead to major inventory corrections. More generally the economic recovery of recent years has been free of the distortions which in the past made the economy sensitive to recessionary forces Employment growth held up even better than output and unemployment remained under percent all year. Unfortunately the strength of employment gains reflected a sharp decline in productivity percent over the year. This fall in productivity added to costs and thus bore a share of the responsibility for higher inflation While inflation worsened in a large part of the acceleration was concentrated in a few areas energy ; homeownership and finance ; and early in the year farm and food products. Elsewhere consumer price inflation was more moderate as prices rose by percent over the year. Wage gains were no higher than in despite the speedup of inflation. The government 's voluntary wage and price standards were widely observed and limited sharply the extent to which inflation spread from oil and a few other troubled sectors to the rest of the economy The Importance of Reducing Inflation It is my strong conviction that inflation remains the Nation 's number one economic problem. Energy and housing prices are still moving up rapidly adding directly to inflation and continuing to threaten a new price-wage spiral in the rest of the economy. Even apart from these special problem sectors inflation is now running at an to percent rate compared to or 6V2 percent several years ago in part because of a disappointing productivity performance Our immediate objective for must be to prevent the spread of double-digit price increases from oil and other problem sectors to the rest of the economy. My budget and economic policies have that as their primary goal. We share that same urgent goal with virtually every other oil-importing country. Halting the spread of inflation is not enough however. We must take steps to reduce it Each new round of inflation since the 1960s has left our country with a higher underlying inflation rate. Without long-term policies to pull down the current to percent rate our Nation will remain vulnerable to still further increases. Another sharp rise in oil prices or a worldwide crop shortage could provide the next turn of the ratchet Failure to lower inflation after the latest episode would strengthen long-run inflationary expectations and erode resistance to even larger wage and price increases. Over the longer term we will either bring inflation down or it will assuredly get worse A Strategy for Dealing with Inflation To fight inflation I propose that we act along four lines. The first and most immediate of these is fiscal and monetary restraint : Under the economic conditions that now confront us we must concentrate on reducing the budget deficit by holding down Federal spending and forgoing tax reductions. We can not afford a permissive economic environment in which the oil-led inflation of gives rise to a widespread acceleration of wage and price increases in and To reduce inflation in subsequent years the budget will have to stay tight. That does not mean that it should fail to respond to changing economic circumstances or that taxes can never be reduced. But compared to an earlier less inflationary era the room for budgetary maneuver has appreciably narrowed Monetary policy will have to continue firmly in support of the same anti-inflationary goals The second line of action is restraint by the private sector in its wage and price decisions. Aided by the deliberations of the Pay and Price Advisory Committees appointed last year we have been updating and improving the voluntary wage and price standards As a third line of action we must pursue measures to encourage productivity growth adapt our economy rapidly to the fact of scarcer oil supplies and improve our competitive standing in the world economy. By dealing with these fundamental aspects of economic performance we seek to ensure that the long-term monetary and fiscal restraints needed to curb inflation go hand-in-hand with a healthy growth in output employment and living standards. These measures will also help us reduce inflationary pressures from the cost side Recent history has driven home the lesson that events outside our country such as worldwide crop shortages or sudden increases in OPEC oil prices can have major inflationary effects on the domestic economy. The fourth line of action therefore must be the use of measures relating to energy and food that reduce our vulnerability to outside inflationary shocks The Short-Term Economic Outlook We face a difficult economic transition in the next year or two. According to my economic advisers our economy is likely to undergo a mild recession early this year. Most private forecasters share this view. Consumer purchasing power is being drained away by rising energy prices ; moreover construction of new homes may decline somewhat further because of limited supplies of mortgage credit and high mortgage interest rates Since economic growth in recent years has been well balanced there are no serious distortions in our economy to intensify the forces of recession. An economic downturn if it occurs should therefore be brief and mild. By year-end our economy should be growing again and the pace of expansion is likely to increase in Unemployment will probably rise moderately this year. Next year a stronger pace of economic expansion will create more new jobs and unemployment will begin to come down again Inflation has been building in our country for a decade and a half and it will take many years of persistent effort to bring it back down This year energy prices will still go up faster than other prices but less so than in Some of the other special factors that contributed to inflation last year should do so to a smaller degree or not at all in Enactment of the budget that I have recommended and continued exercise of reasonable restraint by business and labor in their wage and price decisions should make it possible to lower the rate of inflation from percent in to close to percent in and to a range of to percent in But that accomplishment will still leave inflation running at an entirely unacceptable pace. We can not and will not rest until reasonable price stability has been achieved Budget Policies My budget proposals will reduce the Federal deficit by more than half to $ billion in fiscal Accomplishing this reduction despite the effect of slower economic growth on Federal tax revenues has required severe restraint on Federal spending. Outlays will increase from $ billion this year to $ billion in fiscal Although real defense spending will rise total Federal outlays adjusted for inflation will remain virtually constant. I propose to reduce inflation-adjusted spending outside of defense My budget is based squarely on the premise that bringing an end to inflation must remain the top priority of economic policy. Not only are budget expenditures held to the minimum level consistent with urgent national needs but tax reductions are forgone. This austere budget policy accompanied by supportive policies of monetary restraint is a necessary condition for controlling inflation Citizens all across our country are facing rising tax burdens because of increased social security taxes and because inflation pushes individuals into higher income tax brackets. They want and deserve tax reductions when cuts can be granted within the framework of a prudent budgetary policy. Businesses need greater incentives to invest in the new and modern plant and equipment that is essential to growth in our productive capacity and to long-run improvement in economic efficiency. If we continue to keep the growth of Federal expenditures under tight rein tax reductions will be forthcoming. But I could not and did not recommend tax relief this year I am aware that a mild recession is widely forecast. Indeed the estimates of revenues and expenditures in my budget assume its occurrence. But forecasts are necessarily uncertain. Our economy has shown remarkable resilience to date and there is no evidence that a recession has begun. Under those circumstances to have recommended a tax reduction and a much larger budget deficit would have been a signal that we were not serious in our fight against inflation It would have increased inflationary expectations weakened the value of the dollar in exchange markets and risked the translation of last year 's oil-led inflation into a new and higher wage-price spiral in In recognition of these realities my budget proposals concentrate on reducing the deficit In this uncertain period of course economic policy can not be fixed in place and then forgotten. If economic conditions and prospects should significantly worsen I will be prepared to recommend to the Congress additional fiscal measures to support output and employment in ways and under circumstances that are consistent with a continued fight against inflation Restraint in the budget has been accomplished while still moving forward with Federal programs and expenditures that address our Nation 's critical needs Outlays for defense will increase by over percent in real terms Both strategic and conventional forces will be strengthened. Our commitment to our NATO allies will be met and our ability to deploy forces rapidly anywhere in the world will be improved Recent events in Southwest Asia have underlined the necessity for these actions Expenditures will be raised to expand domestic energy supplies increase energy conservation and provide assistance to lowincome families least able to pay higher energy prices Support for basic research enlarged in the past three fiscal years will be further expanded to a total of $ billion in Sustained commitment to basic research will assure continued American scientific and technical preeminence A major new initiative for which $ billion in new budget authority is requested addresses the serious problem of unemployment among disadvantaged youth These programs were made possible within the framework of a tight budget by pruning less essential programs increasing administrative efficiencies and reducing fraud and abuse. Legislative proposals to reduce Federal spending will save $ 5Vb billion in fiscal and even more in subsequent years Pay and Price Standards A little more than a year ago I asked business and labor to join with me in the fight against inflation by complying with voluntary standards for pay and prices. Cooperation with my request was extensive. Last year 's acceleration of inflation did not represent a breakdown of the pay and price standards. Skyrocketing energy prices and rising costs of home purchase and finance lay behind the substantial worsening of inflation. Declining productivity also added to business costs and prices The pay and price standards in fact have served the Nation well Although the price standards had only limited applicability to food energy and housing prices in the remaining sectors of the economy for which the standards were designed prices accelerated little during the first year of the program. Wage increases were no larger than in even though the cost of living rose faster. Increases in energy prices did not spill over into wages and the broad range of industrial and service prices On September my Administration and leaders of the labor movement reached a National Accord. We agreed that our antiinflation policies must be both effective and equitable and that in fighting inflation we will not abandon our effort to pursue the goals of full employment and balanced growth As an outgrowth of that Accord I appointed a Pay Advisory Committee to work together with my Administration to review and make recommendations on the pay standards and how they are being carried out. A Price Advisory Committee was established to make recommendations with respect to the price standards The most immediate problem in is to ensure that last year 's sharp increase in energy prices does not result in a new spiral of price and wage increases that would worsen the underlying inflation rate for many years to come. Understandably workers business managers and other groups want to make up for last year 's loss of real income and they may seek to do so by asking for larger increases in wage rates salaries and other forms of income. Such efforts would not restore real incomes that have been reduced by rising world oil prices and declining productivity but they would intensify inflation Improvements in our living standards can only be achieved by making our economy more efficient and less dependent on imported oil Voluntary standards for wages and prices together with disciplined fiscal and monetary policies are the key ingredients in a strategy for reducing inflation. During the years immediately ahead monetary and fiscal policies will seek a gradual but steady lowering of inflation. By itself restraint on borrowing and spending would mean relatively slow economic growth and somewhat higher unemployment and idle capacity. Effective standards for moderating wage and price increases will lead to greater progress in lowering inflation and thereby reduce the burden on monetary and fiscal policies and provide scope for faster economic growth and increased jobs Long-Term Economic Goals Just before my Administration took office the overall unemployment rate was still close to percent. For blacks and other minorities the rate was over percent and had shown little improvement since the recovery began in early Since then increases in employment have been extraordinarily large averaging nearly 3V2 percent per year. The gains for women were twice as large as for men. For blacks and other minority groups the percentage rise in employment was half again as large as for whites. Aided by a strongly expanded Federal jobs program for youth employment among black and other minority teenagers grew by over percent. Employment among Hispanic Americans rose by over percent Unemployment rates have come down substantially for most demographic groups. Unemployment among black teenagers however has not fallen significantly and remains distressingly high To address the very serious problem of unemployment among disadvantaged youth my Administration has substantially expanded funds for youth employment and training programs over the past years. My budget includes an important new initiative to increase the skills earning power and employability of disadvantaged young people In the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act was passed with the active support of my Administration The general objectives of the act and those of my Administration are to achieve full employment and reasonable price stability When I signed that act a little over a year ago it was my hope that we could achieve by the interim goals it set forth : to reduce the overall unemployment rate to percent and to achieve a percent inflation rate Since the end of however huge OPEC oil price increases have made the outlook for economic growth much worse and at the same time have sharply increased inflation. The economic policies I have recommended for the next years will help the economy adjust to the impact of higher OPEC oil prices. But no policies can change the realities which those higher prices impose I have therefore been forced to conclude that reaching the goals of a percent unemployment rate and percent inflation by is no longer practicable. Reduction of the unemployment rate to percent by starting from the level now expected in would require an extraordinarily high economic growth rate. Efforts to stimulate the economy to achieve so high a growth rate would be counterproductive. The immediate result would be extremely strong upward pressure on wage rates costs and prices. This would undercut the basis for sustained economic expansion and postpone still further the date at which we could reasonably expect a return to a percent unemployment rate Reducing inflation from the percent expected in to percent by would be an equally unrealistic expectation. Recent ex- perience indicates that the momentum of inflation built up over the past years is extremely strong. A practical goal for reducing inflation must take this fact into account Because of these economic realities I have used the authority provided to me in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act to extend the timetable for achieving a percent unemployment rate and percent inflation The target year for achieving percent unemployment is now a 2-year deferment. The target year for lowering inflation to percent has been postponed until years after that MEASURES TO IMPROVE ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE Achieving satisfactory economic growth reducing unemployment and at the same time making steady progress in curbing inflation constitutes an enormous challenge to economic policy To lower inflation we will have to persist in the painful steps needed to restrain demand. But demand restraint alone is not enough. We must work to improve the supply side of our economy speed its adjustment to an era of scarcer energy increase its efficiency improve the workings of its labor markets and expand its capital stock. We must take measures to reduce our vulnerability to inflationary events that occur outside our own economy. Only an approach that deals with both demand and supply can enable the Nation to combine healthy economic growth with price stability Long-Run Energy Policies Over the past years I have devoted a large part of my own efforts and those of my Administration toward putting in place a long-term energy policy for this Nation. With the cooperation of the Congress much has already been accomplished or stands on the threshold of final enactment The phased decontrol of natural gas and domestic crude oil prices will provide strong unambiguous signals encouraging energy conservation and stimulating the development of domestic energy supplies But decontrol of oil in the face of very high OPEC prices inevitably generates substantial windfall profits. The windfall profits tax I have proposed will capture a significant portion of these windfalls for public use The increased Federal revenues from this tax will make it possible to cushion the poor from the effects of higher oil prices to increase our investment in mass transit and to support programs of accelerated replacement of oil-fired electricity generation facilities and increased residential and commercial energy conservation. I have also proposed incentives for the development of energy from solar and biomass sources and have asked the Congress for authority to create an Energy Security Corporation to provide incentives and assistance on a business-like basis for the accelerated development of synthetic fuels. Other legislation that I have proposed which is also now before a Conference Committee of the Congress would create an Energy Mobilization Board to cut the red tape and speed the development of essential energy projects. I urge the Congress to take the final steps to enact the enabling legislation for my energy initiatives These policies will sharply increase the efficiency with which our Nation uses energy and widen the range of economically feasible energy sources. In so doing they will help make our economy less inflation-prone. They will also drastically cut our reliance on imported oil and by making our Nation less vulnerable to sudden increases in world oil prices reduce the probability of sudden inflationary surges By the end of this decade we will be well on the way to completing the transition toward the new world of scarcer oil supplies. In the interim however our country still remains dangerously exposed to the vagaries of the world oil market I am pursuing measures to deal with this transitional problem. Together with other major oil-consuming countries in the International Energy Agency we are working to devise improved means of matching any future cuts in oil supplies with joint action to reduce oil demand. By avoiding a competitive scramble for scarce oil we can reduce the chances of further large price increases Last year I pledged that our country would never again import more oil than we did in million barrels a day. This year I am establishing a lower import target of million barrels a day. I am prepared to reduce that target in the event that discussions within the International Energy Agency produce a fair and equitable agreement that requires still lower imports. I will impose a fee on purchases of foreign oil if they threaten to exceed the limit that I set While international cooperation is essential so are measures we can take on our own. In accordance with legislation enacted last year the Administration has developed a standby motor fuel rationing plan to deal with major supply interruptions defined to be a shortfall in supply of percent or more. This plan will be submitted to the Congress in February. But even smaller supply interruptions can cause severe economic problems. We are therefore considering proposals for standby measures to be applied if lesser but still significant disruptions occur. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve ( SPR ) can cushion the impact of an abrupt cutoff in supplies. My budget provides funds for resuming SPR purchases this year if conditions permit Improving Labor Markets The persistence of high unemployment among some groups of workers while jobs go begging and unemployment is low elsewhere is not only a major social problem but a waste of national resources The lack of skills the imperfections of the labor market and in some cases the discrimination that gives rise to this situation reduce national productivity and contribute to inflation Although our labor market currently works quite well for most people it does not work well for disadvantaged and minority youth In recognition of this fact I have recently sent to the Congress proposals designed to deal with teenage unemployment The goals of my proposals are : to teach basic skills in the secondary schools to those youths who did not master them in elementary school and who need special help ; to provide part-time employment and training to dropouts if they participate in long-term training to develop skills that will improve their prospects ; and to provide intensive long-term training aimed at helping older youths out of school find jobs in the private sector The funds will go largely to poor rural areas and central cities where youth unemployment is particularly high because of inadequate education and where local resources are insufficient to rectify the problem Another segment of the labor force needing special assistance is the working poor. The welfare reforms which I have sent to the Congress will provide training help in seeking jobs and work opportunities for poor but employable persons Reforming Regulation Regulation has joined taxation defense and the provision of social services as one of the principal activities of the government. Unneeded regulations or necessary regulations that impose undue burdens lower efficiency and raise costs For the past years I have vigorously promoted a basic approach to regulatory reform : unnecessary regulation however rooted in tradition should be dismantled and the role of competition expanded ; necessary regulation should promote its social objectives at minimum cost Working with the Congress we have deregulated the airline industry. We are now cooperating with congressional committees to complete work on fair and effective legislation that eliminates costly ele- ments of regulation in the trucking railroad communications and financial industries Within the executive branch we are improving the quality and lowering the cost of regulations. The Regulatory Council which I established a year ago is helping us comprehend the full scope of Federal regulatory activities and how these activities taken together affect individual industries and sectors. A number of regulatory agencies are experimenting with new regulatory techniques that promise to achieve regulatory goals at substantially lower costs Increasing Investment and Encouraging Research and Development We do not know all of the causes of the slowdown in productivity growth that has characterized our economy in recent years. But we do know that investment and research and development will have to play an important role in reversing the trend To meet the Nation 's sharply increased requirement for investment in energy production and conservation to fulfill its commitment to cleaner air and water and improved health and safety in the workplace and at the same time to provide more and better tools for a growing American work force our Nation in the coming decade will have to increase the share of its resources devoted to capital investment We took one step in this direction in the Revenue Act of which provided a larger than normal share of tax reduction for investment incentives. Passage of my pending energy legislation will make available major new incentives and financial assistance for investment in the production and conservation of energy. When economic conditions become appropriate for further tax reduction I believe we must direct an important part of any tax cut to the provision of further incentives for capital investment generally One of the most important factors in assuring strong productivity growth is a continuing flow of new ideas from industry. This flow depends in the first instance on a strong base of scientific knowledge The most important source of such knowledge is basic research the bulk of which is federally funded Between and Federal spending for basic research measured in constant dollars actually fell. But since that latter year and especially during the years of my Administration Federal support for basic research has increased sharply. In spite of the generally tight economic situation the budget I am submitting to the Congress calls for yet another substantial increase in real Federal support for basic research. Even during a period of economic difficulties we can not afford to cut back on the basis for our future prosperity Agriculture Because the worldwide demand for food has grown substantially overproduction is no longer the primary problem in agriculture. Government policies now seek to encourage full production while cushioning the American economy and the American farmer from the sharp swings in prices and incomes to which the farm sector is often subject. Over the past several years my Administration has created a system of farmer-owned grain reserves to supplement tjie loan and target-price approach to farm income stabilization. In periods of low prices and plentiful supplies incentives are provided to place grain in the reserves thereby helping to support farm income. The incentives also work to hold the grain in reserve until prices rise significantly at which time the grain begins to move out into the market helping to avoid or to moderate the inflationary consequences of a poor crop Over this last year the reserve has been tested twice. When fears of poor world harvests threatened to drive grain prices to extraordinarily high levels last spring and summer farmers sold grain from the reserve limting the price rise. Since I suspended grain shipments to the Soviet Union this month in response to that country 's brutal invasion of Afghanistan increased incentives to place grain in reserve have been serving as one of our main defenses to protect farmers from precipitous declines in prices The International Economy Other countries besides our own suffered important setbacks in from the dramatic increase in oil prices. Growth prospects worsened inflation increased and balance of payments deficits rose In such difficult times economic cooperation between nations is especially important. Joint action among oil-consuming countries is needed to reduce the pressure of demand on supply and to restore order in world petroleum markets. Cooperation is necessary to protect international financial markets against potential disruptions arising from the need to finance massively increased payments for oil. And cooperation is also necessary to prevent a destructive round of protectionism Because the dollar is the major international store of value and medium of exchange the stability of international financial markets is closely linked to the dollar 's strength. The actions taken in November by the United States and our allies to strengthen and stabilize the dollar worked well during the past year. That the dollar did well despite accelerating domestic inflation is due in part to a significant improvement in our current account balance during U.S exports grew rapidly and thus helped to offset rising payments for oil. During the autumn of however the dollar came under downward pressure. The October actions of the Federal Reserve Board to change the techniques of monetary policy helped moderate inflationary expectations which had been partly responsible for the pressure on the dollar. As a Nation we must recognize the importance of a stable dollar not just to the United States but to the world economy as a whole and accept our responsibility to pursue policies that contribute to this stability The Multilateral Trade Negotiations of the Tokyo Round were successfully completed and became law in the United States during These trade agreements are a major achievement for the international economy. By lowering tariff barriers both in the United States and abroad they will help increase our exports and provide Americans with access to foreign goods at lower prices. Perhaps more important these agreements will limit restrictive and unfair trade practices and provide clearer remedies where there is abuse They can not by themselves assure smooth resolution of all trade issues. Indeed the real test will come as we begin to carry them out Nevertheless the agreements reached last year do represent a clear commitment to the preservation and enhancement of an open system of world trade Conclusion The 1970s were a decade of economic turmoil. World oil prices rose more than tenfold helping to set off two major bouts of inflation and the worst recession in years. The international monetary system had to make a difficult transition from fixed to floating exchange rates. In agriculture a chronic situation of oversupply changed to one which alternates between periods of short and ample supplies It was an inflationary decade. It brought increased uncertainty into business and consumer plans for the future We are now making the adjustment to the realities of the economic world that the 1970s brought into being. It is in many ways a more difficult world than the one that preceded it. Yet the problems it poses are not insuperable There are no economic miracles waiting to be performed. But with patience and self-discipline combined with some ingenuity and care we can deal successfully with the new world. The 1980s can be a decade of lessened inflation and healthy growth January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington B.C. January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Cordially Charles L. Schultze CHAIRMAN Lyle E. Gramley c George C. Eads CONTENTS Page CHAPTER THE ECONOMY IN An Overview of the Year The Voluntary Standards The Operation of the Standards Prices of Food Raw Materials and Energy Productivity and Wages The Major Sectors of Aggregate Demand in Personal Consumption Expenditures Housing Business Fixed Investment Inventory Accumulation The Foreign Sector Government Purchases of Goods and Services Labor Market Developments Economic Policy in Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy and Financial Markets Credit Flows Summing Up Supplement I : Improvements in the Method for Estimating the High-Employment Budget Supplement II : Measuring the Restraint from Oil Price Increases CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK The Economy in and Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy World Oil Markets The Economic Forecast Uncertainties in the Outlook Controlling Inflation The Price and Pay Standards The Second Program Year The Outlook for Inflation The Productivity Problem Potential GNP Goals of Economic Policy Conclusion CHAPTER GROWTH AND Page The Need to Reduce Inflation Controlling Aggregate Demand Improving the Structural Performance of the Economy Meeting the Energy Challenge Reducing Vulnerability in the Short Run Longer-Term Improvements Implications for the Economy < Conclusion Striking the Proper Balance in Regulation Regulatory Policy and Productivity Removing Obsolete Regulatory Structures Balancing Costs and Benefits in Individual Regulations Coordinating Regulatory Programs Setting Priorities New Approaches to Regulation Conclusion Promoting Flexibility in the Labor Market Labor Market Developments in the 1980s How Well Can the Labor Market Adjust ? Policies to Aid Labor Markets Increasing the Rate of Capital Formation ( Investment Policy Report ) The Adequacy of Recent Investment Special Investment Needs Saving-Investment Relationship Demand for Nonresidential Fixed Capital The Sources of Saving Capital Markets and the Availability of Credit Some Likely Patterns of National Saving in the 1980s The Prospective Policy Mix Adjusting to Equilibrium in Agriculture Policy Issues The Administration 's Agricultural Policies Future Policy Problems LONGER-TERM POLICIES FOR STABILITY CHAPTER THE WORLD ECONOMY TESTING RESILIENCE Developments in Major Industrial Economies Growth in Inflation in The Response of Economic Policy to Rising Oil Prices The Outlook for Reducing World Oil Demand CHAPTER T H E WORLD ECONOMY TESTING RESILIENCE Con The Global Pattern of Payments The Recycling Problem Foreign Exchange Markets in The Dollar in the International Monetary System World Trade : Patterns and Issues The Multilateral Trade Negotiations Sources of Rising Protectionism Needed Responses Page APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Changes in Consumer Prices and in Producer Prices of Finished Goods Changes in Farm and Food Prices September to September Measures of Changes in Compensation and Employment Costs Wage Increases Under Major Collective Bargaining Contracts Alternative Deflators for Earnings and Compensation Shares of National Income Shares of Gross Product Originating in Nonfinancial Corporate Business Excluding Petroleum and Coal Companies Growth in Major Components of Real Gross National Product Changes in Real Business Fixed Investment Labor Market Developments Actual and High-Employment Federal Receipts and Expenditures National Income and Product Accounts Calendar Years Fiscal and Oil Price Restraint on the Economy Fourth Quarter to Fourth Quarter Economic Outlook for Changes in Compensation per Hour Productivity Unit Labor Costs and Prices Annual Growth in GNP per Employed Worker in Major Industrial Countries List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Page Labor Productivity Growth Potential Gross National Product and Benchmark Unemployment Rate Changes in Employment and Unemployment by Demographic Group Fourth Quarter to Fourth Quarter Economic Goals Gasoline Consumption and Energy Use Share of Selected Demographic Groups in the Civilian Labor Force School Attainment of to 29-Year-Olds and Gross Saving and Investment as Percent of GNP Determinants of Business Fixed Investment Actual and Illustrative Saving-Investment Balances Growth in Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries Inflation in Major Industrial Countries Changes in Consumer Prices With and Without Energy and Import Unit Values Major Industrial Countries Changes in Wages in Major Industrial Countries Current Account Balances Impact of Oil Price Increase on Terms of Trade Charts Personal Saving Rate Real Inventory/Sales Ratio Nonfarm Business Selected Interest Rates and Bond Yields Fixed-Weight Price Index for Personal Consumption Expenditures Productivity Adjusted for Cyclical Variation Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real GNP CHAPTER The Economy in THE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED STATES was dealt a heavy blow by rising OPEC oil prices in Inflation increased sharply ; real earnings of American workers declined and economic growth slowed. Employment continued to rise however while productivity fell and the unemployment rate remained relatively stable at between and percent. Most major demographic groups shared in the rise in employment ; the gains for blacks and adult women were particularly notable The economy 's resilience in the face of the dramatic increase in oil prices and the attendant worsening of inflation was one of the more surprising features of economic developments in Forecasts of impending recession were becoming frequent by late long before the magnitude of the increase in oil prices by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) was perceived. By the middle of such predictions were common. Growth did slow markedly but the characteristics of cumulating recession were still not in evidence at the close of the year Developments on the inflation front were the most significant disappointment in the economic performance. At the beginning of the year it was widely expected that inflation would moderate. Those hopes were destroyed however by skyrocketing energy prices The inflation and energy problems plaguing our economy seriously threaten our ability to achieve the economic goals to which the Carter Administration is firmly committed : maintaining healthy economic growth providing job opportunities for an expanding labor force and reducing the unacceptably high unemployment among minorities. It is urgent that we increase our energy independence and reduce the rate of inflation as soon as possible. These are the central objectives of the Carter Administration 's economic policies for the period immediately ahead AN OVERVIEW OF THE YEAR It was evident at the beginning of that economic growth would slow from the percent average annual rate of the preceding years. Most of the resources idled by the deep recession of had been brought back into productive use and monetary and fiscal policies had been shifted toward restraint in an effort to slow inflation The percent growth of real gross national product ( GNP ) actually recorded over the quarters of last year was well below the percent forecast by the Administration at the beginning of The impact of huge energy price increases on consumers ' real incomes was largely responsible Personal consumption expenditures for goods declined slightly in real terms but higher outlays for services kept total personal consumption rising. Residential construction also fell last year but about in line with expectations at the beginning of the year. The expansion of business fixed investment slowed substantially to less than percent in Businesses continued to pursue cautious inventory policies as they had earlier in the recovery and the rate of inventory accumulation in the fourth quarter was well below its level a year earlier Net exports of goods and services increased substantially in real terms last year and by the fourth quarter they reached the highest level since The volume of exports rose while the volume of imports leveled off. The slowing of U.S economic expansion increased growth abroad and the decline of the dollar during all contributed to these developments The pace of economic expansion in the United States was uneven during Real GNP declined in the second quarter when personal consumption expenditures fell sharply in response to long gas lines but it rebounded in the summer with the resumption of normal shopping patterns. Growth in the fourth quarter was at a more moderate rate ; the rise in final sales slowed and inventory accumulation declined. Output in the industrial sector did not closely follow the quarterly pattern of GNP growth but over the quarters of industrial production rose percent about the same as the increase in real GNP Both total employment and the civilian labor force grew by about million in Adult women accounted for about percent of the total increase in employment. The proportion of the working-age population employed rose to percent a slight gain Very large advances in energy prices and in the costs of home purchase and finance were dominant factors in the percent rise in the consumer price index ( CPI ) during Wholesale prices of finished goods sold by producers rose by percent over the quarters of compared with percent in the previous year. Energy prices were primarily responsible for the larger increase last year Sharp movements in prices for food energy and houses and in mortgage interest costs can have a large influence on the overall rate of inflation recorded in a given year. It is therefore useful to trace the movements of other prices as one means of ascertaining longer-term trends in prices that is in the underlying inflation rate Consumer prices excluding energy home purchase and finance and the farm value of food rose by percent last year less than percentage point above the pace ( Table ) The rate of increase in producers ' prices for finished goods excluding food and energy rose somewhat more from percent in to percent in By these measures the underlying inflation rate has moved up by about to percentage points since TABLE Changes in consumer prices and in producer prices of finished goods [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter ] Item Food Energy All other Producer prices of finished goods total. Farm value of food Energy * Home purchase and finance All other Consumer prices total Includes only prices for direct consumer purchases of energy for the home and for motor vehicles In both the table and the text " home purchase and finance " consists of home purchase and financing taxes and insurance on owner-occupied homes Estimates Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Another measure of the underlying inflation rate is found in the rise of unit labor costs adjusted for cyclical variations in productivity growth. Businesses tend to calculate costs on the basis of longer-term trends in productivity and to set their prices accordingly. When nominal wage increases exceed estimated long-term productivity gains businesses will pass the resulting cost increases through to higher prices if market conditions permit The rate of increase in compensation per hour for all employees in the private nonfarm business sector declined in then rose again. The increase of percent was only slightly more than the percent recorded in Increases in actual productivity have slackened considerably from percent in to minus percent in but this is partly attributable to cyclical developments. In the economy was emerging from a deep recession and was growing strongly. In the recovery was in its fifth year and economic growth slowed It is not clear what rate of productivity growth is now being incorporated in business estimates of longer-term trends in costs. Studies by the Council of Economic Advisers suggest that the current trend rate of increase in productivity is only about to 1V2 percent ; productivity growth in even allowing for a cyclical slowdown was much less than this. With compensation per hour in the private nonfarm business sector rising at about percent the long-term rate of increase in unit labor costs and thus in this measure of the underlying rate of inflation appears to be around TV2 to percent compared to about percent in If heavier weight is given to the especially poor productivity experience of the underlying rate may now be in the to percent range Wage restraint played an important role in limiting the increase in the underlying rate of inflation during Aggregate measures of wage performance indicate that growth in nominal wages did not increase last year Real disposable income rose temporarily in the first quarter when the personal income tax cut provided by the Revenue Act of took effect but it fell in the spring. Over the final quarters of real disposable income remained at about the level reached in the fourth quarter of Higher oil prices were the main cause of this stagnation in real income. Inflation by moving individuals into higher tax brackets added further to the drag on disposable incomes as did overwithholding of personal income taxes. Despite the leveling off of real income personal consumption expenditure rose by about 1V2 percent over the quarters of as the personal saving rate fell The distribution of national income among major classes of income recipients changed little in The shares accruing to corporations as profits and to nonfarm proprietors declined somewhat as one would expect in a year of weak economic growth and declining productivity. The share of rental income in the total continued its long-term descent. Compensatioin of employees rose slightly as a share of the total as did the income of farm proprietors. The net interest component of business costs also increased as a proportion of total national income reflecting both rising interest rates and the rapid pace of business borrowing The greater share of farm income in the total was due primarily to the rapid increase in cattle prices early in the year and a late spring strengthening in grain prices. Cattle price increases were a consequence of reduced marketings and higher consumer demand for beef ; grain prices increased as the extent of a crop shortfall in the Soviet Union became known. Through the first half the income of farm proprietors was percent higher than in Livestock prices declined during the summer and autumn as a result of large supplies of pork and poultry and seasonal increases in beef slaughter Grain prices also dropped from their early summer peaks while farm production costs continued to increase at about the rate of inflation Farm proprietors ' income in the fourth quarter was percent below that recorded a year earlier. For the year as a whole farm income equalled the record Why the Economy Was So Resilient The fact that the economy did not tip into recession in has received widespread comment and attention. Periods of economic expansion since World War II have typically come to an end when inflation accelerated and monetary and fiscal policies shifted toward restraint. In despite rising inflation restraint on aggregate demand from monetary and fiscal policies and a huge " oil tax " levied by OPEC the economy continued to move forward Fiscal policy began to shift toward restraint in but the degree of restraint was lessened somewhat in early by the tax cut provided in the Revenue Act of Thereafter the Federal budget became moderately more restrictive. The high-employment budget ( discussed later in the chapter ) shifted from a $ billion deficit in the second half of to a $ billion surplus in the second half of Added to the restraint from the budget was the enormous drain on consumer purchasing power resulting from the rise in oil prices. The oil drag at year 's end was reducing consumer spending power by almost $ billion at an annual rate or about percent of personal after-tax income. Fiscal and oil price restraint together were thus draining large amounts from consumer incomes by the fourth quarter of last year. The magnitude of this restraint has no parallel in any postwar year including when the first big OPEC price increase rocked the economy Monetary policy also moved toward restraint over the course of last year. Growth of the major monetary aggregates slowed slightly Growth of Mi moderated to percent in from percent in ; however shifts to ATS and New York NOW accounts ( see below ) are estimated to have reduced Mi growth by 1V2 percentage points in The rise in M2 dropped back to percent from percent in the preceding year. Interest rates shot upward in the second half. Short-term market interest rates at year-end were approximately percentage points higher than a year earlier while longterm rates were up about V2 percentage points The reasons why the economy was able to absorb these shocks without going into a steep decline may not be fully understood for some time. Three factors however clearly played a role. First individuals as consumers and home buyers appear to be more strongly affected by inflationary expectations now than in the past. Surveys of consumers ' attitudes indicate that until fairly recently most people expected that an increase in inflation would be temporary. When actual inflation rates were rising expected rates of inflation lagged well behind. After two episodes of double-digit inflation a different response is now elicited. When inflation increases expected inflation rates move up at the same time. As a result consumers are now more likely to accelerate purchases when inflation increases. When inflation accelerated markedly in for example the personal saving rate rose sharply even after allowance is made for a large increase in the share of total income accruing to farm proprietors. In however consumers responded to the squeeze on real incomes resulting from inflation by continuing to borrow heavily and by reducing their saving as a fraction of disposable income ( Chart ) Although the ratio of household borrowing to disposable income declined over the course of last year it remained well above levels Chart Personal Saving Rate PERCENT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Expected price increases probably exert more influence on decisions to buy houses than on purchases of other durable goods. Prices of new and existing homes have risen considerably faster than prices of other consumer goods and services over the past decade and that fact has not been lost on most individuals. With demographic factors also supporting demand sales of new and existing homes remained very strong until late last year despite a rise of mortgage interest rates to unprecedented heights Second monetary restraint no longer produces the abrupt changes in availability of credit that used to be instrumental in bringing an end to economic expansion. Changes in financial markets over the past years have removed or reduced constraints which used to limit the availability of credit to certain borrowers during periods of monetary tightness. For example the legal and constitutional barriers that once prevented States and their political subdivisions from paying market rates of interest have been raised or eliminated. Usury ceilings have also been liberalized. Commercial banks and thrift institutions have been given more freedom to bid for funds and are hence better able to provide credit to borrowers willing to pay going rates of interest for loans. In particular the 6-month money market certificates ( MMCs ) issued by banks and thrift institutions on which rates are tied to market yields on Treasury bills have been a major factor sustaining mortgage credit flows since mid-1978 Changes such as these have altered the way in which restrictive monetary policies influence aggregate demand. Monetary restraint now works more through changes in interest rates that influence a borrower 's willingness to incur debt and less through changes in a borrower 's ability to obtain credit. For this reason monetary restraint now tends to affect aggregate demand less abruptly and with a less uneven impact across major economic sectors. As events in financial markets late in the year attest however significant changes in monetary policy may still lead to constraints on the availability of credit particularly for housing Third the resilience of the economy last year reflects the relative absence of cyclical imbalances characteristic of earlier periods of economic expansion. Most notable in this regard is the comparatively balanced relationship of inventories to sales after nearly years of economic expansion. Better inventory controls and very cautious inventory policies prevented a buildup of inventories relative to sales during the expansion. In fact the aggregate ratio of real nonfarm inventories to sales was lower in late and early than it was throughout most of the preceding years ( see Chart on page ) When consumer spending weakened in the second quarter of last year therefore businesses did not find themselves seriously over- stocked. To be sure auto inventories particularly for large cars increased substantially and major auto producers are still trying to redress the balance between stocks and sales. In other industries however production cutbacks to reduce excess stocks have been modest As Chapter indicates the economy may head into a recession in early The factors that sustained growth in should help to make the recession moderate in depth and duration. But it is unlikely that they will cushion the economy 's response to shocks to the same extent that they did in This fact increases the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of economic performance this year THE VOLUNTARY STANDARDS On October the President announced a comprehensive anti-inflation program that included actions by the Federal Government to reduce the relative size of the Federal budget rationalize and improve the regulatory process and work together with State and local governments to reduce the inflationary impact of government actions on the economy. Business and labor were asked to adhere to voluntary wage and price standards designed to reduce the rate of price increase over the following months The President announced that the Administration would consider noncompliance with the standards to be a sign of inflationary pressure in the markets concerned and would reconsider Federal Government programs and policies affecting those markets. The Federal Government would avoid purchasing from noncompliant firms where feasible. The President also proposed a program of real wage insurance to help protect workers who complied with the program from suffering losses of real income. This innovative proposal was not adopted by the Congress THE OPERATION OF THE STANDARDS The anti-inflation standards administered by the Council on Wage and Price Stability were designed to minimize administrative burdens and provide maximum flexibility to the private sector. Firms were asked to group their employees into " compliance units " : for example employees covered by collective bargaining agreements other nonmanagerial personnel and business managers. The rate of pay increase for each group was to be limited to percent during the first program year October through September The composition of that increase between wages and fringe benefits was left to private decisions as was the distribution of increases among employees within each subgroup. An assumed percent rate of infla- tion was used to evaluate cost-of-living adjustment clauses in labor contracts Each firm was asked to restrain its average price increase to onehalf of percentage point below its average annual rate of increase during ( the " price-deceleration " standard ) Firms were left free to allocate the allowed price increase among their various product lines so that they could respond to market conditions for particular products while adhering to the overall anti-inflation goal. Exempted were prices determined in auction markets such as prices of agricultural commodities and industrial raw materials ; those set by regulation such as prices of crude oil and natural gas ; and most imports New product lines were also exempt For some industries with special characteristics specific alternative standards were constructed. For example since the volatility of agricultural prices would make it difficult to apply the price-deceleration standard to food manufacturers and processors they could instead choose to follow a gross-margin standard limiting the total markup over raw food prices Firms unable to meet the price-deceleration standard or the special alternative industry standards because of uncontrollable cost increases were allowed to achieve compliance by meeting a test based upon a limitation of profit margins Compliance with the standards was widespread during Nevertheless the circumstances in which the program operated made it impossible to prevent overall inflation from increasing. Energy prices rose very sharply and prices of both farm products and internationally traded raw materials increased substantially in late and early The jump in U.S. prices of internationally traded commodities stemmed partly from the earlier depreciation of the dollar These price increases led many firms to shift from the primary pricedeceleration standard to the profit-margin limit so that price increases in primary commodities were passed through to prices of final products. Declining productivity also added substantially to business costs PRICES OF FOOD RAW MATERIALS AND ENERGY Food. Pressures on food prices were greatest during the first half of the program year. Declining supplies of beef and strong consumer demand pushed cattle prices up. Higher prices encouraged farmers and ranchers to begin rebuilding their herds thus reducing current marketings further and putting even more pressure on prices. Prices of pork and poultry which are competitive with beef joined in the upward move. In addition harsh winter weather and a strike in the West were chiefly responsible for shortages of fruit and vegetables that resulted in rapid price increases for these commodities in early Consumer food prices rose less rapidly during the second half of the program year when farm prices of food declined. Meat supplies increased particularly for pork and poultry and vegetable supplies were also more ample Increased marketing costs contributed to rising consumer food prices in as did gains in the net earnings of food distributors Marketing spreads for food the difference between retail costs and farm value ordinarily narrow when farm commodity prices increase rapidly. Early last year however these marketing spreads widened while farm prices were rising sharply ( Table ) TABLE Changes in farm and food prices September to September [ Percent change x ] Marketing spread Farm value Sept to Mar Item iiern Market b a s k e i Sept to Mar Mar to Sept Retail cost Sept to Mar Mar to Sept Meat products Dairy products Poultry Fresh vegetables Processed fruits and vegetables Cereal and bakery products Mar to Sept Not seasonally adjusted and not at an annual rate Includes items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture When farm prices for foods began to decline in April the marketing spread widened still more. The President met with representatives of the food industry in August and asked them to translate changes in farm prices more quickly into price changes at the retail level Increases in retail food prices during the fourth quarter were somewhat below the rate of inflation elsewhere in the economy. At year-end retail food prices were about percent above their level a year earlier Raw materials. Pressures on prices of internationally traded raw materials were also greatest during the first half of the program year During this period the industrial sector of the U.S. economy was operating at high rates of capacity utilization and growth abroad was strengthening. Demand pressures in markets for basic materials therefore intensified. For example wholesale prices of crude commodities other than agricultural products and energy rose percent from September to March Pressures in these markets eased in the spring when growth of the U.S. economy began to be adversely affected by energy developments. Prices of some internationally traded goods began to climb steeply in the early autumn when speculation in gold threatened to spill over into other commodities. Those pressures were short lived and confined largely to metals but international political tensions led to a renewed surge in gold and silver prices in December Energy. It was the runup in world oil prices that most seriously aggravated inflation during Early in the year cutbacks in Iranian production and efforts here and abroad to rebuild oil inventories created a tight balance between world supply and demand for oil. These developments led in the second quarter to rapidly rising spot market prices of crude petroleum and refined products and contributed to local shortages of gasoline in the United States. Premium prices were imposed by many oil-exporting countries and supplies moved from long-term contracts to the spot market where much higher prices prevailed. The Saudi benchmark price of crude oil was raised three times : in April July and December. By early January the world price of oil reached about $ per barrel more than double the level a year earlier Phased decontrol of domestic oil prices which was announced in April and began to take effect on June added only marginally to average crude oil prices in the second half of last year though decontrol will have larger effects in Wider refining and marketing margins were a relatively important factor in the increase in prices of gasoline and home heating fuel Gasoline prices at the pump rose cents per gallon over the quarters of compared to an increase of cents that would have been needed to keep up with the general rate of inflation. Approximately cents of this increase stemmed from higher prices for imported crude oil and products and cents came from widening gross margins of refiners retailers and distributors. About cents resulted from higher domestic crude oil prices only a part of which was due to decontrol Rising energy prices added directly about * A percentage points to the overall rate of consumer price inflation in considerably more than they added in PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGES Declining productivity added substantially to business costs during the first program year compounding the difficulties businesses encountered in complying with the basic price-deceleration standard For all private nonfarm businesses productivity decreased percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of As a consequence the rise in unit labor costs jumped to percent over the same quarters compared with percent during Slower growth of real GNP in contributed to last year 's poor productivity but the decline was too large to be explained by cyclical factors alone. Generally businesses would try to pass cost increases resulting from lower productivity through to higher prices if they considered the decline to be permanent. Last year however prices in the broad industrial and service sectors rose significantly less than unit labor costs. Businesses may have absorbed part of the increased costs because they believed the productivity decline to be temporary ; on the other hand either market resistance or the standards may have prevented businesses from raising prices further Under the circumstances that prevailed in it is hardly surprising that the overall inflation rate increased despite fairly widespread compliance with the standards. What is surprising is the modest acceleration of inflation that occurred in the broad range of industrial and service prices. As noted earlier the increase in consumer prices excluding energy home purchase and finance and the farm value of food was less than percentage point higher in than in the previous year. The standards played an important role in preventing greater acceleration of prices Continued restraint in private wage and price decisions will be important this year. In September the Administration and the leaders of the American labor movement reached a National Accord recognizing the need to continue an effective and equitable anti-inflation program. ( The National Accord and the pay and price standards for the second program year are discussed in Chapter ) Measures of Wage Performance The long-term trend of prices of goods and services produced in the private nonfarm sector of the economy closely follows the rise of business costs. Wages salaries and fringe benefits account for roughly two-thirds of the total costs of production. If last year 's sharp increases in energy prices and the cost of homeownership had led to an accelerated rise of wages and fringe benefits the long-term outlook for inflation would have greatly worsened. Operation of the pay standard during the first program year helped to prevent that outcome The percent pay standard provided a guideline to be used in establishing pay policies for nonunion employees and in collective bargaining. By and large businesses followed those guidelines and American workers cooperated by complying with the program Aggregate measures of wage performance indicate that wage and salary increases did not accelerate during ( Table ) For example the rate of increase in the adjusted average hourly earnings index fell from percent in to percent in and the growth of compensation per hour in private nonfarm business declined slightly from percent to percent TABLE Measures of changes in compensation and employment costs [ Percent change ] // Measure * Fourth quarter to fourth quarter : Adjusted hourly earnings index Compensation per hour Contribution of : Private wages salaries and fringes Employer contributions for social insurance. Third quarter to third quarter : Employment cost index3 Union Nonunion Union wage changes ( total effective adjustment ) Adjustment resulting from : Current settlement Prior settlement Escalator provision Preliminary Data relate to private nonfarm business sector all employees Changes are measured from September to September Agreements covering workers or more Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Some deceleration in wage increases occurred last year in the nonunion sector. However both the employment cost index for union workers and the effective wage change in collective bargaining units covering workers or more showed a greater increase in the quarters through September than in the preceding quarters New collective bargaining agreements were concluded in five major industries in : petroleum trucking rubber electrical machinery and autos. Increases in wages over the life of the contract are shown in Table with cost-of-living adjustment clauses evaluated at three different rates of inflation Without the pay standard the increases in wages granted in all of these contracts might well have been larger. When evaluated at an percent inflation rate ( the average prevailing over the previous contract period ) all of the major contracts concluded last year provided for smaller increases in wages than those in the previous contracts T A B L E Wage increases under major collective bargaining contracts [ Percent increase ] contract assuming Prior contract Industry percent inflation percent inflation percent inflation Petroleum : Three-year increase Annual rate Rubber : Three-year increase Annual rate Electrical : Three-year increase Annual rate Autos : Three-year increase Annual rate First year of two-year term Trucking : The previous petroleum contract was signed in ; all others were signed in The petroleum contract is a two-year agreement but it was reopened in the second year Source : Council on Wage and Price Stability Studies by the Council of Economic Advisers reinforce the view that the President 's program aided in keeping wage rates from accelerating. Estimates from models of wage and price determination those developed at the Council as well as others suggest that wage increases during the first program year were about to 1V2 percentage points lower than would be expected given the basic determinants of wages. To be sure many influences could account for the shortfall the effect of the pay standard being but one. For example a shift in the composition of the work force toward less experienced and lower-paid workers occurred during the year. However this demographic shift could not have accounted for more than a small part of the difference between actual and expected wage increases since available evidence indicates that percentage wage increases for lowerpaid workers were larger than those for higher-paid workers Real Wages Increases in wage rates during the first program year were below the rise in consumer prices and hence workers ' real incomes declined. The rise in prices relative to wages did not result from a general increase in business profit margins however but from other sources. The rise in energy prices stemming in large measure from increased world oil prices was the major cause The magnitude of the decline in real wages last year is itself difficult to estimate. Conclusions differ according to the measure of price change to which the rise in wages is compared. The average hourly earnings index for the private nonfarm sector rose by percent over the quarters of last year. Since the consumer price index for urban consumers climbed percent the average hourly earnings index deflated by the CPI declined by percent compared to the decline of percent in indicated in Table TABLE Alternative deflators for earnings and compensation [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter ] Average hourly earnings index Deflated by : Consumer price index ( CPI ) CPI with rent substituted for homeownership CPI with rent substitution and excluding energy Fixed-weight deflator for personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) Fixed-weight deflator for PCE excluding energy Compensation per hour Deflated by : Consumer price index ( CPI ) CPI with rent substituted for homeownership CPI with rent substitution and excluding energy Fixed-weight deflator for PCE Fixed-weight deflator for PCE excluding energy Preliminary Less than percent Data relate to private nonfarm business all employees Note. Consumer price index for all urban consumers used Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) The appropriateness of using the CPI as a measure of the inflation confronting the average consumer has been called into question in recent years because of the way this index treats the purchase of homes and the associated costs of home financing. The CPI is a price index of goods and services that consumers buy ; it is not a cost-ofliving index. A home is an investment as well as a good purchased by consumers for current consumption. An increase in home prices is thus as much a return on savings to the homeowner in his role as an investor as it is a rise in the cost of living to the individual in his role as a consumer. Furthermore relatively few individuals purchase homes in any given year and pay the associated current mortgage interest rates ; for others the rise in the home purchase and finance components of the CPI does not represent an increase in current living costs. Conversely this year 's increase in the costs of home purchase and finance unless reversed would affect future buyers even if this component of the CPI showed no subsequent rise During recent years the Bureau of Labor Statistics has reviewed intensively the treatment of homeownership in the CPI. Several approaches were developed but none dealt with the complexities in a manner satisfactory to the major users of the CPI. One alternative is to use a rent index to represent the costs of using the services of a house. This may give a better measure of changes in the cost of living to the average consumer particularly during periods when the costs of homes and home finance move very sharply. When average hourly earnings are deflated by the CPI with the rent index substituted for homeownership real earnings still show a drop in as Table indicates but it is more moderate Another measure which uses the CPI rent index to represent housing costs is the fixed-weight price index for personal consumption expenditures in the national income and product accounts. Average hourly earnings show a decline of about the same size when deflated by this index In either case the source of the decline was the sharp increase in energy prices. Without this rise in energy prices real average hourly earnings would have been approximately unchanged in compared with a small increase in the previous year The lower part of the table shows compensation per hour deflated by each of these measures of consumer price change. Compensation per hour includes wages fringe benefits and employers ' contributions to social insurance and it has generally increased faster than wage rates. The broad pattern of change that emerges when this measure is deflated by the various price indexes is similar to that for average hourly earnings There is no doubt that real earnings of American workers declined in Sharp increases in energy prices made that decline inevitable. The decline in real wages would have been larger if businesses had fully passed through to higher prices the rise in unit labor costs resulting from declining productivity. Larger increases in nominal wages would at best have improved real wages only temporarily. By increasing business costs they would eventually have led to a still more rapid rise in prices The Distribution of National Income Another way of appraising the impact of the standards is to consider the changes that occurred during the program year in the distribution of total national income among major income groups In the third quarter of the last quarter before the standards went into effect employee compensation excluding employer contributions to social insurance accounted for percent of total national income ( see Table ) One year later the ratio had risen slightly to percent. Over the same year the corporate profit share fell from percent to percent. Such changes in the share of national income going into employee compensation and profits are typical of a period in which economic growth slows. Since productivity declined and the increased costs were not passed through fully to prices corporate profit margins fell. The share of employee compen- sation in national income was larger than it would have been had the higher costs been passed through fully to higher prices TABLE Shares of national income [ Percent of total ] Third quarter * Corporate profits Net interest Compensation of employees Employer contributions for social insuranceWages salaries fringe benefits and other... Proprietors ' income Nonfarm Farm Rental income Preliminary With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Note. Quarterly figures based on seasonally adjusted data Detail may not add to percent because of rounding Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis The decline in the corporate profit share occurred despite significant increases in the profit margins of oil companies. For other nonfinancial businesses the squeeze on profit margins stemming from the decline in productivity growth was larger than the overall numbers indicate Table shows employee compensation and corporate profits as a share of gross product originating in nonfinancial businesses excluding petroleum and coal companies. From the third quarter of to the third quarter of the profit share declined by V percentage points while the share of employee compensation rose by almost that much TABLE Shares of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporate business excluding petroleum and coal companies [ Percent of total ] Item Compensation of employees Corporate profits II III I V II III Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment but without capital consumption adjustment which can not be distributed by industry Note. Figures in this table can not be compared directly to those in Table Source.- Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers THE MAJOR SECTORS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND IN Demand in nearly all major sectors of the economy was weaker in than in the previous year ( Table ) In real terms domestic final sales declined during the first half largely because of the pronounced drop in consumers ' purchases of goods in the second quarter when long gas lines discouraged shopping. Declining residential construction also contributed to the reduction in final sales. The fall in real GNP in the first half was cushioned by a sizable rise of inventory investment primarily traceable to involuntary accumulation in the second quarter TABLE Growth in major components of real gross national product [ Seasonally adjusted annual rate ] IV to IV Component IV to II II to IV l Percent change : Real gross national product Real domestic final sales Federal State and local Personal consumption expenditures Business fixed investment Residential fixed investment Government purchases of goods and services Change as a percent of real GNP : Inventory accumulation Net exports of goods and services. Preliminary GNP excluding change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Less than percent Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Final sales strengthened in the second half of the year when consumer spending picked up noticeably and government purchases also increased. However continued cautious inventory policies and efforts to reduce swollen stocks of new cars led to a large decline in inventory accumulation Purchases by State and local governments declined slightly in after a large increase in that came partly from the effects of the stimulus package introduced by President Carter in Net exports were a source of strength in particularly in the second half. In volume terms exports of goods and services increased by percent while imports of goods and services rose only percent PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES Growth of real personal consumption expenditures over the quarters of was the smallest since when a decline in real consumer buying occurred. The increase would have been still smaller if consumers had not been willing to reduce their current saving as a proportion of after-tax income and to increase their indebtedness. The personal saving rate already low at percent of disposable income in the fourth quarter of declined further to a very low level of percent by the fourth quarter of last year The pattern of consumer spending over the year was uneven. The steep second-quarter drop was followed in the summer by a marked pickup that carried into the fourth quarter. While sales of new cars weakened in the fourth quarter purchases of other goods and services remained relatively strong despite the continued squeeze on consumer purchasing power Purchases of durable goods fell percent in real terms ; unit auto sales in the fourth quarter were percent below their level a year earlier. The mix of new car sales changed as consumers became increasingly concerned about the cost and availability of gasoline. Purchases of medium-size and larger cars plummeted in the second quarter. Some strengthening occurred in the third quarter in response to very heavy price discounts but sales fell again later in the year. Sales of recreational vehicles vans and light trucks were also hit hard. In contrast more imported models chiefly fuel-efficient vehicles were purchased in than in ; by the end of last year imports had captured one-fourth of the domestic market. Although sales of the new small American models were limited severely by availability domestically produced compact and subcompact cars accounted for one-third of total auto sales late last year Sales of nondurable goods increased by only percent in real terms during Declines occurred for energy commodities gasoline fuel oil and coal as a result of rising energy prices since and the improved fuel efficiency of automobiles. In before the first large OPEC price rise consumers ' outlays for energy amounted to percent of total personal consumption expenditures. Adjusted for price changes the ratio in the fourth quarter of was a full percentage point lower HOUSING The decline in residential construction in was about in line with expectations at the beginning of the year although interest rates increased much more than had been anticipated. For the year as a whole real residential construction was percent below the high level and new housing starts fell to about million units from million in the previous year. A decline in single-family starts to below million units accounted for most of the overall reduction. Multifamily starts were only slightly below levels A severe winter led to a drop of more than percent in housing starts in the first quarter. Making up the resulting shortfall helped to sustain construction activity over the next quarters when housing starts exceeded an annual rate of million. During the fourth quarter housing starts dropped sharply to a rate of about million in response to a marked increase in mortgage interest rates and reduced availability of mortgage credit The rising cost of mortgage and construction financing depressed housing sales and starts only moderately until late in the year. Interest rates on mortgage loans rose a full percentage point to about percent from late to September Nevertheless sales of both new and existing homes continued at a fairly high rate. While this strength was partly attributable to demographic trends the perception of housing as a good hedge against inflation was a major factor sustaining demand. The average price of new homes adjusted for changes in quality increased by about percent last year Following Federal Reserve action in early October to tighten monetary policy mortgage interest rates rose sharply reaching levels well above usury limits in many States. In some cases these usury limits resulted in severe disruptions in local housing markets. In other States potential home buyers found mortgage credit less readily available as mortgage lenders raised down payments made loans only to established depositors and took other steps to reduce their lending. Housing starts fell by percent in November to a 1.5-million annual rate and remained at that level in December BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Real business fixed investment in the current expansion began to rise strongly in early led by increased outlays for producers ' durable equipment especially vehicles ( Table ) Investment in industrial plant and other structures lagged behind but it too turned upward in the middle of From then until the end of rising business investment provided strong support for new jobs higher incomes and increased total real output. From the end of to the fourth quarter of the share of real GNP devoted to business capital formation rose from to percent although it remained below the high level attained in late and early TABLE Changes in real businessfixedinvestment [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter ] Component Nonresidential fixed investment Structures Producers ' durable equipment Autos trucks and buses Other Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Over the quarters of last year growth of real business fixed investment fell to percent compared with percent in the previous quarters. Last year 's slowdown in the rise of business fixed investment was partly caused by the gradual increase in excess capacity and the squeeze on profit margins that accompanied the reduced pace of economic expansion. Purchases of cars and trucks declined sharply. Excluding the vehicle component the growth of business investment in equipment during the past quarters was percent compared with percent in Investment in structures was curtailed in the first quarter because of adverse weather but it recovered in the second quarter and increased somewhat further in the second half. Growth during was percent in real terms well below the increase in INVENTORY ACCUMULATION Inventory investment in dollars was just under percent of real GNP in the first quarter of about the same ratio as in the preceding years. In the second quarter the drop in auto sales led to marked increases in stocks of large cars trucks and recreational vehicles ; inventories of small cars declined however. Involuntary accumulation occurred in other industries also but in moderate amounts The ratio of real inventories to final sales rose in the first half of the year but declined in the second half. Auto stocks were reduced in the late summer and other industries adjusted production to avoid undesired increases in inventories Because cautious inventory policies continued in the cyclical imbalances that often occur during economic expansion have been avoided ( Chart ) As a consequence the slower pace of final sales did not lead to the magnified reduction in output that would have occurred if inventory liquidation had been extensive Chart Real Inventory/Sales Ratio Nonfarm Business RATIO SEASONALLY ADJUSTED r Y n i i i i i i I i i i I i i I i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i I i I i I i i i i I i i I i n NOTE : RATIO OF REAL INVENTORIES AT END OF QUARTER TO ANNUAL RATE OF REAL FINAL SALES FOR QUARTER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE THE FOREIGN SECTOR The volume of U.S. merchandise exports began to grow rapidly in the first half of after several years of near stagnation and this rapid growth continued through Over the quarters of last year the volume of merchandise exports is estimated to have risen by about percent Although more rapid economic growth abroad helped boost U.S exports the most important factor accounting for this surge in foreign sales was the depreciation of the dollar during late and Depreciation of the dollar makes U.S. goods more competitive abroad by lowering their prices in foreign currency. Since trade flows respond to changes in relative prices only after a considerable lag export volumes continued to be affected throughout by the depreciation that had occurred earlier Growth in agricultural exports to a record level also contributed to the rising volume of merchandise exported during particularly in the second half. A crop shortfall in the Soviet Union resulted in a significant increase in grain exports and higher domestic grain prices The price rise was moderated however by farmer-held reserves and excellent domestic crops of corn wheat cotton and soybeans. In January the President announced a suspension of agricultural exports to the Soviet Union. At the same time the President took steps to channel the million metric tons of grain exports which had been interrupted by this action into the Nation 's grain reserves The volume of merchandise imports which had grown strongly during is estimated to have increased by less than percent last year. Earlier depreciation of the dollar weak growth of domestic demand and reduced energy consumption in the United States were all contributing factors The deficit on merchandise trade narrowed during from a $ 48-billion annual rate in the first quarter to about $ billion in the fourth. This improving trend did not continue in because of the rise in oil prices. In the fourth quarter of payments for imported oil were about $ billion higher ( at an annual rate ) than a year earlier even though the volume of oil imports was lower. Net gains in other components of merchandise trade were strong but they did not quite offset this rise in oil payments The current account position of the United States after posting deficits for consecutive quarters improved sharply to show a small surplus in the fourth quarter of For the year the current account may have been in near balance compared with a deficit of $ billion in This improvement was greater than the yearover-year decline in the merchandise trade deficit because the surplus on service transactions particularly net investment earnings rose substantially. Overseas earnings were an estimated $ billion larger in than in Revival of growth abroad exceptionally strong earnings by U.S. oil companies on their foreign operations and the increase in the dollar value of foreign currency earnings due to the depreciation of the dollar all contributed to this rise Net exports as measured in the national income and product accounts rose about $ billion in dollars over the quarters of GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES Federal purchases of goods and services measured in constant dollars rose by slightly more than percent over the quarters of In real terms Federal purchases declined in and their level at the end of was still somewhat below the figure posted years earlier. Most of the increase reflected purchases for defense. In current dollars defense purchases increased by percent over the quarters of The real value of State and local purchases fell in the first quarter of last year because public construction was curtailed by harsh winter weather in the Midwest and along the Atlantic Coast. These purchases recovered somewhat in the second and third quarters of ; but over the quarters of the year they declined slightly compared with a 4-percent rise in This turnaround partly reflects the ending of the step-up of Federal assistance. Grants-in-aid from the Federal Government rose moderately during after a large increase in The aggregate operating account of all State and local governments swung from a small surplus at the end of to a small deficit by the close of Receipts grew more slowly than expenditures partly because the slowdown in economic expansion limited the rise of taxable incomes LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS Employment growth remained strong in although well below the substantial gains of recent years. Despite a continued fairly rapid expansion of the labor force amounting to percent during the quarters of the overall unemployment rate remained within a fairly narrow range of to percent. The unemployment rates for most major population groups were also relatively stable throughout ( Table ) The proportion of the working-age population that was employed rose slightly last year Women contributed most to the growth of the labor force. The participation rate of adult women rose to a new high of percent TABLE Labor market developments Component IV IV IV IV Percent change from year earlier Males years and over Females years and over Both sexes years White Black and other Increase in civilian employment total. Percent2 Unemployment rate t o t a l Males years and over Females years and over Both sexes years White Black and other Participation rate t o t a l Males years and over Females years and over Both sexes years White Black and other Changes for IV adjusted for the increase of about in employment and labor force in January resulting from changes in the sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey Seasonally adjusted Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics up almost a full percentage point over and about percentage points over The participation rates of teenagers and adult men declined slightly last year The increase in employment among adult women accounted for about percent of the rise in total civilian employment ; the percentage increase was about three times that of adult males. Blacks and members of other racial minorities accounted for over percent of the employment increase. Employment for these groups grew one and a half times faster than that for whites Nonfarm payroll employment increased million from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of a smaller gain than the 4-million rise in This increase was concentrated in nonmanufacturing industries ; in particular mining construction and services showed large gains. In the manufacturing sector most nondurable goods industries continued to show little or no growth in employment. Employment declined in the apparel leather products and tobacco industries. Some producers of durable goods notably manufacturers of electrical and electronic machinery showed strong gains in employment After a fairly steady drop since mid-1975 the number of persons reporting layoffs as the reason for their unemployment leveled off in the first half of last year and rose in the second. The number of unemployed persons who were new entrants or reentrants into the labor force fell for the second consecutive year after having risen quite rapidly through ECONOMIC POLICY IN The principal objective of economic policy in was to stem accelerating inflation. Restraining aggregate demand with fiscal and monetary policies was a key element of the government 's anti-inflation program. It was recognized however that monetary and fiscal restraint could not do the job alone. As discussed earlier the voluntary standards for prices and wages helped to hold down the rise of prices in the broad industrial and service sectors of the economy and to maintain wage restraint FISCAL POLICY Federal outlays for fiscal were $ billion an increase of percent over fiscal but well below the percent average annual rate of increase from fiscal through The Revenue Act of provided for tax relief amounting to $ billion in calendar with a $ 14.1-billion reduction in personal taxes a $ 6.5-billion cut in business taxes and a $ 0.7-billion in- crease in outlays for the earned income tax credit. An employment tax credit of $ billion was allowed to expire. The tax package offset the increase in individual income tax rates caused by inflation and it also encouraged investment in the new and modern plant and equipment needed to improve productivity These tax and spending programs yielded a unified budget deficit of $ billion in fiscal $ billion less than the fiscal level. The deficit was $ billion less than had been originally forecast. Outlays were close to original projections while receipts were $ billion greater than expected. The excess of actual over projected receipts reflected not only the impact of inflation but also substantial unanticipated overwithholding The High-Employment Budget Changes in Federal expenditures receipts and the deficit are often misleading indicators of fiscal policy because they reflect cyclical changes in economic activity as well as changes in fiscal policy. This problem does not arise with the high-employment budget. The adjustments made to obtain the high-employment budget remove from TABLE Actual and high-employment Federal receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts calendar years [ Amounts in billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rate ] Actual Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures High-employment Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Amount Percent of GNP Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Amount Percent of GNP ! : III IV : II Ill IV ( ) : | II | | | IV High-employment surplus or deficit as percent of high-employment gross national product Includes proposed tax increases involving foreign tax credits which are retroactive to and not included in data published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis Preliminary Less than percent Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers actual receipts and expenditures the effects of cyclical fluctuations in the economy. Consequently this budget shows the surplus or deficit as it would be if the economy were moving smoothly along its potential growth path. It is therefore a better although still imperfect measure of discretionary fiscal policy Estimates of high-employment budget expenditures and receipts as measured in the national income and product accounts indicate a substantial shift of fiscal policy toward restraint over the past year from a deficit of $ billion annual rate in the second half of to a surplus of about $ billion in the second half of ( Table ) The procedure for estimating the high-employment budget is discussed in Supplement I to this chapter Fiscal and Oil Price Restraint T h e shift of the high-employment budget into surplus was less important in restraining aggregate demand in than were the rising prices of oil and refined petroleum products. T o help assess the effects on aggregate demand of these two factors taken together the Council of Economic Advisers has calculated the combined restraint from fiscal policy and price developments in the oil sector. These estimates are at best an approximate measure but they indicate the unexpectedly severe restraint placed on aggregate demand in Over the quarters of the year fiscal and oil price restraint increased by about $ billion or about 2Vz percent of GNP. ( A more detailed discussion of the procedures used by the Council to measure the restraint from higher oil prices is provided in Supplement II to this chapter. ) MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS T h e principal objective of monetary policy in was to help check accelerating inflation by limiting the growth of money and credit. In an environment of sharply expanding demand for money and credit implementation of that policy required a pronounced rise in interest rates. T h e pattern of increases was uneven : rates fell slightly on balance in the first half but advanced rapidly thereafter ( Chart ) In submitting to the Congress the annual monetary policy report required under the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of the Federal Reserve set forth its objectives with regard to increases in the monetary and credit aggregates during For the period from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of the Federal Reserve established a target range of V2 to 4V2 percent for Mi ( demand deposits and currency ) T h e range for M2 ( Mi plus time and savings deposits other than negotiable certificates of depos- Chart Selected Interest Rates and Bond Yields PERCENT PER ANNUM SHORT-TERM FEDERAL FUNDS A i A tA r \ I \ I J I H h H v / J \ ^ \ \ \ # * r PRIME J LJ / I / A \ \ \ \ t y / I i * _ r r / TREASURY BILLS 6-MONTH NEW ISSUES ) ni I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I LONG-TERM NEW-HOME MORTGAGES ! / ' " ? * ^ / ' CORPORATE Aaa BONDS V l i i i i i i i I i | i i i i i t I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i | i i i i i i i i | i | i i i i i | i i i | i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I UEFFECTIVE RATE ON CONVENTIONAL MORTGAGES IN THE PRIMARY MARKET SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD AND MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE it at large commercial banks ) was set at to percent. For M3 ( M2 plus time and savings deposits at savings and loan associations mutual savings banks and credit unions ) a range of to percent was established. Commercial bank credit was projected to increase between 7V2 percent and 10V2 percent during the year. In setting the initial Mi range the Federal Reserve staff estimated that the introduction of automatic transfer services ( ATS ) and negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts in New York State ( discussed below ) would reduce growth in Mi by about percentage points over the course of In October the target for Mi was revised upward to a range of to percent because ATS and NOW accounts had grown much more slowly than anticipated In the first quarter of Mi actually declined while M2 rose at an annual rate of about percent. This leveling off in the monetary aggregates reflected both slower economic growth and shifts of funds from bank deposits to other financial assets because of the higher interest rates established late in Balances in money market mutual funds jumped from $ billion in December to $ billion in March and households substantially stepped up their purchases of government securities. The contraction in Mi was also due to the rapid growth in ATS and NOW accounts during the first quarter The decline in real GNP in the second quarter combined with uncertainties about the energy situation led to a widespread belief that an economic downturn had begun. In this environment the Federal Reserve kept monetary policy approximately unchanged. The 9V2 percent discount rate established in November was maintained until July ; the Federal funds rate was raised basis points to 10V4 percent in May and then held at that level until July Growth of the monetary aggregates surged in the second quarter despite the decline in real GNP. From March to June both Mi and M2 increased at an annual rate of almost percent. This pickup in money growth was partly attributable to special factors. Large increases in demand balances occurred just before the April and June tax dates. In addition after mid-March thrift institutions were no longer permitted to pay a higher interest rate than banks on the popular 6-month money market certificates. As a result commercial banks captured half of the net increase in MMCs in the second quarter compared to one-third in the first quarter and this raised the growth rate of M2 In July monetary growth continued at a rapid pace and market interest rates began to move up. At first the Federal Reserve kept its target for the Federal funds rate unchanged but it soon became apparent that maintenance of the funds rate was resulting in a rapid expansion in bank reserves and the monetary aggregates. Al- though the expansion of the monetary aggregates slowed considerably in August rapid growth of money and credit resumed in September when economic statistics were indicating a rebound of activity in the third quarter and the continuation of a very high rate of inflation During the third quarter the Federal Reserve took steps that led to higher interest rates. The discount rate was moved up in several stages to percent in mid-September and the Federal funds rate was raised to V2 percent. From the end of June to mid-September most short-term rates had climbed by almost basis points. Nevertheless both Mi and M2 were growing rapidly and it was clear that the Federal Reserve 's target ranges would be breached if such high growth rates continued During the first months of last year growth in bank credit was well above earlier projections and consistently outstripped the expansion in bank deposits. To satisfy expanding demands for credit banks substantially increased their reliance on nondeposit sources of funds which rose from $ billion in December to about $ billion in September It was and still is difficult to assess the degree of restraint exerted by monetary policy in the first quarters of The spread of active liability management among banks the advances in cash management techniques used by firms and the growing financial sophistication of households have produced a marked shift in the normal relationships between economic activity and the monetary aggregates. The new7 MMCs have played a particularly important role in cushioning the effects of monetary restraint on housing. Moreover the effects of interest rates on aggregate demand may also have changed because of heightened inflationary expectations. In any event by September the growth of money and credit developments in the real economy and signs in commodity markets of an apparent worsening of inflationary expectations were giving unambiguous signals that more monetary restraint was needed. Pressures on the dollar reinforced those signals Monetary Policy in the Fourth Quarter of On October the Federal Reserve announced a major shift in its technique for implementing monetary policy. Previously it had attempted to control the expansion of the monetary aggregates by adopting a target for the Federal funds rate. Under the new approach the object of open market operations would be to supply the volume of bank reserves consistent with desired rates of monetary growth Much greater variation in the Federal funds rate was to be permitted The Federal Reserve also raised the discount rate to percent and established a marginal reserve requirement of percent on increases in the total of managed liabilities of member banks Edge Act corporations and U.S. agencies and branches of foreign banks. Managed liabilities subject to this requirement include large-denomination time deposits with maturities of less than a year Eurodollar borrowings repurchase agreements and borrowings of Federal funds from lenders not subject to the requirement. This added reserve requirement raised the effective cost to banks of obtaining funds through these sources Interest rates climbed to record levels in the first few weeks after October but then declined through late November. In December rates rose again but remained below October peaks. On average short-term rates during the final month of were about % percentage points above September levels while long-term rates had risen about percentage point. With the prime bank loan rate at 15V4 percent at the end of December businesses faced short-term borrowing costs that greatly exceeded the rate of inflation in the industrial sector about percent for producer prices of finished goods other than food and energy Money and credit growth decreased markedly in the wake of the Federal Reserve 's action. During the final quarter of last year Mi rose at an annual rate of only percent while growth of M2 dropped to a percent rate. Consequently growth of Mi and M3 fell within the target ranges established for while jthe increase in M2 was just above the upper end of its range Thrift Institution Deposits and Mortgage Credit Although short-term interest rates nearly doubled from December to December both thrift institution deposits and the flow of mortgage credit proved more resilient than in earlier periods of high rates During past periods of high interest rates depositors had shifted their funds from accounts at banks and thrift institutions where deposit ceilings were fixed by regulation to market instruments giving a higher rate of return. The introduction in June of 6-month money market certificates enabled both thrift institutions and banks to compete more effectively for funds. Commercial banks are permitted to pay an interest rate on these certificates which require a $ minimum deposit equal to the discount rate on 6-month Treasury bills. Initially thrift institutions were able to pay one-fourth of percent more but in March that differential was eliminated whenever the 6-month bill rate was percent or higher Thrift institutions captured percent of the net increase in MMC balances from June to March and percent of the growth in MMCs over the last quarters of By the end of MMCs accounted for about one-fourth of all deposits at thrift institutions Certificates of deposit sold in amounts of $ or more which are not subject to rate ceilings were also important in maintaining thrift flows during Those large-denomination certificates accounted for about one-third of the increase in deposits with savings and loan associations last year compared to only percent in Regulations were issued in December authorizing federally chartered savings and loan associations to tap the Euromarkets by issuing large-denomination certificates to foreign investors In July a floating ceiling was established for deposits with a maturity of years or more. Thrift institutions were permitted to pay an interest rate percentage point below the yield on 4-year Treasury issues and the ceiling for commercial banks was set basis points below that for thrift institutions. The 4-year certificates did not play an important role during ; short-term rates remained well above medium-term Treasury yields throughout the latter part of the year and the 4-year certificates were less attractive to depositors than MMCs and money market mutual funds. Minimum deposit requirements were also eliminated in July for all deposit categories except MMCs and penalties for early withdrawal were reduced On January the floating ceiling was extended to cover deposits with a maturity of % years or more. Under these new regulations thrift institutions can pay an interest rate on such accounts that is one-half of a percentage point less than the 2V2-year Treasury yield while the ceiling for banks is basis points less than that for thrift institutions. ( Floating ceilings apply only when they exceed the previously established fixed ceilings for a given class of deposits. ) Secondary mortgage markets which have expanded rapidly in recent years also helped sustain the flow of mortgage credit during The Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) guarantees mortgage-backed securities issued against pools of FHA and VA mortgages. Only $ billion of such securities were issued during when the GNMA market was just developing. By more than two-thirds of all FHA and VA mortgages were being packaged in pools guaranteed by GNMA and new issues of these securities rose to almost $ billion. The secondary market for conventional mortgages has also expanded in recent years. By making mortgages attractive to a wider group of investors the development of secondary markets has further reduced the degree to which the availability of mortgage credit depends on the flow of deposits to thrift institutions Despite these developments the October actions of the Federal Reserve caused a severe shock in the mortgage credit markets. Thrift institutions were confronted with greater uncertainty regarding their ability to attract funds. They also faced the prospect of sharp reductions in earnings because the cost of attracting funds had risen so much relative to revenues from their loan portfolios which consist largely of loans made at lower rates of interest prevailing in earlier years. In the light of these uncertainties substantial numbers of thrift institutions stopped making new mortgage loan commitments altogether and many others tightened their lending policies by raising required down payments or by lending only to long-standing depositors. Mortgage interest rates increased sharply in all States where usury ceilings were not binding. Where such ceilings prevented mortgage rates from rising many mortgage lenders withdrew from the market Potential home buyers in late were therefore confronted with sharply higher costs of home financing and tighter nonprice terms Some were unwilling to pay the higher rates others could not make the higher down payment required and still others found it difficult to qualify for loans because of the higher monthly payments. With both higher costs and reduced availability of credit driving buyers out of the market housing starts declined substantially in October and in November before leveling off in December What the developments in late imply for the mortgage market in can not yet be fully evaluated. Initially the market may have overreacted to uncertainties prevailing in October and November. Since late October interest rates on market securities have declined as have rates on new mortgage loan commitments in some regions of the country. Late last year legislation was enacted that permanently exempted FHA and VA loans from State usury limits and temporarily exempted other residential mortgage lending from these ceilings. This should bolster home sales and construction in States where usury limits had been binding. Nevertheless the outlook for housing construction in early has been dimmed by conditions prevailing in mortgage markets late in This weakness in housing makes it more likely that the economy will slide into recession this year ATS and NOW Accounts Two regulatory changes introduced late in had an important bearing on the financial services offered to individuals by banks in On November commercial banks were authorized to offer customers automatic transfer services whereby funds are shifted automatically from savings to demand deposit accounts to cover checks. With ATS the customer need not keep money in his checking account and his funds can earn interest at the passbook rate in his savings account. In the same month banks and thrift institutions in New York State were authorized to offer NOW accounts. Negotiable orders of withdrawal may be used like checks to make current payments but they are drawn against an interest-bearing savings account. NOW accounts have been available in all six New England States for several years Both ATS and NOW accounts as well as credit union share drafts provide checking privileges on a deposit that earns interest. Since all of these accounts are classified as savings deposits shifts from regular demand deposits to these accounts reduce the growth of Mi In the months through March the increase in ATS accounts and in NOW accounts at New York banks totaled more than $ billion. In mid-April however a U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that ATS and similar accounts such as credit union share drafts were illegal and could not be maintained after January unless the Congress enacted appropriate legislation. After this ruling the spread of ATS was curtailed sharply In December the Congress enacted legislation extending authority for credit union share drafts and bank ATS systems through March The Senate bill had also included provisions to phase out regulatory interest ceilings on bank and thrift institution deposits over a period of years and to give federally chartered savings and loan associations and credit unions greater consumer and commercial lending authority. Decision on these steps was deferred until In May the President had sent a message to the Congress strongly supporting such measures which would enable small savers to earn a market rate of return on their deposits and give thrift institutions the flexibility they need to pay market interest rates and yet maintain adequate earnings. The Administration also proposed granting thrift institutions authority to offer variable rate mortgages. Regulations were issued in July by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board permitting all federally chartered savings and loan associations to issue variable rate mortgages. Federally chartered associations in California and some State-chartered associations were already offering such mortgages before July CREDIT FLOWS Borrowing by the private nonfinancial sector of the economy ( including State and local governments ) continued to expand during the first quarters of although somewhat less rapidly than private GNP. The increase in private credit flows was about offset by a reduction in Federal borrowing that reflected the decline in the Federal budget deficit. The aggregate flow of credit to all nonfinancial borrowers thus remained close to its pace The increase in private borrowing stemmed from the business sector. The annual rate of borrowing by nonfinancial businesses during the first quarters of was one-fourth larger than in Although the increase cut across most types of borrowing by business commercial bank loans accounted for most of the acceleration. The strength of business credit demands reflected the slow growth of internal funds relative to capital spending. For nonfinancial corporations the ratio of external funds raised to expenditures for fixed capital and inventories increased from percent in to percent during but remained well below the peak rate of percent recorded in Borrowing by households over the first quarters of as a whole remained close to the pace but the rate of borrowing tended to decline as the year went on. Growth in consumer installment credit subsided and so did the volume of mortgage borrowing The moderation of growth in installment credit derived primarily from the slower pace of auto sales after the first quarter. The slower expansion of household mortgage debt may have stemmed from higher mortgage interest rates and the somewhat more limited availability of mortgage credit. During the increase in household mortgage debt amounted to percent of household expenditures for new residential construction. By the third quarter of the ratio was down to percent In earlier periods of economic expansion rising interest rates generally led to sharp changes in the sources of credit supplied to borrowers. Constraints on the ability of depository institutions to attract and hold deposits resulted in a marked decline in the share of credit supplied through financial intermediaries. Correspondingly a higher share was supplied directly to credit markets by households businesses and State and local governments. As a result of the innovations in financial markets discussed earlier this shift in sources of credit did not occur in the first quarters of when the proportion of funds advanced through private financial intermediaries was actually somewhat higher than in During the first half of the year the proportion advanced directly by the public also increased while supplies from foreign sources declined reflecting substantial intervention sales of dollars by foreign central banks as the U.S. currency strengthened in exchange markets The Consumer Debt Burden The ratio of consumer debt repayments to disposable income has risen steadily in recent years reaching a record peak of percent in the third quarter of The increase in this ratio has created con- cern that consumers are becoming overextended and has also raised fears that a high repayment burden might act as a strong constraint on consumer spending during an economic downturn. Repayments were equal to percent of disposable income at the top of the last cycle in The increase in the debt repayment burden from the last cyclical peak to the present is completely accounted for however by an increase in monthly payments on revolving credit lines. The revolving credit figures cover all charges and repayments on credit cards issued by banks gasoline companies and retail stores including transactions of consumers who use credit cards only as a convenience and pay their outstanding balances in full each month. Bank credit cards accounted for most of the increase in revolving credit charges and repayments relative to income. While revolving credit repayments have risen rapidly relative to income in the past years the ratio of debt outstanding on revolving credit lines to income has risen only slightly. Most of the recorded increase in the debt repayment burden for this category of consumer credit can thus be attributed to a greater use of credit cards particularly bank cards for convenience only The monthly repayment burden on fixed-term consumer loans has not risen over this period. On the contrary during the last half of such repayments which include those on auto loans were actually somewhat lower in relation to income than they were in Debt outstanding on these loans however has increased substantially as a proportion of after-tax income. Consumers were able to increase their debt without raising required repayments as a share of income because average maturities have lengthened considerably. The average repayment period on new car loans for example has increased from almost years in to about years and months in the third quarter of Maturities on other fixed-term installment loans have also lengthened reflecting the easier terms provided by most categories of lenders Consumer indebtedness from auto loans and other fixed-term installment credit declined substantially relative to disposable personal income during and and then increased rapidly in the upturn. Outstanding balances on revolving credit lines however have been a fairly constant proportion of after-tax income throughout the past decade. Last year net borrowing on revolving lines rose at about the same pace as disposable income while net fixed-term borrowing dropped from about 2V2 percent of disposable income in the fourth quarter of to less than IV2 percent in the final quarter of Consumers are indeed more indebted today than they were at the peak of the past cycle but their fixed-term repayments are actually somewhat lower compared to their disposable income than was the case in While the burden of repayments can be expected to restrain consumer spending as the economy heads into recession the impact will probably be no greater than during the last downturn and might well be less SUMMING UP Huge oil price increases dominated economic developments in Economic growth slowed much more than expected. The decline in inflation anticipated at the beginning of the year did not materialize ; on the contrary inflation increased sharply. The fact that the increase in inflation was confined largely to energy ( and as measured in the CPI to housing ) was a distinct positive element in the economic record but there is still a danger that last year 's sharp rise of energy and housing prices may spill over into this year 's wages and costs and thus become built into the underlying inflation rate Fighting inflation must therefore remain the top priority of economic policy SUPPLEMENT I Improvements in the Method for Estimating the High-Employment Budget Beginning with the publication of the Report the Council 's approach in calculating the high-employment budget changed. In the method used earlier high-employment receipts were determined as the product of real potential GNP the price level and estimates of income shares and effective tax rates at high employment. Comparisons of actual receipts those collected at actual employment levels with high-employment receipts often yielded an implausible elasticity of receipts with respect to the change in income between actual and potential GNP The source of the problem is that estimates of high-employment income shares and effective tax rates made with this approach do not reflect all of the structural characteristics of the tax system or the economy that are embodied in the short-term behavior of actual income shares and effective tax rates. These estimates are unlikely to incorporate such features because they rely completely on trends of income shares and effective tax rates. Hence estimates of actual and high-employment budgets can be inconsistent The revised approach ensures consistency by basing the high-employment estimates on actual receipts and adding to these receipts the extra revenues that would be collected if the gap between actual and high-employment GNP were closed. Estimates of these additional revenues are based on the average historical behavior of income shares and marginal tax rates or tax elasticities over the business cycle. In this way the implied elasticity of receipts with respect to the change in income between actual and potential GNP is more consistent with past experience During the Council worked with other Federal agencies to improve the estimates of income shares marginal tax rates and tax elasticities used in this approach integrating as fully as possible the Council 's work on potential GNP. Cyclical adjustments of expenditures were made for the first time for several additional Federal expenditure programs and separate cyclical adjustments were made for regular and extended unemployment insurance benefits Income Shares The principal improvement last year to estimates of cyclically adjusted income shares was the joint estimation of equations explaining the shares of all major components of national income and the difference between national income and GNP. Because the equations were estimated jointly the sum of the gaps between actual and high-employment values for income components equals the gap between actual GNP and its high-employment level To facilitate the calculation of the difference between actual and highemployment tax bases for different revenue aggregates national income was disaggregated into six components : wages and salaries other forms of compensation nonfarm proprietors ' income farm proprietors ' income corporate profits and rent plus net interest Tax Elasticities Efforts were made on several fronts in to improve estimates of the personal income tax elasticity. Time series analyses related personal tax receipts adjusted for changes in tax law to adjusted personal income ( defined as wages and salaries proprietors ' income rental income dividends and personal interest income ) Cross-sectional analyses using a model from the Department of the Treasury 's Office of Tax Analysis were also performed for several years in the 1970s. Inputs to this model included estimates of changes in the components of adjusted personal income that would occur in closing the gap between actual and potential GNP. The estimated number and type of additional income tax returns filed by the extra persons employed in closing the gap were also used by the model. These studies suggest that estimates of the personal tax elasticity obtained in moving between actual and potential GNP are particularly sensitive to assumptions about productivity the income distribution and the filing status of the extra employed persons. For the calculation shown in this Report an elasticity of 1V3 was used. It is recognized that this estimate is subject to a substantial margin of The study of the marginal corporate tax rate used a time series analysis of the relationship of corporate profits tax receipts to the product of the statutory tax rate and a tax base adjusted for Federal Reserve profits profits from foreign operations and State and local taxes. The investment tax credit was also an explanatory factor in the analysis. While it is difficult to control accurately for the effects that changes in these factors exert on corporate tax revenues most specifications suggested a marginal corporate tax rate near percent in recent years During estimates of the additional contributions for social insurance brought about by closing the gap between actual and high employment were refined in several ways. Social insurance revenues were disaggregated into four subcategories : social security taxes excluding those paid by the selfemployed and railroad retirement taxes ; social security contributions by the self-employed ; unemployment insurance taxes ; and other taxes ( including Federal employee retirement contributions supplemental medical insurance premiums veterans ' life insurance payments and workmen 's compensation ) This disaggregation was particularly important because the relative weight of social security taxes in the total has increased materially since the 1950s Estimates were made of the cyclical sensitivity of tax bases for each category of social insurance receipts ( except the tax base of other contributions which was assumed to be insensitive to cyclical influences ) Separate tax elasticities were then applied to each of these bases. The tax elasticities were calculated as a weighted average of an employment elasticity ( assumed to be ) and an average wage elasticity. For example the average wage elasticity for social security taxes ( except those paid by the self-employed ) and railroad retirement taxes has increased during the 1970s from an estimated in to in because of the increase in the taxable earnings base relative to average earnings. The weights are based on the proportion of the difference between actual and high-employment wages and salaries attributable to the change in employment and the proportion attributable to the change in average wages per worker in moving from actual to potential GNP Estimates of the elasticity of indirect business taxes with respect to changes in real GNP were revised last year on the basis of studies that analyzed the behavior of indirect business taxes since the 1950s after allowing for changes in tax law. According to these studies the elasticity of total indirect business taxes with respect to real GNP is less than since most of the taxes are on products for which demand is inelastic in relation to income. This elasticity has declined from a peak of in the mid-1960s to nearly in recent years as a consequence of the repeal of several cyclically sensitive excise taxes particularly the automobile excise tax Expenditure Adjustments Separate estimates were made of the cyclical sensitivity of regular and extended unemployment insurance benefits. The estimates suggest that ex- penditures for regular unemployment insurance benefits currently rise about $ billion for each percentage point increase in the unemployment rate The cost of extended benefits is estimated to rise smoothly as a percentage of the cost of regular benefits when the actual unemployment rate rises to about 7V2 percent from the benchmark unemployment rate of percent This rise occurs as extended benefits payments are triggered in an increasing number of States. Near an unemployment rate of IV2 percent the cost of extended benefits jumps sharply because these benefits are triggered for the Nation as a whole During cyclical adjustments were made for six additional Federal expenditure programs : food stamps aid to families with dependent children old age and survivors ' insurance disability insurance medicaid and veterans ' readjustment benefits ( the GI bill ) These adjustments were based on a survey of research on these programs most of it conducted within the Federal Government during the last decade. The increase in expenditures for a percentage point rise in the unemployment rate is about percent of total expenditures on these programs or $ billion at expenditure levels The total cyclical adjustment for these programs was $ billion in Further improvements are planned in the estimates of income shares and tax elasticities used in calculating the high-employment budget. During these refinements and historical estimates of the high-employment budget will be reported in the Survey of Current Business ; and the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce will then regularly publish updates and revisions of these historical estimates SUPPLEMENT II Measuring the Restraint from Oil Price Increases In analyzing the economic consequences of higher oil prices the Council has found it useful to estimate the magnitude of the " oil price drag " which has effects on real output and employment that are analogous to those of fiscal drag Oil price increases affect the broad performance of the economy in two principal ways. First the overall price level is raised because of the higher prices of petroleum products and the higher costs of products incorporating petroleum. Second income is transferred from users of petroleum to foreign and domestic producers and also to the government through increased tax collections The effect of higher oil prices on users of petroleum is similar to the impact of a higher excise tax. Both raise prices directly reduce real purchasing power and thus depress aggregate demand. But when oil prices rise oil pro- ducers receive higher net revenues and expand their demands for goods and services The calculations of oil price drag are based on average prices for imported and domestically produced oil and on estimated changes in refining and marketing margins. The gross impact of a price increase for imported or domestic crude oil used in the United States is calculated by multiplying changes in average oil prices by the quantities of oil from each source after allowing for the reduction in oil consumption induced by higher prices. To estimate the effect of higher margins price increases at each stage in the processing and distribution of refined products are taken into account along with the quantity of each product used. Where crude oil or refined products are used as inputs in producing other goods the increased costs are assumed to be passed through to prices on a dollar-for-dollar basis In calculating the drag attributable to higher crude oil prices and increased refining and marketing margins only the increase that exceeds the general rate of inflation is taken into account. Estimates for assume no further rise in real prices of imported oil above the level prevailing in early and no further widening of real margins Gross oil price drag is defined simply as the gross value of changes in the cost that users of oil and refined products must pay. To calculate a net oil price drag estimates of respending on American products from the increased revenues of OPEC countries and those of domestic oil producers are subtracted. Increased exports of American products resulting from higher world oil prices are estimated to equal percent of the increase in the U.S. oil bill after year and percent after years. It is assumed that percent of the incremental after-tax revenue of domestic sellers of oil is respent for goods and services after year and percent after years According to the Council 's estimates gross oil drag increased over the quarters of by $ billion and is expected to rise by an additional $ billion over the quarters of this year. Over the same two 4-quarter periods the net oil drag is expected to increase by just under $ and $ billion respectively. By the end of the net drag will have increased by an amount approximately equal to percent of GNP CHAPTER The Economic Outlook ECONOMIC FORECASTS LAST YEAR tended to underestimate the strength of private spending and consequently the economy 's ability to withstand the effects of energy price shocks fiscal restraint and rising interest rates As indicated in Chapter the resilience of the economy last year reflected forces that may continue to sustain economic activity in Nevertheless there are a number of reasons for expecting a mild recession in the first half of this year. Rising oil prices coupled with increases in effective tax rates caused by inflation will continue to dampen consumers ' purchasing power in and the personal saving rate is likely to rise from its exceptionally low level at the end of last year. Consequently the growth in consumer spending will slow. Businesses are likely to react to the slowdown in consumer buying by trimming their capital investment plans. Housing starts turned down sharply late last year and may decline further in response to reduced availability of mortgage credit and extraordinarily high mortgage interest rates. And inventory accumulation is also likely to decline further as final sales weaken In most past periods of economic recession both fiscal and monetary policy have been eased significantly. At the present time however recession is still only a forecast ; it has not yet appeared in overall measures of economic performance. Moreover the economy has recently withstood recessionary pressures far better than most analysts expected. These facts together with the seriousness of our inflation problem argue against an easing of policy at this time. Such a move would heighten expectations of inflation and reduce our prospects of making progress toward price stability. An easing of monetary and fiscal policy in advance of any actual economic deterioration would also put strong downward pressures on the dollar in foreign exchange markets. Creating an environment conducive to reduced pressures on prices and costs requires restraint in fiscal and monetary policies and great caution in making changes Fiscal policies can not of course be set to run an unswerving course regardless of how actual economic events unfold. The Administration will monitor economic developments closely in and is prepared to recommend additional policy measures if worsening economic conditions warrant such action THE ECONOMY IN AND The expected recession is likely to be mild and brief. Declines in real gross national product ( GNP ) should not extend much past midyear and economic growth will resume later this year albeit slowly at first. Over the quarters of real GNP is forecast to decline by percent Employment should remain almost unchanged despite the fall in real GNP as productivity declines and the average length of the workweek is reduced. However because job opportunities will not grow as fast as the labor force the unemployment rate is likely to rise from percent in the fourth quarter of to % percent in the fourth quarter of this year In a major task of economic policy is to prevent the large energy shocks of from spilling over into wages and industrial prices. Greater slack in the economy will help to hold down inflation by discouraging large wage increases and creating resistance to price increases. The rate of increase in home financing costs should slow this year. Energy prices will continue to rise substantially although most probably at a slower pace than in Over the months of this year consumer prices are forecast to increase percent compared with percent in the year just ended. Late in the annual rate of inflation should be between and 9V2 percent While several factors will be working to reduce inflation dramatic progress can not be expected because the momentum of past inflation is substantial and expectations of inflation are deeply entrenched The pay and price standards will continue to help restrain the growth of wages and nonenergy prices but they can not be expected to yield a large reduction in inflation. Indeed to the extent that workers seek and achieve larger nominal wage gains some increase in the underlying rate of inflation that is the rate determined by the long-term trend in industrial costs could occur this year. The degree of spillover of last year 's price increases into this year 's wages will be limited however not only by greater economic slack but also by continuation of the voluntary pay and price standards Real growth is forecast to increase to a rate of % percent over the quarters of Employment growth is also expected to strengthen and consequently the unemployment rate is forecast to be slightly lower by year 's end. Inflation should decline somewhat further to about 8V2 percent over the months of as a result of some improvement in productivity growth and continued slack in labor and product markets FISCAL POLICY Fiscal policy must continue to follow a course consistent with reducing inflation. This principle is particularly important in light of the large rise in oil prices in and the possibility of spillover from higher oil prices into wages and nonenergy costs In fiscal Federal outlays are projected to be $ billion an increase of about percent from the previous year. In fiscal the budget projects outlays of $ billion a rise of percent Most of the increase in Federal outlays over the years arises from the effects of inflation on the Federal budget. Adjusted for inflation Federal spending will increase only about 2V2 percent over the years. Outlays for defense in real terms will rise somewhat more than percent between fiscal and fiscal Inflation-adjusted outlays for all other Federal programs will be less in fiscal than they were in fiscal Fighting inflation continues to be the top priority of economic policy and hence the President has not recommended any legislated changes in tax rates in the budget. Since individuals will be moving into higher tax brackets as their incomes increase the share of personal income taken by Federal income taxes will rise. Social security tax liabilities are scheduled to increase in January by $ billion. The resulting rise in effective tax rates combined with limited growth of Federal outlays will cause the Federal budget to move significantly toward restraint in the next fiscal year MONETARY POLICY The actions taken by the Federal Reserve on October to restrain the growth of money and credit were followed by a sharp rise in interest rates to record postwar levels in the last quarter of Short-term market interest rates reached a peak in the third week of October but eased somewhat thereafter The changed approach to monetary control with more emphasis on controlling the growth of bank reserves and greater willingness to permit fluctuations in interest rates will help the Federal Reserve to hit its target ranges for the growth of the monetary aggregates Short-term shifts in the demand for money and credit now show up in movements of short-term interest rates more than in the growth of the monetary aggregates While the new strategy will lead to more variation in the course of interest rates over the short run it need not alter their central tendency. This will continue to be determined by longer-term trends in inflation and the demands for credit and money relative to the available supplies which are influenced by the objectives of the Federal Reserve. As the year progresses slowing economic activity and declining inflation should make the Federal Reserve 's objectives for monetary restraint consistent with lower interest rates. The decline in interest rates that develops however is likely to be moderate compared to past periods of recession because of the persistence of a high rate of inflation WORLD OIL MARKETS World oil markets are expected to be in a delicate balance in Although consumer demand for petroleum products has fallen and can be expected to decline further continued high levels of stockbuilding combined with supply cutbacks by some foreign producers may offset whatever tendency might exist for the creation of slack in the international oil market The outlook presented here takes into account the most recent price increases announced by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) In Caracas the OPEC members did not agree on an integrated cartel pricing structure though some member countries made an effort to narrow existing price differentials within the cartel. Since then some of the countries with the highest prices have posted additional increases. In early January the world price of oil was near $ per barrel more than twice its level a year earlier. The forecast makes allowance for the possibility that further increases in world oil prices may somewhat exceed the inflation rate during THE ECONOMIC FORECAST At this time the economy appears likely to head into a mild recession. Housing starts began to turn down in the fourth quarter of last year. New car sales also fell and auto companies have curtailed their production schedules for the first quarter of this year to reduce abnormally large inventories especially of large models The downward pressure on consumers ' real incomes resulting from rising oil prices and increasing fiscal restraint is continuing. In the years beginning with the final quarter of the high-employment budget will swing to surplus by $ billion. Increases in crude oil prices and in domestic oil refiners ' and distributors ' gross margins in excess of the general rate of inflation will increase the revenues of domestic and foreign producers by $ billion during these years. Some of these receipts will be respent within this time but a large part will be retained. Allowing for such respending and adjusting for double-counting the combination of oil and fiscal restraint is estimated to rise by almost $ billion over the years end- ing in the fourth quarter of about percent of GNP ( see Table ) TABLE Fiscal and oil price restraint on the economy fourth quarter to fourth quarter [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] IV to IV Item Fiscal restraint x Oil price restraint less adjustment for double-counting IV to IV IV to IV Total Change in the high-employment budget Increase in foreign and domestic producer revenues due to real increases in crude oil prices and refiners ' and distributors ' gross margins less the estimated respending by oil sellers of their additional revenues. The estimates assume no further rise in real imported oil prices from levels prevailing early in Higher windfall profits taxes and corporate profits taxes due to real increases in crude oil prices and refiners ' and distributors ' gross margins which are included in both the measure of fiscal restraint and the measure of oil price restraint have been deleted from the latter Source : Council of Economic Advisers Around the middle of forces of recovery from recession are expected to be evident. Reduced restraint in financial markets will permit housing starts to turn up in response to strong underlying demand. As inflation abates some of the drain on consumer purchasing power will be relieved. Continuation of fiscal restraint together with maintenance of cautious inventory policies by businesses will result in a slower pace of recovery than has been typical after earlier postwar recessions. The rate of economic growth is expected to strengthen during however as businesses step up their capital spending plans. Table reports the forecast for this year Consumer Expenditures Consumer spending in will be restrained by the drain on consumers ' purchasing power imposed by rising energy prices and the increases in effective tax rates caused by inflation. The rise in energy prices is expected to be smaller than in and there is likely to be some step-up in the rise of wage rates during But since employment is projected to change little this year after-tax income in real terms will show only a small gain. An increase in tax refunds because of overwithholding of individual income taxes in will help to sustain the rise of after-tax incomes Last year the personal saving rate declined considerably and ended the year below M percent. Some increase from this exceptionally s low level seems very likely this year but it should be small as people try to maintain their living standards in the face of slow growth of income. The expected rise in the saving rate together with sluggish income growth is expected to result in a decline in real consumer purchases of goods and services of between one-half and percent over the quarters of This would be the first reduction since TABLE Economic outlook for * Item Forecast range Growth fourth quarter to fourth quarter ( percent ) : Federal purchases State and local purchases to 3V2 -PAto-PA 9y 9y to -y4to % % to GNP implicit price deflator Compensation per hour Output per hour -V2to OtO V to Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment.. % to -1V * Real gross national product.. 7y to iy2to % i % Level fourth quarter : Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units ) Preliminary Private business sector all employees Seasonally adjusted Annual rate Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Expenditures for consumer durable goods will be most affected Automobile sales for the year will be below average levels but should improve in the second half. Purchases of other household durables may also decline given the downturn forecast for housing starts Expenditures by consumers on nondurable goods are also expected to decline in real terms in ; purchases of energy-related items are likely to be cut considerably. Consumption of services will probably continue to rise but at a slower pace than in Growth in real consumer spending should resume late this year and strengthen in when employment is expected to rise more strongly while inflation moderates. The increase in social security taxes scheduled for January however will limit the rise in real disposable income. In part for this reason real consumption expenditures are likely to grow less rapidly than real GNP next year Business Fixed Investment Current indicators suggest that business fixed capital spending in real terms should turn down moderately in New orders for nondefense capital goods adjusted for inflation have fallen from their peaks of last spring. Capital appropriations of manufacturing firms adjusted for inflation have also declined since the first quarter of last year. The most recent Department of Commerce survey of capital spending plans by business suggests that companies are planning to increase their real outlays by only about to percent on a year-over-year basis in Business spending plans tend to be revised down when the economy weakens. With a mild recession early this year capacity utilization will be falling profits will be squeezed corporate cash flow will diminish and business spending will slow further. Recovery from the recession will lead to a strengthening of business investment plans early in and increased activity in this key sector will provide increasing support to economic growth next year Housing The outlook for housing is more uncertain in than in the past several years. Late in the fourth quarter the severe strains evident in the mortgage market soon after the October tightening of monetary policy were eased somewhat. Mortgage lenders appeared to be relaxing their lending terms a little ; in some sections of the country mortgage loan rates were lowered from the extreme highs of a few weeks earlier. Interest rates on short-term market securities were down from their October peaks and depository institutions gained additional power to attract funds for lending when the regulatory authorities effective January instituted a floating interest rate ceiling on deposits with a maturity of 2Vfe years or more These developments should help to improve the flow of mortgage credit early next year. Moreover the preemption of State usury ceilings by Federal law through March which applies to new residential mortgage commitments made during the period as well as to residential loans closed could lead to a substantial increase in credit available to potential home buyers in almost States Very high mortgage interest rates will continue to discourage some individuals however and make it difficult for others to qualify for loans. It may also take time for builders to reassess the prospects for housing sales. A sample survey in mid-November conducted by the Bureau of the Census indicated sharp cutbacks in builders ' construction plans for early this year Housing starts may therefore fall somewhat further to a trough before midyear. Single-family housing starts will bear the brunt of the decline. Unlike the experience starts of multiple-family dwellings are expected to decline relatively little ; vacancy rates are low and demand is strong in this segment of the housing market Later this year housing construction should recover as demand responds to lower mortgage interest rates and continuing strong demographic factors. The favorable after-tax rate of return on housing compared with other physical and financial assets will also reinforce housing demand Some slowing in the rise of housing prices may occur in particularly in the first half when sales will be depressed by the high cost of mortgage credit. This slowdown of inflation in the housing sector may be temporary however since the forces underlying the demand for housing are strong In housing starts should continue to increase toward levels consistent with their long-term determinants. By the end of next year housing starts may be close to a 2-million annual rate Inventories As final demand weakens in the first half of this year the rate of inventory accumulation is expected to fall. Since the cautious inventory policies followed by businesses during the recovery have prevented a large buildup of undesired stocks no significant decumulation is expected. By around midyear adjustments of stocks to lower levels of demand should be largely complete. Resumption of growth of final demand together with lower rates of interest will encourage an upturn in the rate of inventory accumulation in Government Purchases Real Federal purchases are projected to increase by about percent over the quarters of led by growth in defense outlays and will continue to rise moderately during calendar State and local government purchases in real terms are expected to continue falling in Concern over the impact of the recession on tax revenues combined with taxpayers ' resistance to expenditures for new programs will operate to hold down spending. In as economic growth resumes and tax revenues increase State and local purchases should increase in real terms though much more slowly than real GNP Employment and Unemployment Employment is likely to be almost unchanged in despite the weakness of overall economic activity. Declining real GNP during the first half is expected to lead to a further reduction in output per hour worked and to a somewhat more rapid reduction in the average workweek than occurred in In employment growth should be stronger as growth in real output increases Growth in the labor force is expected to average about 13A percent a year over the next years. Weak growth of job opportunities will keep the labor force from growing at the rates of recent years. Nevertheless the increase in the number of job seekers will be larger than the rise in employment during and the unemployment rate is forecast to rise to % percent by the fourth quarter of A small decline in the unemployment rate to about 7Vi percent is expected by the end of Foreign Sector Economic growth abroad is likely to slow from percent in to an average annual rate of about percent in and For the years taken together growth abroad is expected to be stronger than in the United States. These developments will add moderately to real net exports of goods and services The contribution of net exports to real GNP growth this year and next however will be significantly less than during the previous years. Imports are projected to decline in volume during the course of and to recover only moderately in reflecting the pattern of mild recession and recovery foreseen for the U.S. economy But the growth of exports is not expected to continue at the strong pace that marked the last years not only because growth abroad is likely to slow but also because the boost to exports from the past depreciation of the dollar will largely have run its course The deficit on merchandise trade which was about $ billion in is expected to increase somewhat over the coming years because the generally favorable developments in non-oil trade will not fully offset the large increase in the oil import bill from to Agricultural exports which reached record levels in the second half of should remain on a high plateau in This estimate makes allowance for the recent decision to limit grain sales to the Soviet Union. A small decline in the volume of agricultural exports over the quarters of will be nearly offset by a slight increase in export prices of farm commodities The widening deficit on merchandise trade should result in a small current account deficit in and again in even though moderate increases in net receipts on invisibles transactions are likely These developments are not expected to affect the value of the dollar adversely in foreign exchange markets since the U.S. current account position should be stronger than that of other major industrial countries UNCERTAINTIES IN THE OUTLOOK As in a major threat to the outlook is that OPEC decisions about prices and production may lead to increases in world oil prices that go well beyond those announced recently. Such a development would in the short run add to the restraint on the economy exerted by oil prices exacerbate inflation and lead to lower economic growth and higher unemployment. As Chapter indicates the probability of large price increases for oil will be diminished if the major consuming countries join to reduce demand in world oil markets Discussions toward this end are now proceeding in the International Energy Agency The new orientation of monetary policy poses additional uncertainties. If inflation does not decelerate as expected interest rates may be under more upward pressure than is now foreseen. On the other hand if the Federal Reserve 's monetary targets are attained easily be- cause money demand weakens more than expected the Federal Reserve 's strategy will permit market forces to lower interest rates considerably. The central bank 's scope for maneuver will be determined in part by developments in monetary policy abroad and by a variety of forces influencing the value of the dollar in exchange markets The potential behavior of the personal saving rate further complicates the assessment of the course of the economy. The saving rate is forecast to rise moderately from its exceptionally low level at the end of Should it increase further economic growth would be weaker than expected. As Chapter indicates past experience provides only limited guidance on how individuals may choose to allocate their disposable income between current consumption and saving under present circumstances Perhaps the most serious risk for the longer-term performance of the economy is the possibility of a large spillover of energy price increases into wages and then into industrial goods prices generally. If temporary bursts in energy prices became a relatively permanent feature of the underlying cost structure the outlook for inflation during the years immediately ahead would worsen ; and as Chapter points out the costs of bringing inflation back down again would be increased. Maintenance of effective pay and price standards is essential to minimize this spillover CONTROLLING INFLATION Even during the very sharp recession the underlying rate of inflation never fell below the neighborhood of percent. In and inflation remained at about this level. But early in inflation began to accelerate initially on account of a dramatic increase in food prices that resulted from limited supplies of meat and the effects of cold weather on fruit and vegetable production. In and adverse productivity developments acted to push up unit labor costs. And around the close of as the economy was operating near the limit of its capacity excess demand added briefly to upward pressure on prices. But a dominant factor in the most recent worsening of inflation was the explosion of energy prices in In the consumer price index ( CPI ) energy prices in had risen by percent somewhat less than the overall rise for other consumer goods and services. During the months of however energy prices to consumers increased by percent directly adding about 2XA percentage points to overall inflation Temporary excess demand or sharply rising food and energy prices would not affect inflation for more than a limited period if they did not become built into longer-term trend rates of increase in wages and other costs. However as outside shocks drive up materials prices businesses may seek to maintain profit margins by raising prices. The higher prices of finished goods may induce workers to try to protect their real incomes by demanding larger nominal wages Moreover businesses are less resistant to increases in the cost of materials and labor when demand is relatively strong and these increases can be readily passed through to prices of finished products Temporary shocks that aggravate inflation can thus become embedded in underlying inflation To the extent that a rise in prices relative to wages reflected a surge of business profits to abnormal levels wages could rise to recover the lost ground. The increase in costs could then be absorbed by businesses without further price rises and any longer-term increase in inflation could be avoided. However as Table in Chapter indicates in the rise in prices relative to wages did not stem from a general increase in the profit share of national income. Instead it was the result mainly of rising oil prices. Attempts to recapture the lost ground are not likely to lead to a readjustment of income shares ; the danger is that they may trigger another round of price increases Trends in the broad range of prices for final industrial goods and services in the U.S. economy are fairly evident in the fixed-weight price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy in the national income and product accounts. Chart inChart4 Fixed-Weight Price Index for Personal Consumption Expenditures PERCENT CHANGE * CHANGE FROM FOURTH QUARTER TO FOURTH QUARTER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE dicates a rise in that index from a percent rate of increase in to near percent in There have been few years in which this measure of price rise has shown any significant moderation over the past two decades. In and when mandatory price controls were in effect inflation shown by this measure declined by more than IV2 percentage points from 4V2 percent in to just under percent in By the end of however when a less stringent set of mandatory controls was in place inflation in the industrial and service sectors was up again to % percent. Removal of the controls in early was followed by an explosion of wages and prices. By the fourth quarter of prices paid by consumers for goods and services excluding food and energy had risen lOVi percent above the level a year earlier. Once this temporary burst of prices following controls ended underlying inflation settled back to around percent higher than the level before the controls were instituted Periods of economic recession over these two decades produced little permanent progress in unwinding inflation. In the very mild recession of prices of goods and services other than food and energy rose nearly as fast as they had in when the economy was overheated. Moreover in when the unemployment rate averaged almost percent the rise of hourly wages and fringe benefits was almost as large as the rise in when the unemployment rate was 3V2 percent. In the rate of increase of prices ( excluding food and energy ) declined significantly as did the rise of compensation per hour worked. That moderation of inflation however came about largely because of the termination of the special factors pushing up prices and wages in During the latter half of the rates of increase in compensation per hour and in prices excluding food and energy were still higher than they had been in The trend of inflation created by these developments is disturbing Shocks from excess demand and from higher prices of food and energy have at least partly fed back into wages costs and prices for goods other than food and energy. Since the early 1960s the start of each period of economic expansion has been marked by higher inflation than the start of the previous upswing and inflation has been higher at the end of each expansion than at the beginning Developments in productivity have been another important source of the upward trend of cost and price increases. In the early 1960s increments to productivity averaged about percent per year as Table shows. Rates of advance have dwindled however since the middle years of the 1960s. Adjusted for cyclical developments productivity growth in the years ending with the fourth quarter of was only one-half of percent. During cyclically adjusted productivity declined sharply. The longer-term reduction in produc- tivity growth would not have influenced the trend of inflation if wage increases had been correspondingly scaled down Table Changes in compensation per hour productivity unit labor costs and prices [ Percent change per y e a r x ] Private nonfarm business sector all employees Period to to to to to to Compensation per hour Output per hour Unit labor costs Fixed-weight deflator for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy Changes are measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) As noted earlier rising inflation over a long period has influenced the way prices and wages are set and these and other structural changes may have reduced the response of wages and prices to a moderate degree of slack in the economy. Formal escalator clauses in labor contracts have become more common. In only one-fourth of the workers covered by major collective bargaining contracts had such clauses ; in the contracts of nearly percent of such workers had these clauses. Nonunion wages have also become more sensitive to price increases perhaps because informal agreements to provide cost-of-living protection for workers have become more common. Econometric studies of the determinants of wage changes indicate a larger response to price inflation in more recent periods and some studies suggest a smaller response to labor market slack. The incomes of other groups have been adjusted for inflation as well Since social security benefits have been indexed to increases in the consumer price index Widespread belief that inflation will continue if not worsen leads businesses to accede to cost increases in the expectation of being able to pass the added costs forward into higher prices. These higher prices then become the basis for additional rounds of wage increases Expectations of inflation can also lead individuals and businesses to accelerate their spending and thus add to the pressure of aggregate demand on available supplies of goods and services Repeated shocks to prices from the energy and food sectors aggravate the problem. As shocks become more frequent the probability grows that a given shock will have a greater effect on expectations of inflation In the present environment we can not realistically expect that price and wage increases will respond quickly and strongly to a moderate increase in the degree of slack in the economy. Nor can it be expect- ed that a sharp but relatively short recession would have a lasting effect on inflation. Expectations of inflation have become much too deeply entrenched for that to happen Aggregate demand restraint is nonetheless critical to the creation of an environment that helps to prevent an acceleration of underlying inflation in and to lower it in the years beyond. Fiscal and monetary policies must be conducted in ways that convince the public workers businesses consumers and investors that our government will not permit inflation to proceed unchecked. It is particularly critical at this time to avoid circumstances in which the energy-led price increases of could easily carry over into a general wageprice spiral at double-digit rates of increase. Maintenance of restrictive fiscal and monetary policies in the face of the forces now weakening the economy will unfortunately mean less output and employment in the immediate future than anyone would like. But persistence in restraint now is the only way to produce the conditions for sustainable expansion later The Administration 's fiscal policy exhibits the restraint needed at this time. As Table in Chapter indicates the high-employment Federal budget began to move from stimulus toward restraint early in At that time the high-employment deficit amounted to about Vi percent of actual GNP. The budget moved into surplus in early and will move further into surplus throughout and By late the surplus in the high-employment budget will amount to 2V4 percent of GNP ; the swing from deficit to surplus over the years ending in the fourth quarter of will be about percent of GNP. This fiscal policy and the impact on the economy of higher oil prices imply a strong degree of restraint on aggregate demand The monetary policy being pursued by the Federal Reserve is consistent with an overall aggregate demand policy aimed at slowing inflation and breaking the grip that expectations of inflation have on decisions affecting wages prices and spending. Because the new methods of implementing monetary policy should make the monetary authority better able to achieve its target ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates they provide greater assurance that monetary policy will not inadvertently add to pressures on costs and prices by permitting excessive increases in supplies of money and credit. At the same time the new approach will tend to lead fairly promptly to lower interest rates as inflation comes down and economic activity weakens THE PRICK AND PAY STANDARDS The price and pay standards announced in October recognized that our current inflation problem can not be solved through aggregate demand policy alone. The costs in forgone output and em- ployment would be unacceptably high. Used in conjunction with prudent monetary and fiscal policies voluntary standards for prices and wages can help limit increases in prices that widen profit margins lessen the need for catchup wage increases and minimize the transmission of temporary price pressures into wages and other costs During their first months the pay and price standards did help hold down inflation as indicated in Chapter The first year 's experience revealed two major problems both caused in large measure by sharp price increases in sectors where standards can not effectively limit price increases : energy other raw materials and food Many firms faced with uncontrollable cost increases applied to switch from the price-deceleration standard to the profit-margin limitation. While this limitation restricted both the profit margin and the rise in dollar profits that could be secured through higher prices firms that qualified for the exception were still able to pass through large uncontrollable cost increases to prices of final products. Moreover the constraint on the growth of dollar profits had an upward bias. Firms with low base-year profits were able to increase prices and raise their profit margins to the average of the best out of prior fiscal years while those with high base-period profits were not compelled to make a comparable downward adjustment On the pay side a problem of equity was created by the way costof-living adjustment ( COLA ) clauses were treated. Calculations of whether a wage contract adhered to the standard assumed a percent inflation rate in assessing the cost of a COLA clause. This appeared to be a reasonable assumption at the time that the standard was designed especially for multiyear contracts. Because of the large price increases in the several sectors noted above however inflation during the first program year was far in excess of percent. As a result many workers with COLAs were in compliance with the pay standard while receiving greater wage increases than the complying workers without such clauses and greater increases than were consistent with the desired degree of wage restraint THE SECOND PROGRAM YEAR Sharply higher prices led to a substantial reduction in real wages in the first program year. Because many workers have attributed the loss of real income to the pay standard rather than to its fundamental causes there have been pressures to relax the pay standard in ways that would aggravate inflation. The American people can not be wholly recompensed for losses of real income due to higher world oil prices. Efforts by workers or other groups to restore real income through larger increases in wages salaries or other forms of nominal income will only increase business costs and thus ultimately intensify inflation. This fact makes the pay and price standards all the more important in the year ahead On November the Council on Wage and Price Stability announced the second-year price standard. Companies are expected to limit their price increases for the years ending September to the price change for the years from to A 2year standard was chosen to avoid penalizing companies that raised prices less than the standard allowed during the first year. Any company regardless of its base-period performance will be in compliance if its prices go up less than percent in the years ; any company whose prices rise by more than percent will be out of compliance. Under the profit limitation exception price increases are permissible if the growth of dollar profits over the years does not exceed percent and the profit margin is no higher than the average in the best out of fiscal years preceding the program. The special adjustment for firms whose base-year profit margin is below the profit margin in the best of the last years has been cut in half To elicit greater public participation in the standards program a Price Advisory Committee has been created. This Committee which consists of six public members appointed by the President will from time to time recommend to the Council on Wage and Price Stability modifications of the price standards and new or revised interpretations of them The problem of catchup for workers without COLA clauses who complied with the pay standard in is difficult. Just before the end of the first program year the Council on Wage and Price Stability allowed a self-administered percent pay increase for complying workers not covered by COLA clauses ; on a case-by-case basis the increases may be more than percent where disparities between wage increases of workers with COLAs and other workers in similar situations demonstrably require correction On September the Carter Administration and the leadership of the American labor movement reached a National Accord This agreement provides for the cooperation and participation of organized labor in formulating and implementing policies aimed at reducing inflation effectively and equitably while furthering our national goals of full employment and balanced growth One immediate result of this accord was the creation of a tripartite Pay Advisory Committee with members : six from labor six from management and six from the public. Its central task is to recommend modifications to the first-year pay standard. The Committee has been asked to look at the basic standard the accompanying infla- tion assumption for those workers who have COLA clauses the exemption for low-wage workers equitable catchup adjustments for workers not covered by COLA clauses and the treatment of incremental or merit increases The Committee has already made a number of recommendations that the Council on Wage and Price Stability subsequently adopted The Committee recommended loosening the exception for tandem pay relationships allowed in the first year. Pay increases in " follower " units will be in compliance if they are substantially equal to increases in " leader " units that are exempt from or in compliance with the pay standard ; employee groups whose pay increases follow formal market surveys of pay rates will also be in compliance. The Committee further proposed that the tandem exception be self-administered with notification to the Council on Wage and Price Stability after the fact The Pay Committee recommended a change as well in the lowwage exemption. The exemption will continue to apply to individual workers making under $ per hour on October Employee groups with an average straight-time hourly wage rate of $ or less during the third quarter of are exempt from the pay standard in the second program year Finally a recommendation by the Committee clarifies the status of so-called incremental pay increases. Any promotion or pay raise in established pay plans that results from completing a qualification requirement or from movement within a preexisting pay structure is exempt from the pay standard As this Report went to press the Committee had just recommended a basic pay standard that would establish a range of allowable pay increases together with a statement of principles for labor and management to use in determining the appropriateness of particular wage increases THE OUTLOOK FOR INFLATION Restraint on aggregate demand in combination with the pay and price standards can make an important contribution to the control of inflation in and help lay the foundation for later reductions in inflation. Price developments in specific sectors such as food energy and housing will continue to have a significant impact on inflation Over the quarters of food prices should rise approximately in line with general inflation. Prices are expected to climb most rapidly during the fall. Both the farm value of food prices and marketers ' margins are expected to move up at about the same rate Inflation will continue to raise food marketing costs which account for about two-thirds of consumer food costs. Price increases in food marketing operations including labor packaging materials fuels and transport supplies are quickly translated into higher retail food prices The pattern of price increases for food during the year will also depend on the general level of economic activity and the relative availability of food products primarily meats. Beef supplies for the year will be about the same as in making the first year since that supplies have not declined substantially. However seasonally lower cattle marketings could put upward pressure on beef prices during the spring and a reduction in the supplies of other meats is likely to boost meat prices in the fall. While pork and poultry production will continue to increase through the first half of the year it might slow later because farm prices for these commodities may not cover production costs during the first half of Pork and poultry prices are consequently expected to remain fairly stable through midyear but then to increase particularly in the fourth quarter A major uncertainty in the outlook for food prices is consumer demand. While food prices tend to be most heavily influenced by the availability of food products and marketing costs the slower growth of consumer incomes expected in the first half of this year will help to moderate food price increases. Prices for highly perishable products like meat fruit and vegetables are likely to be most affected Energy prices to consumers are likely to increase less in than in when they rose percent. The outlook for prices of petroleum products is very uncertain however since it is not clear how much further world oil prices will rise this year. The forecast assumes no further increase in real world oil prices in after the most recent round of OPEC price increases. As decontrol of domestic oil prices proceeds the ratio of domestic to world oil prices will rise from about two-thirds at the beginning of to slightly over four-fifths at year 's end. Domestic oil prices will rise substantially over the quarters of The extent to which crude oil price increases are passed on to consumers depends heavily upon the balance of supply and demand in the oil market. In the market was tight enough not only to allow full pass-through of higher crude oil prices but also to permit a widening of refiners ' and distributors ' gross margins. Barring another severe disruption in world oil supplies the outlook for the balance of supply and demand in the world oil market at least in the first half of is not likely to permit a further widening of inflation-adjusted margins The rate of increase in prices of houses may moderate somewhat early in as a consequence of reduced demand attributable to developments in mortgage credit markets late in The rise in home financing costs should also be moderated later in by declining mortgage interest rates Available evidence noted in Chapter suggests that the pay standard reduced wage inflation by about percentage point in The voluntary pay standard will continue this year although its impact on increases in wage costs during may be somewhat less than in both because the standard has had to be made more liberal and because of pressures to restore real wage losses suffered in Increased slack in the labor market however will also help to hold down the rise of wage rates this year. The increase in average hourly earnings is expected to range between 8V2 and percent in Because of the projected cyclical decline in real GNP the output per hour of all employees in the private business sector will probably decline in but by less than in As a consequence the increase in unit labor costs will be above percent for the second year in a row. Not all of these cost increases will be passed through to consumers however because weak aggregate demand will limit price increases and cut into profit margins in Taking all these factors into account consumer prices are expected to rise about percent over the months of this year considerably less than in Smaller increases in energy prices and in the costs of purchasing and financing homes are principally responsible for the moderation. Most of the expected slowing of inflation this year will occur during the second half when the direct effects that OPEC 's recent price increases exert on the prices of petroleum products will be largely exhausted. Some further winding down of inflation is expected in when the increase in the consumer price index is expected to be about V2 percent THE PRODUCTIVITY PROBLEM The trend rate of productivity growth in the United States as in other major industrial countries has been declining in recent years In the United States however this decline started earlier and has lasted longer than in other industrial economies. Table which compares growth in output per worker for the major OECD countries makes it evident that declines have occurred in all countries Table shows growth in output per hour in the United States since the end of World War II. During the first years after the war output per hour for all employees in the private nonfarm business sector rose at an average annual rate of just under 2V2 percent. From to the increase was 1V2 percent. Since the annual growth of productivity has been less than percent. In the most recent period years of sharply declining productivity such as and have been interspersed with years of fairly good gains such as TABLE Annual growth in GNPper employed worker in major industrial countries [ Percent change per year ] to Country to l United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy Canada Estimate Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Last year 's productivity performance was particularly disappointing. While productivity increased at a rate of percent during in line with the recent trend it declined over the quarters of by about percent. Productivity growth is cyclically sensitive because businesses are generally slow to adjust their work force to changes in production. This tendency causes sharp increases in productivity when output increases vigorously in the early stages of recovery ; later near cyclical peaks very weak growth in productivity or even declines may occur as growth in real output slows. Still cyclical considerations can not account for all of the decline in productivity last year TABLE Labor productivity growth [ Percent change per year ] Sector to Private business sector Nonfarm Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing to to IV to IV to Preliminary Not available Note Data relate to output per hour for all employees Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Chart shows 4-quarter changes in productivity since adjusted for cyclical fluctuations. The productivity pattern of the last decade has not been marked by consistently lower growth but by periods of relatively satisfactory productivity gains interrupted by several intervals of very poor performance. One of the disturbing factors about the productivity decline of was that it did not interrupt a period of high growth but followed years in which productivity gains had already been quite low Last year 's Report evaluated the various explanations for the slower growth of productivity in recent years. The Council has continued to examine the productivity problem and to monitor closely other analyses of this topic Chart Productivity Adjusted for Cyclical Variation PERCENT CHANGE FROM FOUR QUARTERS EARLIER NOTE : DATA ARE FOR PRIVATE NONFARM BUSINESS SECTOR. ALL PERSONS SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The magnitude of the slowdown and numerical estimates of the various forces behind it differ according to the period and measure of productivity examined. Most analysts have however identified breaks in productivity growth in the mid-1960s and again in though other sharp reductions in cyclically adjusted productivity appear to have occurred as well. A comparison of estimated productivity growth in the nonfarm economy from to with the estimated growth from to indicates a slowdown of about % percentage points. Statistical analyses have been able to identify factors responsible for some of the decline but a significant part remains unexplained The slowdown in the growth of the capital-labor ratio may have contributed about one-fourth of a percentage point to the decline although some estimates put the figure higher. In earlier years the entry into the labor force of many young workers had a measurable impact on the decline but this factor has not been so important since Offsetting some of the loss however have been the improved training and health of the labor force The diversion of resources to comply with government regulation may have accounted for as much as three-tenths of a percentage point of the decline although the impact has not been so large in recent years. Many of these regulations have of course improved the quality of our environment and the health and safety of workers and consumers benefits that are not measured in business output and productivity statistics. But regulation has not always proceeded in the most effective and efficient manner and there is ample room for improvement. Administration initiatives to modernize the regulatory structure in some industries have improved productivity. ( The case of the airline industry is discussed in Chapter ) The relevance of research and development spending in explaining the decline of productivity is controversial. The real volume of resources devoted to research and development fell by percent between and but since the latter date it has increased steadily. However as a percentage of GNP total research and development spending has declined since the mid-1960s from percent in to percent in In private industry where the links between productivity and research and development are more firmly established real expenditures have increased steadily over the last two decades and have remained relatively stable as a share of GNP. More industrial research and development however has been aimed at compliance with regulatory requirements and this may affect its contribution to measured output especially in the short term. Moreover with the recent slowing of growth of the private capital stock fewer technological advances may have been embodied in equipment used in production. Federal support for research and development rose steadily during the early and middle years of the 1960s but in real terms declined by about one-fourth from fiscal to fiscal Government research and development support is concentrated in basic research and in military research however which affect business output and productivity only after very long lags. Thus this slowdown in Federal funding may have had little effect on measured productivity so far. And Federal obligations for research and development have increased by over percent in real terms since Finally some events such as sudden changes in energy prices or the impact of inflation on decisions by business and individuals may affect productivity in ways not yet understood. For example rapid increases in energy prices if sustained would make the operation of older energy-intensive equipment less profitable and may make some of our present knowledge less relevant. To the extent that energy and capital are complements in production rising energy prices may slow the rate of growth of the capital-labor ratio and labor productivity may fall. While this phenomenon probably played a role the available evidence does not suggest that it represents a major source of the decline in productivity since Since it is difficult to identify a single cause for a slowdown in productivity growth the immediate prospects for a dramatic improvement in productivity are not good. Most recommendations for policies to improve productivity have been directed at incentives to increase investment in human and physical capital as well as in research and development. Since the slower growth of physical capital is responsible for only a part of the decline in productivity growth efforts to stimulate business fixed investment will not solve all our productivity problem. Still improved investment performance is almost surely a necessary condition for higher productivity growth In last year 's Report the Council estimated the current trend rate of advance in productivity at V percent. Since the average rate of in2 crease during the past years has been below that figure the trend rate of increase may very well be still lower perhaps percent. Such a judgment however would give very heavy weight to last year 's sharp decline in productivity whose causes are not clearly understood. The Council has therefore decided to leave its estimate of the trend unchanged at 1V2 percent. It is recognized however that cyclically adjusted productivity growth in the immediate future may fall short of that figure POTENTIAL GNP The uncertainties surrounding the causes and extent of the decline in trend productivity make the assessment of the rate of growth of the economy 's productive potential most difficult. In last year 's Report the Council of Economic Advisers noted that the trend rate of growth of productivity since was extremely uncertain but apparently it was below the percent figure consistent with the V2 percent growth rate of potential GNP previously estimated Corollary evidence for this conclusion came from inaccurate predictions of the unemployment rate based on Okun 's law which describes the relation between the unemployment rate and the gap between actual and potential real GNP. If potential GNP growth had been at 3V2 percent from onward the unemployment rate in and would have been substantially higher than its actual level As a result of these considerations the Council concluded in the Report that potential GNP had grown at only a percent average rate in the years since With this downward revision the overpredictions of the unemployment rate by Okun 's law were brought within historical margins of error. Underlying this estimate of potential GNP growth was an assessment that productivity had grown on average at about percent per year perhaps one-half of percentage point below its long-term average. The shortfall of actual productivity growth from its trend was offset by average annual growth in the labor force about one-half of percent above its longterm average The projection made in the Report of potential GNP growth over the period was percent the same as the revised estimate for The estimated trend productivity growth underlying this projection was 1V2 percent implying that some part but less than half of the drop in productivity represented nonrecurring events and that the remainder derived from a lower trend rate of increase Developments during raised further questions about the long-term trend rate of increase in productivity as noted earlier Once again the unemployment rate was substantially less than would have been indicated by a projection based on a comparison between the rate of growth of actual GNP and the assumed growth rate of potential GNP. If potential GNP had been rising at percent actual economic growth of percent in the quarters of should have caused the unemployment rate to rise from in the fourth quarter of to about 6V2 percent in last year 's final quarter ; in fact the unemployment rate was unchanged over the period One year 's experience does not provide sufficient evidence to change the 1V2 percent estimate of long-term productivity advance that underlies the Council 's projection of a percent annual trend rate of growth in potential GNP. The drop in productivity however in the wake of a similar one in does reduce the confidence with which that estimate can be held. In any event the Council believes that cyclically adjusted productivity growth in the next years will not recover fully from its low and reach the V per2 cent trend. For this reason the estimate of the rate of growth of potential GNP has been reduced from to V2 percent during the years beginning with the first quarter of This temporarily lower growth of potential can be divided into the following components : an annual growth in potential employment of near percent an increase in productivity of about percent per year and a one-half of percent per year decline in hours per worker This estimate puts potential real GNP at $ billion in dollars in $ billion above the actual real GNP of $ billion as shown in Table By the fourth quarter of the gap between actual and potential GNP was $ billion in dollars During the period productivity growth should increase Improved growth in investment and a more experienced labor force should boost cyclically adjusted productivity growth during this period to a range of 1V2 to percent. A projected average annual increase of % percent in potential employment combined with an ex- TABLE Potential gross national product and benchmark unemployment rate [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Potential GNP Year Actual GNP GNP gap ( potential less actual ) Benchmark unemployment rate ( percent ) [ 97AZZZZZZZIZZZZZZZZZZZZI1ZZZ Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers pected yearly fall in hours of one-half of percent yields a growth in potential output over the period that is near percent Projections of potential GNP and in particular of cyclically adjusted productivity are always subject to wide margins of error. This is especially true now when the economy is adjusting to higher energy prices changes in comparative advantage in international trade and new trends in regulation GOALS OF ECONOMIC POLICY In the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act enacted with the support of this Administration specified procedures for developing and reviewing economic policies within the government and required the President to set 5-year goals for the U.S. economy. Last year the Economic Report of the President and the accompanying " Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers " discussed the act at length. In September the use of the principles in the act as a framework for making economic policy was reaffirmed in the National Accord reached by the Administration and American labor leaders The Humphrey-Hawkins Act incorporates both general and highly specific objectives for two of the most important indicators of the country 's economic health : the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation. The general objectives of the act and those of the Administration are to achieve full employment and reasonable price stability. The act is quite clear that reasonable price stability means ultimately achieving a zero rate of inflation. Full employment is not defined as any specific unemployment rate. The preamble to the act however indicates that the purpose of the legislation is " to translate into practical reality the right of all Americans who are able willing and seeking to work to full opportunity for useful paid employment at fair rates of compensation. " The act also establishes a balanced Federal budget as a high-priority goal of economic policy The act sets up specific milestones for the reduction of unemployment and inflation as the Nation proceeds toward the ultimate objectives. Interim goals of percent for the overall unemployment rate ( percent for adults ) and percent for inflation are set for The act requires that this year 's Economic Report include along with a review of the numerical goals and timetables for reducing unemployment and inflation and the goal of a balanced budget a report to the Congress on the degree of progress being made in these areas and a discussion of the policies being used to achieve these goals In this and subsequent Economic Reports the President may if he finds it necessary recommend modification of the existing timetable or timetables for achieving the interim goals of percent for the unemployment rate and percent for inflation Progress Toward Meeting the Humphrey-Haw kins Goals At the end of the overall unemployment rate was still close to percent. For blacks and other minorities the rate was over percent. The average duration of unemployment exceeded weeks and million discouraged workers stayed out of the labor force because they believed no jobs were available. A large part of the labor resources idled by the severe recession of the deepest of the postwar period still remained unemployed Since the fourth quarter of increases in employment have been extraordinarily large averaging nearly 3V2 percent per year Gains in employment have occurred for all major demographic groups ( Table ) TABLE Changes in employment and unemployment by demographic group fourth quarter to fourth quarter [ Seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Unemployment rate ( percent ) Employment Thousands of persons Group IV IV IV IV Percent change By sex : Male Female Total... By race and origin : White Black and other Hispanic origin By age : Adults ( years and over ) Teenagers ( years ) Black and other Adjusted for the increase of about in employment and labor force in January resulting from changes in the sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey Data on persons of Hispanic origin are tabulated separately without regard to race which means that such persons are also included in the data for white and black and other workers ; at the time of the Census approximately percent of their population was white. Data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics For blacks and other minority groups the percentage rise in employment was half again as large as for whites. Gains in employment among persons of Hispanic origin in percentage terms were about twice as large as for all workers. Aided by strongly expanded Federal jobs programs for youth employment among black teenagers grew by nearly percent. Since the number of black teenagers seeking work also climbed very sharply however their unemployment rate fell less rapidly and in December it was still an exceedingly high percent While unemployment rates declined for all major demographic groups disparities among the rates for different groups did not change appreciably. The unemployment rate late last year for blacks and other minorities was still about twice as high as that for whites ; the teenage unemployment rate was more than three times that for adults The most distressing feature of the unemployment record is the fact that the unemployment rates of black teenagers failed to decline significantly. To address this very serious problem the Administration has substantially increased the funds available during the past years to support employment and training programs for youth. Indeed despite a tight budget it has gone further. An important new initiative to improve the basic skills and the ability of disadvantaged youth to find and keep jobs is proposed in this year 's budget As discussed earlier in this chapter inflation has not declined during the past years ; in fact it has increased appreciably since A large part of the increase was due to developments in the food and energy sectors where aggregate demand policies and the voluntary pay and price standards have little influence. The underlying or longer-term rate of inflation however has also moved up considerably Progress in reducing the Federal budget deficit has been significant. The budget deficit has declined from $ billion ( percent of GNP ) in fiscal to a projected level of about $ billion in the fiscal year ( percent of GNP ) The budget for just submitted to the Congress moves the deficit substantially lower to $ billion. Sharp increases in oil prices have worsened the outlook for economic growth in If economic growth in and were strong enough to keep the unemployment rate from rising the expenditure programs and tax rates in the budget would yield a surplus Achieving the Goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act The next years will be difficult for the U.S. economy. As indicated earlier a mild recession is expected in the first half of this year and some increase in unemployment is likely. Economic growth is expected to resume later in and to continue through ; and the unemployment rate should begin to decline though it is not expected to fall below 7XA percent by the fourth quarter of Some progress in slowing inflation from the very high rate that occurred last year is foreseen ; but given the energy price increases now in train the rate of consumer price increases in is still likely to be close to 8V2 percent After years of relatively rapid growth during the recovery from the recession some slowdown in the rate of economic expansion in and would have occurred even under the best of circumstances. But we have not had the best of circumstances Huge OPEC oil price increases since the end of have made the outlook for economic growth much worse and have at the same time sharply increased inflation. Attempting to offset the deleterious effects on output and employment from the rise in the cost of oil by applying a very strong economic stimulus would make inflation worse and risk pushing it permanently into the double-digit range. The effect that a further worsening of inflation would have on long-term interest rates the exchange value of the dollar and investment plans would in turn frustrate the effort to keep output and employment on a rising course. Conversely applying draconian monetary and fiscal policies in an effort to suppress completely the inflationary results of the oil price increase and keep the economy on a path toward the Humphrey-Hawkins goal of percent inflation would produce a deep and extended recession without reducing inflation to the desired degree. During the next years appropriate economic policies can help the economy adjust to the impact of the OPEC price increases But no policies can change the realities which those increases impose. The world oil situation has caused a tremendous setback in the economic progress of all oil-importing nations Given this obstacle to economic progress the goals of a percent unemployment rate and percent inflation by are no longer practicable. Reduction of the unemployment rate to percent by starting from the level now expected in would require a growth of real GNP averaging about percent per year during and That would be a rate of growth higher than that in the first years following the recession of the deepest of the postwar period. Indeed no consecutive calendar years since the Korean war have produced a real GNP growth averaging over percent a year. Moreover efforts to achieve so high a growth rate through aggregate demand policies would be counterproductive. Their immediate result would be extremely strong upward pressure on wage rates costs and prices. As already noted this would undercut the basis for sustained economic expansion and postpone still further the date at which we could reasonably expect a return to a percent unemployment rate Reducing inflation from 8M2 percent in to percent by is an equally unrealistic expectation. Recent experience indicates that the momentum of inflation built up over the past years is extremely strong. A practical goal for reducing inflation must take this fact into account Because of these economic realities the President has used the authority provided to him in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act to extend the timetable for achieving a percent unemployment rate and percent inflation. The target year for achieving percent unemployment is now a 2-year deferment. The target year for achieving percent inflation has been postponed until years beyond that. Economic goals through consistent with this timetable are shown in Table TABLE Economic goals Item Level fourth quarter l Employment ( millions ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Consumer prices Real GNP Real disposable income Productivity Seasonally adjusted Based on real GNP per hour worked Source.- Council of Economic Advisers The short-term goals represent a forecast for and The medium-term goals for through are not forecasts but projections of the economic performance needed to achieve the unemployment rate and inflation goals within the Administration 's timetable. Long-term policies that will improve the prospects of meeting these targets are discussed in Chapter These projections through assume that growth of real potential GNP is 2V2 percent during this year and next and percent thereafter. Accordingly given the growth rates forecast for and real GNP growth from through would need to be quite rapid to achieve percent unemployment by The projection shows growth at a percent rate in and followed by a deceleration as the economy approaches percent unemployment The rate of inflation is projected to slow steadily to just under percent by Faster deceleration would be desirable but difficult to attain particularly in light of the prospect discussed in Chapter that energy prices will probably continue to rise faster than other prices. Progress against inflation along the lines projected would have an important salutary effect on inflationary expectations however and would greatly add to the chances of reducing inflation still further in subsequent years As last year 's Economic Report pointed out reducing unemployment to percent and at the same time achieving steady progress in curbing inflation constitutes an enormous challenge. The rate of unemployment has continuously exceeded percent since early Over the past decade however inflation has increased substantially stimulated by large increases in oil prices and the slowdown in productivity growth The Administration believes that simultaneous progress toward the unemployment rate and inflation goals can not be made by relying solely on aggregate demand policies. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act also recognizes this fact. To be sure a reduction of inflation over the long term will require continued application of restraint in monetary and fiscal policies. Braking the momentum of inflation will also require the widespread and sustained compliance of business and labor with the voluntary pay and price standards. If output and employment are to be kept growing satisfactorily while growth of aggregate demand is restrained specific policies are needed to improve productivity and reduce the impact from outside inflationary shocks. Chapters and in this Report discuss a number of such measures. First among these is the Administration 's long-term energy program designed to promote conservation and to help in the development of alternative energy sources that will make us gradually less vulnerable to OPEC price increases that add to unemployment and inflation Also included among these longer-term measures and discussed in Chapters and are grain reserve policies designed to prevent worldwide crop shortages from leading to sharp increases in food prices ; regulatory reform policies to foster competition in currently regulated industries and ensure cost-effective social regulations ; cooperative efforts with other oil-consuming countries to match oil imports with available production and thus avoid a costly scramble for petroleum supplies ; and trade policies designed to secure the advantages of a free flow of imports for American consumers to give American businesses access to expanding world markets and to improve procedures for the protection of American workers and businesses from unfair trade practices Progress toward the goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act will also require policies that reduce structural unemployment through carefully targeted jobs programs especially for minorities and youth. The Administration has launched a number of such programs since In a new structural employment component was added to title II of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ( CETA ) establishing a category of public service jobs especially for the disadvantaged and the long-term unemployed. The legislation also provided new resources for employment and training opportunities in private industry and private industry councils have been established in nearly all local CETA jurisdictions. In addition under CETA particularly in the Youth Employment and Demonstration Projects Act special employment and training programs have been established for the young giving particular attention to the disadvantaged. Outlays for the Department of Labor 's youth employment and training programs have tripled since The Revenue Act of contained a targeted income tax credit to encourage the employment of disadvantaged persons particularly those between the ages of and The Administration has also worked vigorously for its proposed welfare reform which would make benefit levels uniform and expand work and training opportunities for the poor thus moving the country closer to the President 's goal of providing job opportunities for all Americans. A major demonstration project has been initiated to help in the design of the program Further as mentioned previously a significant new initiative is included in the budget this year to improve basic educational and job skills among the Nation 's disadvantaged young people. This program is described further in Chapter CONCLUSION Progress toward our goal of a high-employment economy with reasonably stable prices was interrupted last year by the effects of sharply rising oil prices on economic growth and inflation. Achieving both a percent unemployment rate and percent inflation by was an ambitious goal a year ago ; developments of this past year indicate now that it is impossible. A reasonable degree of success in attaining our objectives will take somewhat longer As last year 's Economic Report pointed out the most difficult obstacle to achieving our national economic goals is the tendency of inflationary forces to intensify as the economy approaches full utilization of its human and capital resources. This obstacle still exists ; in fact increased real prices of energy make it even greater. The challenge for economic policy in the near term is to prevent last year 's higher energy prices from becoming embedded in the structure of costs and industrial prices thereby worsening inflation for years to come and delaying even longer the achievement of our economic goals. The challenge over the longer run is to strengthen our defenses against the effects of OPEC price and supply decisions and reduce the inflationary forces that accompany high employment through measures to increase productivity and to lower structural unemployment. Longterm policies to meet these needs are the subject of Chapter CHAPTER Longer-Term Policies for Stability and Growth THE CONTROL AND REDUCTION OF INFLATION is the Nation 's highest economic priority requiring fiscal and monetary policies that restrain demand not only in the immediate future but over an extended period. We also need policies to improve the structure and functioning of the economy in order to increase the effectiveness of demand restraint in lowering inflation and to reduce its depressing influence on output and employment. Such supply and structural policies are also important because they address two other tasks facing the American economy : restoring the Nation 's productivity growth and making the necessary adjustments to scarce energy supplies The first part of this chapter outlines the broad framework of aggregate demand restraint consistent with a sustained attack on inflation and touches briefly on the strengths and limitations of this means of controlling inflation over the long run. The bulk of the chapter is devoted to a discussion of supply and structural problems It examines how productivity and output are affected by the pace of business investment and by measures to reform regulatory policies improve the operation of labor markets promote energy conservation and expand energy supplies. It also discusses ways to reduce the economy 's vulnerability to inflationary shocks in the areas of energy and food THE NEED TO REDUCE INFLATION As Chapter emphasized the most immediate goal of anti-inflation policy must be to prevent the recent price increases for energy and housing from spilling over into the rest of the economy. Success in that endeavor will still leave the country 's inflation rate far too high. On the basis of measures of inflation in sectors other than energy and housing and taking account of longer-term trends in unit labor costs the underlying inflation rate currently appears to be in the neighborhood of to percent Each new round of inflation since the mid-1960s has left us with a higher underlying inflation rate. Without long-term policies to reduce the current underlying rate of to percent the economy will remain vulnerable to still further increases. These could come from a variety of sources. Another sharp increase in oil prices or a worldwide crop shortage could be the impetus for the next turn of the ratchet. A sudden and unanticipated surge in private spending could temporarily overheat the economy and spur inflation. Moreover failure to lower inflation significantly after the latest inflationary episode would strengthen long-run inflationary expectations and erode resistance to future wage and price increases. Over the longer term therefore we must either have policies in place to reduce the underlying rate of inflation or in all likelihood face worsening inflation Successfully unwinding inflation over the coming years will require policies that address each of its three major long-run determinants : the rate of growth of nominal wages profits and other income ; the pace at which productivity advances ; and the occurrence of outside inflationary events. First the rise in hourly wages and other income has to be reduced in order to bring down the rate at which costs are rising. While the task of economic policy at the moment after a year of substantial increase in energy and housing prices is to prevent the acceleration of wages and other costs the longer-run objective of substantially reducing inflation can only be achieved by decreasing the rate of growth in nominal incomes. Second curbing the rise of unit costs also requires that the rate of productivity growth be improved. For the economy as a whole short-run changes in the rate of productivity growth do not seem to affect the growth of money wages which depends principally on the state of aggregate demand and the momentum of past inflation. As a consequence measures that improve efficiency and speed up productivity growth not only raise real living standards but retard the growth of unit labor costs and thus lower the underlying rate of inflation. The dismal productivity performance of the American economy in recent years calls urgently for improvement. Much of the rise in unit labor costs over the past several years appears to derive not from an acceleration of wage increases but from the fall in productivity growth Finally the Nation must improve its ability to cope with such shocks as worldwide crop shortages or sudden increases in the world price of oil. These periodic events whose effects have been especially severe in the past decade do not cause merely temporary spurts in inflation. They do more permanent damage through the formal indexing and informal mechanisms that many groups in society resort to in an attempt to raise their money incomes and escape the burden of the initial price shocks. If widespread these mechanisms can not make up for the loss in real income but they do raise the underlying rate of inflation CONTROLLING AGGREGATE DEMAND The President 's budget for calls for increased fiscal restraint Chapter estimates the degree of restraint and explains the necessity for using the budget as an anti-inflation tool even in a period of weakening economic growth The specific fiscal and monetary policies needed to reduce inflation will necessarily vary from year to year depending principally upon the strength or weakness of the private economy and the actual course of inflation and unemployment. Nevertheless some broad principles can be laid down to guide fiscal and monetary policy toward a long-term reduction in the underlying rate of inflation Reducing the Groivth of Nominal GNP While monetary and fiscal policies can to some extent directly affect the rate of inflation through their impact on inflationary expectations their principal influence comes indirectly through their effect on the growth of total spending or nominal gross national product ( GNP ) If inflation is to be reduced over the long run the growth of nominal GNP must decline. At one level this is simply an arithmetic truism. The growth rate of nominal GNP approximately equals the rate of growth of real output plus the rate of inflation. If real output increases by percent and prices rise by percent nominal GNP will thus increase by about percent. A long-term reduction in the rate of inflation in an economy growing at or close to its potential rate necessarily implies a decline in the growth rate of nominal GNP But the proposition is more than a truism. Because there is a momentum to inherited inflation this year 's underlying rate of wage and price increase is likely to perpetuate itself next year unless other forces counteract it. In the absence of significant economic slack therefore monetary and fiscal policies which aim at a continuation of last year 's rate of growth in nominal GNP are likely to perpetuate last year 's underlying rate of inflation. Indeed failure to resist such perpetuation of inflation may arouse inflationary expectations and thereby produce a further increase in inflation particularly after the economy has been shocked by soaring energy prices. On the other hand if monetary and fiscal policies reduce the growth of nominal GNP the persistence of wage and price increases at undiminished rates would necessarily lessen the growth of output and create more idle capacity and unemployment. Increased economic slack generates greater resistance to wage and price increases ; and the degree to which wage and price increases respond determines the division of reduced growth in nominal GNP between a reduction in output and a decline in the inflation rate Unfortunately as the Economic Report of the President discussed at length the overall rate of wage and price increases in the American economy while not immune to the effects of idle capacity and unemployment is not highly sensitive to moderate changes in economic slack. Using monetary and fiscal policies to produce a very sharp and immediate reduction in the growth of nominal GNP in the hope of reducing inflation quickly by a large amount would almost surely fail. It would produce a large decline in output and employment and only a modest reduction in the underlying rate of inflation In such circumstances the political consensus needed to continue policies of restraint on aggregate demand would be short lived. The most appropriate course is likely to be monetary and fiscal restraint that aims for a long-term decline in the growth of nominal GNP and produces a gradual but steady lowering of inflation. Persistence in this endeavor moreover would improve the expectations about future inflation and as a result prices and wages might respond more readily to economic slack than they have in the past In the context of such monetary and fiscal policies standards for moderation in setting wages and prices become a means not only of reducing inflation but also of increasing jobs and output. If the pay and price standards succeed this year in stabilizing the underlying rate of inflation they can be directed in later years to the more difficult task of reducing that rate. Over the longer term the challenge is to develop standards and approaches that are sufficiently specific to be self-administered by most employers and employee groups but flexible enough to avoid rigidity and misallocation of resources. The National Accord between labor leadership and the Administration provides a framework for developing such standards Similarly in the context of a long-run aggregate demand policy dedicated to reducing inflation the supply and structural policies discussed later in the chapter also take on a new meaning. Many of these measures are designed to speed up the rate of productivity growth. To the extent that they succeed the growth of output is likely to be higher for any given reduction in the growth of nominal GNP. Moreover an increase in the long-term rate of productivity growth raises the potential growth rate and thus output can rise more rapidly without putting any greater demand pressure on product or labor markets. As a consequence a lesser degree of monetary and fiscal restraint is needed to produce a decline in the inflation rate. Policies that improve supply thus make possible an eventual relaxation of the monetary and fiscal constraints on the growth of aggregate demand without endangering the effort to reduce inflation Some General Principles The general principles that must guide economic policies designed to reduce the inherited underlying rate of inflation over the long run can be summarized in four propositions : ( ) The rate of inflation can be reduced only if fiscal and monetary policies over the long term aim at lowering the rate of growth of nominal GNP. ( ) Because of the momentum of underlying inflation such restraint in fiscal and monetary policies will operate to retard output and employment somewhat compared to what might have been achieved in a noninflationary economy. ( ) Greater moderation in wage and price decisions by business and labor will result in correspondingly smaller losses in output and employment growth as growth in nominal GNP falls. ( ) Measures that successfully increase the Nation 's efficiency in using its human and capital resources not only directly reduce inflation but also improve standards of living and make possible some relaxation of fiscal and monetary restraint thereby promoting a faster growth in national output and employment The goal of a long-term reduction in the nominal growth of GNP still leaves room for adapting fiscal and monetary policy to shorterrun changes in economic conditions. In the first place the objective of a long-term decline in nominal GNP growth has to allow for some year-to-year variations. In for example real output is expected to decline while subsequent recovery would raise GNP growth moderately above potential for a time. Anti-inflation policy this year will be successful if it does no more than stabilize the rate of underlying inflation after a series of huge oil price increases. Substantial reductions in inflation must come later. Taking all of these factors into account the maintenance of an overall framework of monetary and fiscal restraint during the next several years is likely to be consistent with a growth of nominal GNP that declines substantially in and then rises in and Furthermore any given growth of nominal GNP might require more or less restraint from monetary or fiscal policy depending upon the strength of private demand. When the growth of private spending promises to be very strong aggregate demand should be further restrained to prevent nominal GNP from growing too rapidly When private demand is very weak the desired growth in nominal GNP may require more expansive policies. The long-term reduction of inflation does not mean that fiscal and monetary policy must be locked into a fixed position. But it does require adjustments around an average degree of demand restraint that produces declining inflation over the long run and is therefore greater than would be appropriate in less inflationary times In one respect the necessities of the long-term fight against inflation have a very particular implication for the way in which specific decisions ought to be made about short-run adjustments of monetary and fiscal policies. Monetary and fiscal policies exert their effects on the economy only after some time. Hence they must be based on economic forecasts which are often in error ; makers of economic policy must take this fact into account. A world in which the momentum of past inflation is very strong and in which inflationary expectations are easily aroused produces asymmetric risks. If expansive monetary or fiscal actions are undertaken on the basis of an erroneous forecast that economic activity will weaken the underlying inflation rate may well worsen for many years to come. On the other hand if expansive actions are forgone because of a mistakenly optimistic forecast the resulting unexpected declines in output and employment while still costly can be remedied more surely and quickly than if the error had been in the other direction These considerations do not warrant a rigid and unbending policy but they do indicate the need for continuing prudence and caution in monetary and fiscal decisions. To be acceptable the case for relaxing monetary and fiscal restraint now and in the near future will have to be more urgent and much clearer than it was in earlier and less inflationary periods As events of the past decade have made painfully clear monetary and fiscal policy must be prepared to cope with sudden inflationary forces arising from events like a worldwide crop shortage or a large increase in world oil prices. Such supply shocks have two inflationary effects. First they directly increase prices of the affected commodities ; second they threaten to induce larger wage increases and efforts to restore profit margins which generate higher prices throughout the economy If before the supply shock monetary and fiscal policies were set to produce a decline in the growth of nominal GNP and in the rate of inflation how should they now be adjusted ? To suppress even the direct inflationary consequences of an abrupt increase in food or oil prices fiscal and monetary policy would have to be sufficiently tightened that the reduction in price and wage inflation outside the affected sector would offset the price shock within the sector. But given the relative insensitivity of wages and prices to economic slack such a policy would lead to unacceptably severe reductions in output and employment. On the other hand an effort to avoid any loss in output and employment from the supply shock would require supporting aggregate demand to the point where no resistance would be offered to the wage-price spiral triggered by the price shock. Such a policy would raise the underlying rate of inflation setting back for many years the long-term goal of reducing inflation. A practical alternative would be to accommodate the direct inflationary effects of the shock but through a combination of monetary and fiscal policies and wageprice guidelines to seek to stabilize the rate of wage and price increase elsewhere in the economy. Thus monetary and fiscal policy would recognize the inevitability of a temporary addition to inflation but would fight vigorously any tendencies to increase the underlying rate. Such a policy would lead to some temporary loss of output. But the direct inflationary effects of the supply shock would gradually disappear and the economic slack would itself moderate the indirect effects. At some cost the economy could absorb the supply shock and return to its previous path of increasing output and declining inflation Finally one must be clear about measuring restraint in fiscal policy. This Administration has committed itself to reducing the share of Federal spending in GNP. At the same time however in the absence of tax cuts the progressivity of the tax system generates Federal revenues that grow faster than GNP producing increasing fiscal restraint. ( Table estimates the growth of fiscal drag in and ) Tax reductions become necessary at times to prevent excessive fiscal restraint and need not in themselves be inconsistent with a general policy of fiscal restraint. However the timing and magnitude of such reductions must be decided on the basis of prevailing and expected economic conditions. Tax reductions at the appropriate time could be quite consistent with the maintenance of restraint ; taken prematurely they could induce an excessive growth in nominal GNP and thus thwart the achievement of long-run anti-inflation objectives. Proper timing for tax reductions must also take into account the asymmetry of risks discussed on the previous page. The President 's budget for was drawn up in accordance with these considerations IMPROVING THE STRUCTURAL PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY While a long-term strategy of restraint on the growth of aggregate demand is essential in bringing down the underlying rate of inflation it can not accomplish the task by itself without serious costs in the form of reduced growth in real incomes. Over the longer run there is simply no alternative to increasing the efficiency with which the economy produces goods and services. " Supply-side " policies to achieve this end fall into two general categories : those that improve the productivity of human and capital resources and those that help insulate the economy from the price-increasing effects of supply shocks Supply-side policies do not produce quick and dramatic results They operate slowly and sometimes only after a considerable lag. But unless we successfully pursue them we can not achieve the high rates of economic growth stable prices and full employment set forth as goals in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act MEETING THE ENERGY CHALLENGE The immediate economic consequences of the sharp rise in world oil prices in have focused attention on the short-term effects of tighter energy supplies. Developments over the last year have a deeper significance however. They confirm that rising energy prices are not a transient phenomenon but something the Nation must adjust to. This adjustment will place a significant burden on the economy but it can not be avoided. Attempts to do so will damage the Nation 's growth prospects and its competitiveness in the world economy Over the long run and with proper policies the United States can make a successful transition to a world of higher energy prices. With energy conservation and the timely development of alternative energy supplies growth in output and improvements in our living standards need be only modestly reduced by the relative scarcity of energy supplies. The task of energy policy is tw7ofold : to promote over the long run an efficient and orderly adjustment to a world of scarcer and more costly energy supplies and in the interim to reduce the Nation 's vulnerability to the transitional economic costs of sudden increases in oil prices and disruptions in supply REDUCING VULNERABILITY IN THE SHORT RUN Over the longer term the Administration 's energy program will accomplish substantial reductions in oil imports. In the short run however the Nation 's dependence on imported oil is likely to remain uncomfortably high. The President has pledged that the United States will never again import more oil than it did during : a net of million barrels per day. During both imports and oil consumption fell considerably because of a number of factors including physical shortages in the spring conservation induced by the sharp increases in energy prices and policies to promote conservation and conversion to non-oil energy sources. A continuing decline in domestic demand for petroleum products is forecast for However uncertainty about further sharp price increases and supply disruptions keep the balance between supply and demand in the world oil market precarious. Measures to limit the Nation 's vulnerability over the shorter term are therefore necessary The most effective means of moderating the impact of supply disruptions is to change the conditions which permit large and sudden price increases. To the extent that world demand for oil can be reduced the price-raising pressures of demand against supply will be relieved. Similarly by developing a mechanism for responding to any cutbacks in oil supply with a coordinated reduction in demand the major oil-consuming countries acting together can reduce the competitive scramble for oil and thus lessen the bidding up of prices in the spot market. High spot market prices would encourage further official price increases by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) Chapter discusses the efforts now under way by the United States and other major oil-consuming countries in the International Energy Agency to achieve these very important objectives While international cooperation is essential so are national measures. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve ( SPR ) is intended to cushion the impact of any abrupt cutoff in supply. Purchases for the SPR were halted last year at the onset of the Iranian crisis. In August the reserve contained million barrels far short of its target If conditions permit during the year ahead SPR purchases could resume. An adequate Strategic Petroleum Reserve combined with private stocks will provide considerable protection for the United States against supply interruptions. The SPR will also buy time for other responses to disruptions such as mandatory conservation measures to be put in place Finally we also need to have measures in readiness so that if a severe disruption occurs available supplies will be distributed both fairly and efficiently. While the price system is likely to be the most efficient ( and in some respects the fairest ) way of handling minor interruptions in supply it should not be relied on as the sole remedy for interruptions of all magnitudes. In response to recent legislation the Administration is developing a standby motor fuel rationing plan for submission to the Congress. Under that legislation the rationing plan may be put into effect in situations where the shortfall in gasoline diesel fuel and heating oil supplies is expected to exceed percent for more than days. ( Using figures this shortfall would amount to approximately million barrels per day. ) A notable feature of the plan is a " white market " for trading unused ration coupons. All motorists would be assured a certain minimum supply of fuel but those wishing more would be free to purchase it at marketclearing prices The Nation must also be capable of dealing with smaller supply disruptions. As we learned this past year even cutoffs of less than percent of supply can significantly disrupt normal activity and hence the Administration is preparing proposals for standby measures to be applied when smaller disruptions occur LONGER-TERM IMPROVEMENTS A key aim in the Administration 's energy program is to move as quickly as feasible to a rational pricing policy for energy. Price controls are being removed from domestic oil and natural gas so that the market can direct efficient use of energy and encourage the production of additional supplies Unfortunately reliance on the market will not be enough. Habits of energy consumption learned over decades of falling real energy prices are difficult to change. Furthermore the benefits to our national and economic security from reducing our dependence on foreign oil exceed even the high price we must now pay for this oil. For both of these reasons there is room for measures that mandate additional energy conservation and encourage investment in new sources of energy Gradual Decontrol of Domestic Natural Gas and Crude Oil Prices The enactment of the Administration 's proposal for deregulation of natural gas began what is to be a gradual decontrol of gas prices. The initial steps toward decontrol have already been beneficial. The decline in yearly additions to reserves has been halted and natural gas previously confined to intrastate channels can now enter the interstate market. Price flexibility is also helping to redirect supplies to relatively more valuable uses In April the President announced that he would phase out price controls on domestically produced oil. Decontrol began on June with the release of controls on the price of newly discovered oil ( oil discovered since January ) At that same time percent of all " marginal " oil ( oil produced from wells of various depths yielding to barrels per day ) was allowed to be sold at a substantially higher ( but still controlled ) price. In August the President announced the immediate decontrol of " heavy " crude oil an extremely viscous oil produced mainly in California. In December the definition of heavy oil was broadened slightly exempting still more oil from controls. These initial decontrol steps had little impact on the economy however because they affected a relatively small proportion of the domestically produced oil In January the pace of decontrol accelerated as the price of most domestically produced oil began to move steadily toward the world price. Decontrol is scheduled to be completed by October Decontrol of domestic crude oil prices will provide strong unambiguous signals encouraging conservation and stimulating do- mestic energy supplies. According to recent estimates by the Department of Energy and the Congressional Budget Office by decontrol will result in U.S. oil imports being at least million barrels per day lower than they would be otherwise The Effect of Higher Prices on Oil Consumption Some continue to doubt that higher energy prices significantly reduce energy demand. Because the elasticity of demand for most petroleum products is somewhat smaller than that for other familiar commodities and is less than unity economists have called the demand for petroleum products inelastic. This fact combined with a widespread belief that use of energy in general and gasoline in particular is essential has led to the erroneous conclusion that price would have no impact on demand. However economists who have studied the question have almost invariably found statistical evidence that gasoline demand is indeed responsive to price. In the majority of studies estimated short-run ( 1-year ) price elasticities of demand for gasoline range between minus and minus ( Thus a percent rise in price will lead to a reduction of to percent in consumption. ) Longer-run ( 5-year ) elasticities are significantly higher generally between minus and minus Even before the dramatic price rise of last year there were signs that the price of energy was cutting into demand. Table shows that after the oil embargo the growth in per capita gasoline consumption was much slower than in the years immediately preceding it even though real per capita income rose at approximately the same rate during the two periods. While this finding is partly explained by improvements in the fuel efficiency of automobiles there was also a sharp reduction in automobile use. By the end of the average miles traveled per car was slightly below the average. If trends before the embargo had continued the figure would have been percent higher Of course gasoline is not the only energy source whose demand is influenced by price. The final item in Table shows that increases in total per capita energy use slowed dramatically after the embargo. If the trends of the preceding years had continued total use would have been percent higher the equivalent of nearly million barrels of oil per day During additional evidence accumulated that energy demand is responsive to price. Preliminary estimates indicate that demand for all petroleum products ( as measured by disappearances from primary stocks ) fell by percent between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of Demand for gasoline fell by percent Preliminary estimates also suggest that miles traveled per car dropped about percent from levels. Although waiting in line TABLE Gasoline consumption and energy use [ Percent change ] to Item teal per capita income to teal gasoline price Per capita gasoline consumption Per capita total energy use Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Energy ( Energy Information Administration ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers for gasoline surely contributed to these dramatic reductions there is no doubt that sharply higher prices were a primary factor Side Effects of Crude Oil Decontrol : Windfall Profits and Impact on LowerIncome Groups Decontrol has inevitable side effects which public policy must address. Decontrol generates substantial windfall profits and reduces the real incomes of consumers. Gradual phasing in of decontrol can mitigate those effects but it can not entirely eliminate them. Other measures are therefore needed Decontrol of domestic crude oil will transfer very substantial revenues from users of petroleum products to domestic crude oil producers. While some of these increased revenues will stimulate additional domestic production a large proportion will represent pure windfalls revenues that owners of oil properties receive solely because of actions taken by others. Windfalls do nothing to increase supplies. The windfall profits tax will divert a significant portion of these revenues to public uses that will help the economy to adjust to higher oil prices. Through the combined effect of the corporate income tax and the windfall profits tax the Federal Government will collect considerably more than half of the additional net revenues accruing to producers. Certain States will also collect substantial additional revenues through their own tax systems Recent sharp increases in energy prices have had a significant impact on low-income households. A portion of the windfall profits tax will be used to cushion this blow. Public policy must try to offset the drain on the incomes of poor households from higher energy prices without blunting the incentive to conserve energy. Policies which directly reduce the perceived price of energy should obviously be avoided. But even income supplement programs which might not appear to influence decisions at the margin may blunt impulses toward conservation. The weaker the link between the amount of assistance and the family 's actual energy consumption the less interfer- ence there will be with conservation incentives but the greater the likelihood will be that some poor families needing relatively large amounts of energy may have significant losses of income. The Administration 's low-income energy assistance program represents a reasonable compromise in adjusting assistance to need without blunting conservation incentives The program provides two types of assistance to low-income households. The first is the special energy allowance which provides assistance to recipients of supplemental security income and will provide grants to States to be distributed according to the energy-related needs of the low-income population. This program will cost $ billion in increasing to $ billion in and later years The second is the energy crisis assistance program. It provides payments of $ million per year that States can use to help low-income households with critical emergencies related to energy : the need to repair home heating systems pay overdue heating bills and obtain additional clothing or food. In the program will be completely financed by the Federal Government but in it will become a matching-grant program with the States. After $ billion in windfall profits tax revenues will be used annually for these programs to assist low-income individuals and families The Case for Additional Conservation and Supply Incentives Although the incentives for increased energy conservation as well as for increased energy supplies must come principally from market prices a strong case can be made for supplementary measures to push conservation and supply decisions beyond what the market dictates. The most telling argument is that the cost to the Nation of substantial dependence on imports exceeds the price that U.S. citizens pay for imported oil First the United States is the world 's largest importer of oil accounting for about one-fourth of all world oil imports. Reductions in U.S. import demand will help ease pressures for higher prices in the world oil market. Second the bill for imported oil adds substantially to the Nation 's trade deficit. Reducing this bill will tend to strengthen the dollar thereby lowering the cost of all imports. Third an intangible but exceedingly important consideration is the cost to our security entailed by an excessive reliance on imported oil. The events of the past year graphically demonstrate these costs The conservation incentives in the Administration 's energy policy are targeted to reach nearly every significant use of energy. Illustrations here will focus on two such uses : automobiles and residential space heating and cooling Fuel economy standards for autos. Automobiles represent the country 's single largest user of petroleum products. As of American motorists were burning over billion gallons of gasoline per year almost percent of total domestic energy use. Between and the average number of miles traveled per gallon of fuel consumed by newly produced cars dropped by percent Even though this trend was reversed in the model year the Energy Policy and Conservation Act passed in December required that automobile manufacturers substantially increase their improvements in fuel efficiency. By the average fuel efficiency of new cars must reach at least miles per gallon ( EPA test basis ) While the relation between the Environmental Protection Agency 's ( EPA ) estimates and actual mileage is uncertain current estimates indicate that actual mileage for new cars is about percent of the EPA figures Sharply higher gasoline prices in have caused consumer demand to shift toward smaller and more fuel-efficient cars. Due to the standards this demand will be more easily accommodated The effect that improving the fuel economy of cars will have on domestic demand for energy will be substantial. Because of the time it takes to replace the entire fleet of domestic automobiles the full effects of these improvements will not be felt until the mid-1990s But by then even if the annual average number of miles driven per car does not fall significantly from present levels and even if the fleet continues to grow the total amount of fuel consumed by U.S passenger cars will be only about two-thirds of what it was in This savings would translate into about million barrels of gasoline per day. To the extent that higher gasoline prices reduce the miles traveled per car and that further improvements in automobile fuel economy occur after the reduction in total gasoline consumption could be significantly greater Residential space heating and cooling. Residential space heating and cooling account for about percent of all the energy consumed in the United States. This figure can be significantly cut by several relatively simple and inexpensive steps. Raising thermostat settings during the summer and lowering them during the winter directly reduce energy use and costs though they entail some discomfort. Other measures such as increased insulation and making structures more weatherproof require investment but increase the efficiency with which any given degree of comfort can be attained. It is difficult to induce millions of individuals to undertake such changes. The single most important inducement for residential users to conserve energy will be the higher prices now confronting them. Indeed higher prices may be the only way to bring about permanent changes Ill A targeted program of incentives can nevertheless accelerate investments in insulation and weatherproofing. The Administration 's program to encourage energy conservation in residential structures requires that electric and gas utilities offer to perform " energy audits " of their customers ' residences thus enabling households to pinpoint sources of serious heat losses and learn how to remedy them The program also provides financial assistance to households for installing insulation caulking weatherstripping storm windows and fuel-saving heating equipment. Households at all income levels are helped in various ways. For example a percent tax credit on the first $ spent on qualified conservation measures is available to any household. Households with low or moderate incomes may apply for a direct interest subsidy of up to percent with a limit of $ per loan. ( This limit includes the value of any tax credit taken. ) The Weatherization Grant Program goes even further in assisting families with low incomes ; it supplies grants for qualified energy-saving measures. Supplementing these provisions the program requires that utilities offer to help customers finance the energy-saving measures they may need to take Special incentives are available to encourage use of solar energy Builders of new structures utilizing passive solar technology may be eligible for a tax credit up to $ per residence or $ per commercial building. A tax credit of up to $ is available for new homes with active solar systems. A proposed Solar Bank would provide interest subsidies of up to percent on loans for equipment to convert to solar energy The improvements that these programs and higher energy prices could produce are impressive. One private study estimates that by incorporating in existing and new residential structures only those technological improvements in heating systems and building shells that are economically justifiable at an energy price equivalent to $ per barrel for oil the total U.S. consumption of energy for residential heating could be reduced to about half its level by the year This translates into a reduction in energy demand equivalent to approximately million barrels of oil per day Developing Additional Domestic Supplies of Energy Policies to stimulate savings in energy must be supplemented by programs to add to domestic supplies of energy. Even after decontrol the unaided market place may not in all instances generate the needed investment in new energy supplies. Or it may do so more slowly than is desirable especially in the case of investments involving new technology for increasing the supply of energy The synthetic fuels program. Events of the past few years have demonstrated that future oil prices are hard to estimate. Yet a private investor must predict not only the level but also the path of world oil prices in deciding whether to undertake a development project for synthetic fuel The difficulty is more than statistical. If world oil prices were market determined then an investor might reasonably estimate when the rising world oil price would so far exceed the cost of commercializing a given synthetic fuel technology that he would be compensated for the risk of proceeding. But world oil prices are not market determined. The present price reflects both demand considerations ( including the demand for increased stocks ) and OPEC 's desired production levels. The latter incorporate the OPEC countries ' assessment of the oil prices they can charge in the future The cost of producing synthetic fuels in commercial quantities however can have an important effect on this judgment. As the prospects of substantial supplies of synthetic fuels increase OPEC countries may be induced to expand their own oil production considerably because of the depressing effect of this development on the value of their oil reserves. Thus the potential investor faces a risk that the world price of oil will be less than his break-even point ; he has little chance of making much more than a going rate of return on his capital Few private concerns would be willing to invest in synthetic fuels on the basis of forecasts that world oil prices will rise by a given amount They would more likely wait until the world oil price came fairly close to the estimated cost of synthetic fuel production. This would not present a problem if a synthetic fuels industry could be developed quickly but more than a decade will probably be required before much capacity can be brought into operation A paradox here underlines the need for some governmental role The more OPEC countries are convinced that high oil prices will bring a large synthetic fuels industry into existence the more their own decisions are likely to lead to moderate pricing. But the more potential investors fear this reaction from OPEC the less likely they are to make the investments needed for developing a large-scale synthetic fuels industry on their own In addition to such price risks new products like synthetic fuels involve serious technological uncertainties. Several processes may be able to produce synthetic liquid fuels. The absolute and relative costs of each are highly uncertain. Given the large capital costs the risk of picking the wrong technology could discourage private commercialscale investment in any one The preceding argument applies equally to all of the so-called unconventional sources of energy. The development of a significant domestic capacity to produce liquid fuels from biomass a substantial increase in the use of solar energy or the development of major new sources of natural gas would all tend to limit the rise in OPEC prices to a degree that depends on the cost at which each resource could be brought to market. The Administration is strongly supporting programs in each of these areas tailored to the specific technological characteristics and the current state of development During the past year techniques which would tap the Nation 's vast supplies of coal and shale and biomass were singled out for special attention. These now seem to be at a stage where a focused effort might hasten their commercial use. The Administration has therefore proposed the creation of an independent government corporation to assist in this major undertaking The Energy Security Corporation ( ESC ) will have a number of instruments at its disposal. It will be able to use at its discretion both loan guarantees and outright loans to assist private enterprises pursuing approved synthetic fuel projects. The Corporation will also be able to shelter to some extent the developing concerns from the risks they would otherwise face because of the uncertainty of future oil prices. Purchasing agreements or price guarantees will be arranged at firm prices for the project output but the agreements will require private enterprise to bear a fair share of the risks. The variety of instruments available to the Energy Security Corporation increase its ability to assist recipients without removing the normal incentives to exercise prudent judgment and keep costs to a minimum The Energy Security Corporation will also be able to participate in cooperative or joint ventures with private companies. In an extremely limited number of cases it may also construct and operate facilities for processes that have technical merit but can not be sufficiently developed by other means IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ECONOMY The energy policy initiatives undertaken during this Administration will sharply alter both the future consumption of energy in this country and the range of energy sources. Most important the Nation 's reliance on oil especially imported oil will be cut. By the end of the decade the economy will be well on its way toward completing this transition one of the most important and difficult it has ever faced Total U.S. energy use in amounted to quadrillion Btu ( quads ) Estimates for made soon after the oil price rise were as high as quads. More recent forecasts have been re- vised sharply downward and seem to be clustering near quads. Given recent rapid increases in oil prices even lower figures can be expected The composition of expected demand for fuels reflects a relatively more rapid rise in the price of oil. In nearly half of the country 's primary energy demand was met by petroleum. In most present forecasts this share falls sharply ; some project it to be as low as onethird by Removal of price controls on domestic crude oil will ensure that the highest possible share will be met by domestically produced oil In mid-July the Department of Energy estimated that the various steps already taken or announced would reduce oil imports to approximately million barrels per day by far less than earlier estimates of imports which were as high as million barrels per day. Events since July have reinforced the belief that record levels of oil imports are already behind us Requirements for Higher Investment Levels Changes in private consumption and production in response to higher energy prices the supplemental conservation measures induced by regulation and the development of new unconventional sources of energy in the United States will all require substantial investments by both the private and the public sectors. Estimates vary but the following figures ( all in dollars ) give some idea of the possible magnitudes The Department of Energy has estimated that the domestic oil and gas sector will need to invest an average of $ to $ billion annually during the 1980s for exploration development production and refining capacity just to achieve the lower share of energy supply that has been projected for it. Other private estimates range as high as $ billion per year. Comparable expenditures were less than $ billion in and approximately $ billion in The Department of Energy also estimates that the domestic coal industry will have to invest between $ and $ billion annually during the 1980s if it is to increase its output as forecast. This compares to actual investments of less than $ billion in and $ billion in Building a domestic synthetic fuels industry will also be expensive The costs of developing the technology and installing operating capacity are still highly uncertain ; but to create the capacity to produce about % million barrels of coal liquids and shale oil per day by the early 1990s at a capacity cost per barrel of output per day of about $ investment will probably average more than $ billion per year over the next decade. While the ESC will provide various forms of assistance most of these funds will come from the private sector The adjustments in consumption induced by decontrol with its consequent higher prices and the supplementary conservation measures will also be costly. Fuel-saving features installed in old and new dwellings will add at least an additional $ billion per year to the cost of residential construction. Similar conservation measures for new and old commercial structures will also add to construction costs. Finally the replacement or refitting of portions of our industrial plants may have to be accelerated. Facilities that might have been marginally profitable for a few more years at pre-1974 or even pre1979 energy prices may have become unprofitable at current energy prices. Any such acceleration in obsolescence will add to required annual investments during the mid-1980s CONCLUSION The developments in the domestic and international energy markets during this past year have profoundly affected the economy. Energy consumers and producers have begun in earnest to adjust to higher prices. These adjustments belt-tightening in some cases or finding more energy-efficient ways to do things have been costly and in some cases painful. But as a result the economy should gradually become less dependent on foreign sources of oil and consequently less vulnerable to disruptions in supply. It is imperative that the Nation persevere in these efforts STRIKING THE PROPER BALANCE IN REGULATION That the pace and scope of the government 's regulatory activity have increased sharply over the last decade is obvious. Whether and how the government should regulate certain activities have become familiar questions in policy debates. In the case of traditional economic regulatory activities especially with regard to transportation communications and finance there has been a growing recognition that we need to reduce direct regulation and give greater play to competitive forces. In these sectors regulatory reform has become synonymous with deregulation. But for the newer forms of regulation dealing with social concerns such as the environment occupational health and safety and the safety of consumer products regulatory reform has come to mean not deregulation but more flexible and more cost-effective regulation. The government is increasingly seen to have a legitimate role in helping the private sector to attain socially desirable ends that can not be achieved in the market place. People have also become much more aware that regulation often adversely affects productivity at least as it is conventionally measured Over the last years the Administration has made marked progress in reforming this country 's regulatory institutions and procedures. In some cases regulatory structures existing for decades are being dismantled exposing the industries they protected to new forces of competition. In other areas important procedural reforms have been put into place to help assure that subject to legislative mandates regulations set reasonable goals and meet those goals in a costeffective manner. The job of reforming the regulatory process is far from complete but an important beginning has been made REGULATORY POLICY AND PRODUCTIVITY Government regulation of individual and corporate behavior takes many forms including common law rules of liability antitrust laws restrictions on international trade and regulatory rules of all kinds at the Federal State and local level. The ways in which this activity affects productivity are varied and complex but several broad generalizations can be made : First regulations which divert capital and labor from the production of steel automobiles or clothing ( where output can be readily measured ) to the production of environmental cleanliness workers ' safety or other goods whose values are difficult to measure entail a loss in measured productivity. This is not necessarily a matter for concern since it stems primarily from the limitations of what can be captured in the national income statistics Second regulatory procedures which cost more in capital and labor than they yield in social benefits or which require more resources than are necessary to meet stipulated social targets do reduce national productivity both measured and unmeasured Third many economic regulations directly cut productivity. Before recent decontrol actions airline regulations encouraged low load factors on airplanes. Current trucking regulations require needless empty backhauls and circuitous routing of trucks both of which reduce productivity. Many local building codes necessitate the use of excessively costly materials. Perhaps an even more important cause of lower productivity is the attempt by many of the older economic regulatory bodies to preserve the domain of some established industries Such protective measures can suppress the competitive pressures that force otherwise staid firms to adopt innovative ideas and improve their productivity Some loss in measured productivity is a necessary and unavoidable consequence of regulation. But there are also avoidable losses stemming from regulatory activities. Regulatory reform that works toward the elimination of outmoded economic regulations and promotes improvements in the balance and cost effectiveness of social regulation can contribute to growth in productivity REMOVING OBSOLETE REGULATORY STRUCTURES The reasons why industries were originally made subject to detailed economic regulation regarding the prices they charged and the conditions under which they provided service were many and varied One obvious example was the objection to the so-called " natural monopoly " enjoyed by an industry with such large economies of scale that meaningful competition was impossible. In other instances fear of " destructive competition " provided the primary rationale for regulation. Extending the scope of service was yet another aim behind government intervention. In many cases the original justification is no longer valid ; in others it never existed. Legislative and administrative action is helping to remove these obsolete regulatory structures In late with the cooperation of the Congress the Administration succeeded in opening up the domestic airline industry to meaningful entry and truly competitive pricing for the first time in at least years. This was the culmination of a process of liberalization that had begun several years earlier. Under regulation airlines competed through quality of service ; under deregulation consumers benefited immediately from an expanded volume of flights and lower fares. By September the average level of domestic and foreign air fares for the largest U.S. airlines had fallen percent from the year before and stood only percent above their level. In October air fares were actually lower than years earlier Some critics have interpreted recent increases in airline fares as evidence that deregulation though perhaps successful initially will be a failure in the long run. Nothing could be further from the truth Deregulation of an industry does not render it immune to increases in prices of factors of production. It does affect the degree to which such increases are translated into higher unit costs and prices. The airline industry has recently provided graphic proof of how reduced regulation can improve productivity and hence price performance As of the end of September average fares for the domestic trunklines were percent above their mid-1977 levels. But average weighted input prices for the airlines rose by percent over this same period. These rises in input prices were largely offset by improved productivity. Load factors the percentage of seats filled rose from percent during the first months of to percent during the comparable period in The airlines increased the number of seats per aircraft by percent for the large DC-lOs and L-lOlls and by percent for the smaller 727s. Finally air- lines have used their aircraft fleets more intensively. Airborne hours per aircraft per day rose by percent between the third quarter of and the third quarter of Greater use of the airlines ' capital stock has reduced passenger comfort and curtailed some other amenities but the lower fares it permits compensates for these reductions in service The record under regulation offers an instructive contrast. During the mid-1970s airline input prices also rose substantially ; in they averaged percent above their level of During this period however the airlines lacked the strong spur to productivity brought about by deregulation. Fares rose by percent. Although airlines ' profits have weakened during recent months orders for new fuel-efficient aircraft have continued to be strong. The difficulty of obtaining long-term credit which accompanied some industry downturns in the past as yet shows little sign of occurring The experience of the airlines during this past year differs sharply from that of certain segments of the regulated trucking industry Here lack of fuel large fuel price increases and sticky Interstate Commerce Commission rates were significant factors in leading many of the smaller independent truckers to go on strike rather than operate their trucks at a loss. The result was a shortage of trucking capacity and a disruption in commerce It is both impractical and inequitable to dismantle regulatory institutions overnight. Producers and consumers as well as suppliers and others indirectly dependent on the industry must have time to adjust to a less regulated market environment and some may be hurt by less stringent regulation. Transitions must therefore be planned for the groups seriously affected by the change. For this reason the Airline Deregulation Act of permits a gradual phase-out of the Civil Aeronautics Board 's regulatory activity and of the Board itself over a 6-year period. The act also provides continued subsidies for essential service to communities affected by the easing of abandonment restrictions Substantially relaxing detailed economic regulation of an industry does not mean the end of governmental interest in the industry 's performance. For example the eventual abolition of the Civil Aeronautics Board will not weaken the powers of the Federal Aviation Administration to regulate airline safety. The Administration is committed to basic reforms in economic regulation and to incorporating in them the adjustments needed to ease the legitimate problems of transition. The President has introduced or is supporting legislation embodying these principles which would substantially reduce Federal regulation in trucking railroads telecommunications and finance. As the record of airline deregulation has so graphically illustrated these initiatives offer the prospect of large gains in productivity The Administration 's trucking bill proposes a sharp reduction in regulatory barriers to competition. Among other things the bill will make entry into common-carrier trucking easier and will phase out the numerous commodity and route restrictions which limit competition between firms in this segment of the industry. It will significantly broaden the exemption from regulation currently enjoyed by the transporters of some agricultural commodities and permit the Commission to grant similar exemptions to other classes of commodities if this seems in the public interest. The bill permits freight forwarders and contract carriers to hold common-carrier certificates and ends the artificial limit on the number of shippers that contract carriers may serve. Private carriers will be allowed to apply for authority to haul noncompany commodities to provide transportation for corporate subsidiaries and to " trip-lease " for single trips to carriers holding certificates. Finally it will end the exemption granted in ( over President Truman 's veto ) of rate bureaus ' activities from antitrust litigation. Because of the Administration 's belief that truck safety is currently inadequate the Administration 's bill would substantially increase the government 's responsibility for this activity and the Federal resources channeled into it The Administration 's efforts are also directed at broadening the gains achieved by earlier reform legislation affecting railroads. The intent of this legislation has been blunted by the Interstate Commerce Commission 's overly restrictive interpretation of certain of its key provisions. The Administration is working with the Congress to see how increased pricing flexibility can be achieved in ways that do not reduce the protection offered " captive " shippers and it has also sought to make abandonment of unprofitable services less difficult In his September message on telecommunications policy the President supported congressional efforts to amend the Communications Act of Consumers are already benefiting from Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) actions that have increased competition in the market for telephone sets and for certain sophisticated data-processing and private-line services. But in spite of extraordinary technological advances that now make it possible to hold meetings transmit messages perform research bank shop and receive a widening variety of information and entertainment through electronics and that invalidate the assumption that all telecommunications enterprises are natural monopolies the basic statutory framework for regulating telecommunications has remained unchanged. The President 's message encouraged legislation to promote competition wherever it is workable. ( If necessary some markets such as local telephone exchanges may remain regulated monopolies indefinitely. ) He also urged removal of restrictions based on out-of-date market distinctions such as that between telecommunications and data processing and he advocated allowing the FCC to develop more efficient means of assigning nonbroadcast frequencies. At the same time the President reaffirmed the Administration 's support for regulations to make basic telephone service available to all at affordable rates and for measures to protect the technical quality of the telecommunications network In May the President sent a financial reform message to the Congress urging that deposit interest rates be permitted to rise to market levels after a period of orderly transition and that federally insured institutions be authorized to offer interest-bearing transactions accounts to individuals. The President also urged the Congress to grant all federally chartered savings institutions the power to offer variable rate mortgages and to invest up to percent of their assets in consumer loans. This package was intended to bring the benefits of market rates to small savers promote a steadier flow of credit to finance housing and improve the efficiency of financial markets. Although a bill was passed by the Senate which addressed all of the President 's May proposals the House-passed bill was less comprehensive. Resolution of the broader questions was postponed until but the Congress did pass more limited legislation extending through March authority for credit union share drafts automatic transfer services and savings and loan institutions ' remote service units. These three services effectively enable depositors to earn interest on deposits that are used for making current transactions BALANCING COSTS AND BENEFITS IN INDIVIDUAL REGULATIONS Eliminating large areas of regulation is not the appropriate route to reform of regulations aimed at environmental protection health safety and other social goals. Rather attention must focus on the processes and techniques of regulation. One especially important task is to ensure that the individual regulations consider the balance between gains and social costs and the adoption of cost-effective approaches The designing of any regulation involves an implicit weighing of costs against benefits. How explicit any such balancing should be or can be is a major question especially in regulation affecting the environment health and safety. Although any explicit effort to determine the " appropriate " level of health and safety meets with opposition many similar choices are being made implicitly. It is clear for example that traffic fatalities could be reduced by drastically lower- ing maximum speed limits or by providing pedestrian underpasses at all major traffic intersections. The failure of society to take these actions reflects a tacit judgment that the benefits in safety do not warrant the costs. Society also implicitly recognizes that a risk-free world is impossible and that pursuing such a goal would lead to unacceptable reductions in social welfare. Indeed reducing some risks can generate new risks elsewhere. For example prohibiting the use of sodium nitrite as a meat preservative may cut the risk of cancer but increase the risk of botulism The Administration has sought to encourage balanced and costeffective regulation through the requirement for regulatory analysis called for in Executive Order signed by the President on March which applies to executive branch agencies and departments but not to the independent regulatory agencies. The order requires that agencies ' policy makers give increased attention to regulatory issues provide greater opportunity for public participation in the development of regulation and conduct " sunset " reviews of existing regulations. In addition the order requires that agencies prepare a regulatory analysis for each major regulation. The analysis must examine the costs and other burdens imposed by the proposed regulatory action and compare them with those of alternative actions differing in approach timing degree of stringency or scope The purpose of regulatory analysis is not to reduce all costs and benefits to dollar sums that can be mechanically compared. Some monetary costs can not be confidently estimated the costs for example of introducing untested changes in technology or production processes or of changing the attributes of products or the location of plants. Even more clearly many social benefits can not be easily converted to monetary terms. But costs and burdens can be identified and in many cases measured. Benefits can be described and often analyzed at least partially in quantitative terms even if not in dollars The fundamental premise of the requirement for regulatory analysis is that the difficulty of measuring costs and benefits justifies neither indiscriminate regulation nor the elimination of all regulation The analysis required by the Executive Order is not a cost-benefit analysis which automatically dictates the decision ; it is a procedural mechanism a decision-making tool for examining the costs and other consequences of achieving regulatory goals Regulatory analyses are not easy to prepare but they play an important role. A formal regulatory analysis forces the rulemaking agency to consider explicitly the objectives of a major regulation and the best route to those goals. It requires consideration of process as well as outcome. This sort of thinking is a prerequisite for good rulemaking A draft regulatory analysis is issued when a regulation is first proposed. It can thus play a part in the public debate over the rule Members of the public can examine and evaluate the agency 's assumptions and objectives. The President has also established an interagency group to review and comment upon selected regulatory analyses. The Regulatory Analysis Review Group comprises representatives from the Executive Office of the President and from all executive branch economic and regulatory agencies. This group which is chaired by the Council of Economic Advisers has completed five comprehensive reviews during each of the past years. In this group 's reports submitted for the public record covered the Environmental Protection Agency 's hazardous waste standards and new source performance standards for electric utility plants ; the Department of Energy 's proposed and interim final regulations on coal conversion for utilities and industrial boilers ; and the Department of Health Education and Welfare 's proposal for labeling to accompany prescription drugs. At year 's end reports were being prepared reviewing the Environmental Protection Agency 's air carcinogen policy its guidelines for water effluents in the leather-tanning industry and the Department of Energy 's standards for the energy performance of new buildings The number of reviews that the group can undertake in any one year is quite limited. Furthermore the Executive Order does not apply to independent regulatory agencies. Comments filed by the Council on Wage and Price Stability however partially fill the gap That Council is directed by statute to comment on the economic impact of rules and regulations proposed by both the executive branch and the independent agencies. In the Council on Wage and Price Stability filed comments in rulemaking proceedings The Administration 's regulatory reform legislation would make the regulatory analysis called for in Executive Order a permanent requirement and extend the order to cover the independent regulatory agencies. Agency heads would be required either to choose the least burdensome alternative or to explain their proposed course of action. Selecting the least burdensome alternative would not be mandatory if there were a justification for choosing another approach The relevant substantive statute would continue to govern the final decision Several existing statutes have been interpreted as limiting the extent to which regulatory agencies can consider costs ( including added risks ) However even for agencies having little or no discretion to balance costs against benefits the regulatory analysis allows consideration of cost effectiveness. If even this degree of flexibility is not within the terms of the statute the rationale for precluding cost ef- fectiveness should be continuously re-evaluated in the light of new knowledge. The Administration supports " sunset " review legislation that would require just such periodic re-examination of major regulatory mandates COORDINATING REGULATORY PROGRAMS Improving individual regulations is an important part of long-term economic policy but more is needed for effective management of the regulatory process. Many individual regulations overlap and some try to serve conflicting objectives. For example congressionally mandated emission standards for automobiles have sometimes tended to decrease fuel economy. When they do this they make it harder for auto companies to meet the Department of Transportation 's standards requiring a steady increase in fuel economy. This is not a case of confused action but of conflicting goals. In designing an automobile some balancing may be necessary between cleaner air and energy conservation The President established the Regulatory Council composed of Federal departments and agencies to help achieve better coordination among regulatory programs and expand efforts to manage the regulatory process more effectively. At the President 's direction the Council prepares the semiannual Calendar of Federal Regulations. This provides in one document a concise summary and analysis of important regulations being developed by each of the executive branch agencies and by those independent regulatory agencies that choose to participate. It includes all major rulemakings in progress or expected during the coming year and thus provides a means of identifying potential overlaps or conflicts as well as previewing the impact of the rules on affected sectors The Regulatory Council will assess the cumulative effects of regulations issued by a number of different agencies on particular sectors or industries. The Council has begun a comprehensive analysis of how regulation affects the automobile industry and it is conducting projects related to coal hospitals and nonferrous metals. In addition the Council has successfully coordinated a joint policy statement by the five Federal agencies with primary responsibility for regulating carcinogens. The activities of the Council should help reduce two of the major sources of unnecessary costs of regulation uncertainty about regulatory policies and conflict or duplication in regulatory actions SETTING PRIORITIES Because we do not live in a world of unlimited resources we can not simultaneously achieve all desirable social goals. Rational social regulation requires priorities in our use of the resources at hand. No purely technical means can determine what resources should be devoted to social goals in any given year. That must come from the political system. Although some implicit balancing of goals occurs more explicit attention should be devoted to the aggregate and sectoral consequences of regulation and to the problem of priorities Until recently efforts by the Federal Government to promote social goals relied principally on direct expenditures. Since the Congress has required that these expenditures appear in the Federal budget. The budget process allows explicit tradeoffs to be made and the appropriate level of government action to be debated. But as more goals are pursued through rules and regulations mandating private outlays rather than through direct governmental expenditures the Federal budget is an increasingly inadequate measure of the resources directed by government toward social ends As a result proposals have been made that the Federal Government develop a " regulatory budget " similar to the expenditure budget as a framework for looking at the total financial burden imposed by regulations for setting some limits to this burden and for making tradeoffs within those limits However a regulatory budget is not without problems. In the case of particular programs in the expenditure budget past outlays are known and most future outlays can be predicted with some accuracy Estimates of the past or future costs of regulation some of which may be important to the development of a regulatory budget are much less certain. It is difficult for example to specify all the costs to a firm when it must locate a new plant according to its third choice rather than its first. It is equally hard to measure the cost of banning the manufacture of a product A regulatory budget would also have to take into account the basic difference between the processes through which regulation and expenditures are determined. For Federal expenditures the President initially sets priorities in the budget he submits to the Congress which has the final word in adjusting those priorities through appropriation and revenue bills. For social regulations the order is generally reversed. The Congress passes regulatory statutes which set forth objectives with varying specificity. A number of executive branch agencies and independent regulatory agencies are delegated the power subject to judicial review to implement those objectives through specific regulations on a case-by-case basis. Regardless of which branch initiates and which completes the priority-setting however it is clear that the regulatory process as yet lacks any mechanism analogous to the expenditure budget for comparing and integrating priorities among different program areas As the process of regulation develops more consideration will need to be given to the impact of regulations on the economy. The Nation must recognize that regulation to meet social goals competes for scarce resources with other national objectives. Priorities must be set to make certain that the first problems addressed are those in which regulations are likely to bring the greatest social benefits. Admittedly this is an ideal that can never be perfectly realized but tools like the regulatory budget may have to be developed if it is to be approached NEW APPROACHES TO REGULATION Growing recognition that social regulations have significant and sometimes unintended indirect effects on the economy is producing pressure to modify regulatory mechanisms. One modification may take the form of alternatives to or variations of the " command-andcontrol " approach which uses detailed regulations to specify permissible behavior. This approach often creates inflexibilities that add unnecessarily to the burdens imposed by the regulations. In the past few years regulatory agencies have begun to experiment with alternatives or supplements to traditional regulation. For example the Environmental Protection Agency has developed an " offset " policy under which firms can set up activities that result in pollution in areas not currently attaining air quality standards only if they can purchase greater reductions in the pollution from existing sources. The agency has also recently promulgated a " bubble " policy to be applied under carefully controlled conditions which permits a firm to trade further reductions in emissions from one source for increases in emissions from another. Since firms can thereby reduce pollution most where costs are least the same overall reduction of pollution can be achieved at a lower cost ( or more improvements realized for the same cost ) A similar approach was taken in permitting corporatefleet averaging in the present standards for automobile fuel economy Regulation can be improved in other ways as well. Although there is some doubt about the ability of consumers to assess and assimilate certain information the strategy of informing the public instead of banning questionable products shows promise in some situations During the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration made data available to potential buyers on how well cars can withstand crashes and the Consumer Product Safety Commission continued to publish information about hazardous products as an alternative to outright bans or restrictions. Such programs help consumers become better able to judge competing products Increasing the information consumers can draw upon sometimes complements more traditional structural remedies as a means of fostering competition in a market. The Department of Agriculture is currently trying to replicate in the United States the results of a recent Canadian experiment that achieved price reductions of to percent on a typical market basket of food items by disseminating comparative price lists for local grocery stores. If successful this strategy of fighting high prices by helping consumers take advantage of price differentials among retailers could have wide application CONCLUSION Regulation has joined taxation and the provision of defense and social services as one of the principal activities of government ; it has just as much need for effective management. Careful and responsible management of the government 's regulatory efforts is all the more vital because many of their effects on the economy are subtle and difficult to discern. Although some regulation can be largely or wholly eliminated most of the government 's regulatory activities are here to stay. This country will not give up the protection afforded by these programs any more than it will give up education or a sound defense. But it has every right to demand its dollar 's worth. The Administration 's regulatory reform effort over the past years has been designed to assure just that PROMOTING FLEXIBILITY IN THE LABOR MARKET How well the labor market functions will be crucial in any successful long-run strategy for reducing inflation. Wages constitute a major part of production costs and the supply and productivity of labor help determine how much of which goods and services will be sold at any particular price. The more rapidly and smoothly the labor market adjusts to changes in the supply and demand for labor the less delay and cost will be entailed in accommodating such major economic dislocations as the sharp rise in energy prices. Efficient adjustment in the labor market makes possible a greater growth in employment and output without hindering the long-term reduction in inflation Output and the demand for labor do not grow evenly in all industries and occupations. In a poorly adjusting labor market unsatisfied demands for labor in rapidly growing sectors or occupations can generate inflationary pressures while unemployment and economic slack are still high elsewhere in the economy. In such situations inflation can be avoided only by more restrained monetary and fiscal policies and a slower growth of overall employment than would have been possible in a more efficient labor market In a modern industrial society raising the productivity of labor is less a matter of changing worker motivation than of attracting labor to the sectors of the economy where it is most productive and then combining it effectively with other resources. Therefore a labor market in which the demand and supply of labor adjust smoothly raises the general productivity of the labor force The use of labor market policy as part of an anti-inflation strategy poses three requirements : ( ) to identify the sources of potential labor market pressures ; ( ) to consider how well the labor market is likely to cope with these developments ; and ( ) to ascertain the measures most likely to promote timely and effective labor market adjustments LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 1980s On the demand side two developments that will probably require continuing adjustments in the labor market during the years ahead are rising energy prices and the increasing importance of international trade. Governmental policies that help the labor market adjust to these developments will also help build an energy-efficient economy pull labor into more productive uses and thus work to reduce inflation Energy. Technological adaptation to a higher real price of energy entails two major shifts in employment. First labor is needed to build operate and maintain the new sources of energy. Second workers must adapt to the new productive techniques that become economically efficient at the higher energy prices The amount of labor directly required by the President 's energy program depends on the mix of energy sources the technology used to produce energy and the labor required for constructing operating and maintaining these projects. The Administration 's initiatives are expected to increase substantially the demand for labor in the energy sector. Employment in the industries supplying goods and services to the energy sector will also increase. The distribution of these added jobs will not be uniform either geographically or by skills In the remainder of the economy higher energy prices once adjusted to will also lead to changes in employment patterns. Some studies using data through the early 1970s have suggested that higher fuel prices cause a substitution of labor for energy and capital in manufacturing industries although the evidence on this as noted earlier is mixed. Historically energy and blue-collar workers have appeared on average to be substitutes in production ; energy and white-collar workers in manufacturing have appeared to be complements. If those relationships continue as energy prices rise the consequent increases both in gross manufacturing employment and in the ratio of blue-collar to white-collar jobs may partially offset a trend of the past several decades. Given the uncertainty about the technology that will prevail in a world of sharply higher energy prices however predictions about the impact of higher energy prices on employment patterns must remain tentative International trade. Over the past two decades U.S. foreign trade has expanded very considerably. Real exports have increased steadily from percent of real GNP in to percent in A growing role for international trade tends to favor industries for which our Nation has particular efficiencies ; it also helps provide an additional competitive force to the market. On both counts trade has a moderating effect on inflation. But it also forces shifts in employment. Jobs become fewer in domestic sectors threatened by imports ; they increase in industries which are more competitive in world markets. Since the comparative advantage of the United States tends to be in its high-technology capital-intensive industries a growth in exports shifts the demand for labor toward more highly skilled workers with more advanced training Other factors. If the adjustments required by international trade and higher energy prices are encouraged rather than hindered changes in the composition of labor demand during the next decade should favor a faster productivity growth. Reducing race and sex discrimination will also improve productivity because human resources will be put to more advantageous use. The virtual disappearance of wage discrimination against young blacks with high levels of education is a favorable development. Unless the pace of improvement is accelerated however it will still be many decades before all wage discrimination against blacks is eliminated Supply Side The dominant force on the supply side of the labor market during the 1980s will be the aging of the large World War II " baby boom " generation. As Table shows young people in the age group have represented one of the fastest growing components of the labor force during the 1970s. In the coming years their share of the labor force will decline swiftly. At the same time the proportion of the work force accounted for by prime-age and the more experienced workers will grow rapidly This demographic change should help reduce both inflation and unemployment. The growth in the relative size of the experienced work force means that average productivity should rise. The fact that young people whose unemployment rates are usually higher than average will represent a smaller fraction of the work force will itself tend to lower the level of aggregate unemployment at which inflationary pressures begin to emerge. Finally young members of minor- TABLE Share of selected demographic groups in the civilian labor force Annual percent change in share * Group ( projected ) to to ( projected ) Share ( percent ) All youth ( years ) Black and other minority youth ( years ) All prime-age ( years ) ' Prime-age women ( years ) Percent changes based on unrounded shares Percent of civilian labor force Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ity groups whose unemployment rates are now exceedingly high should find it easier to secure entry-level jobs in a work force where there are fewer young people seeking such jobs The productivity of the labor force depends not only on the number and experience of workers but also on their education. As Table shows a general increase occurred during the past four decades in the years of schooling of all groups in the labor force with a dramatic rise for blacks. School enrollment rates for whites and nonwhites are now comparable. Unfortunately trends in the quality of education have not all been favorable. For elementary school children an improvement in basic skills and a substantial lessening of racial differentials are evident. But there has been no improvement in the skills achieved in the secondary schools. Blacks and low-income city youths do especially poorly in tests measuring functional literacy and this weakness may contribute to their unemployment problems TABLE School attainment of to 29-year-olds and Item All persons Blacks Percent with Less than years of school : years of high school or more : years of college or more : Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census There is some evidence that the gap between the achievement of black and white students has been narrowing. Future improvements in productivity performance would be aided by continuation of this movement HOW WELL CAN THE LABOR MARKET ADJUST ? Policies that will help the labor market allocate resources so as to raise productivity and reduce the waste of human resources need to be targeted to areas where the market fails to perform effectively The fact is that the labor market worked quite well for most people during the 1970s ; the serious failures were concentrated among special groups. During this period the civilian labor force grew by some million workers or percent. One-third of that growth was among young people from to years old and percent was among women between the ages of and Although unemployment rates for those groups rose over the decade the percentage increase in their unemployment rate was less than that of the total unemployment rate. Indeed the market even works well for most youths ; they find jobs without difficulty when they enter the full-time labor force There is a large flow of workers through the labor market each year as people change jobs and individual firms hire and lay off workers. In January a special study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that fewer than percent of those employed had held the same job they were in a year earlier. Transfers on so large a scale imply that the labor market is relatively flexible and capable of making major adjustments. Moreover fewer than percent of those unemployed in were on indefinite layoffs or had lost their jobs Most were re-entering the labor force had quit their last job or had never worked before While the market has worked well for most groups it has not worked well for all. The greatest problems are concentrated among disadvantaged young people especially blacks. Approximately threefourths of the weeks of unemployment reported by youths are accounted for by those who have been unemployed for periods totaling more than weeks within a year. A disproportionate share of those young people are black. Over the past years the employmentpopulation ratio for black youths has been falling both absolutely and relative to the record for white youths. A Department of Labor study found that among black males aged to the unemployment rate rose from percent to percent between March and March Among black teenage females there was an increase from percent to percent over the same period. Increases were especially large for central city black teenagers attending school. The message is clear : when major labor market adjustments are required like the absorption of the large numbers of young people during the 1970s the poor or those with other disadvantages have the least chance of making that adjustment successfully. Further when potential workers have few basic skills and little experience and when the minimum wage and other institutions create wage floors the result can be unemployment or part-time employment rather than full-time but lower-wage employment. The Administration 's targeted jobs tax credit is an employment subsidy designed to deal with these problems Unwarranted differences in the experiences of different groups imply that there has been failure in the labor market and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act places special emphasis on reducing such differences. While it is not possible to establish detailed employment and earnings goals for disadvantaged youths older displaced workers the handicapped women Hispanics veterans and other such subgroups the specific goal can be set forth : to reduce unemployment and raise earnings for all these groups. Equality of unemployment rates among all demographic groups is not an appropriate objective of course since it would fail to recognize differences in employment needs. For example young people searching for better careers and not greatly attached to any job should not be expected to have the same unemployment rates as older experienced workers. But structural policies are needed to reduce unjustified disparities among groups and especially to lower unemployment among those with the most acute problems and those handicapped by childhood poverty. Labor market differences based on factors which do not affect productivity or reflect variations in tastes for work and type of job search should be eliminated Another group for whom labor markets may not work adequately is older more experienced workers whose long-time jobs disappear Workers with skills specific to the needs of a particular firm often have to accept lower wages when they must seek another job. In a dynamic economy where the fortunes of individual firms wax and wane these problems are continual. If they are concentrated in a major industry or in a large firm they often become issues for government to deal with Problems in adjustment will continue in the 1980s as the labor market responds to changes in energy sources in patterns of international trade and in other economic factors. While no general rule will serve every occasion the goals of raising productivity and improving living standards are best achieved if governmental policy is designed to aid the flow of human resources from obsolescent and lower productivity uses to new and more productive ones Although there are some general principles for dealing with displaced workers possessing firm-specific skills applying them to particular cases is not easy. It is difficult to tell in advance which displaced workers will have trouble. For example a study of workers who had been laid off and were eligible for aid under the Trade Adjustment Act in showed that about three-fourths eventually returned to their previous place of employment. In the same period a sample of unemployed manufacturing workers receiving unemployment insurance showed that percent eventually returned to their previous jobs POLICIES TO AID LABOR MARKETS The labor market is sufficiently flexible that it can adjust to most of the pressures of the 1980s without special assistance. Governmental policy still has a role however in easing the adjustment for some workers. This can not be accomplished through aggregate demand policy alone because attempting to do so would merely add to inflation while yielding only minimal benefits for the groups suffering especially from unemployment. Active labor market policies directed at the structural unemployment of particular groups or at specific rigidities in the market are thus called for Nearly percent of the Federal budget goes to education training and employment programs many of which are aimed directly at increasing employment. These include public service jobs ( some such jobs will be funded in ) ; a new targeted jobs tax credit giving subsidies to firms hiring the disadvantaged ; antidiscrimination efforts of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance ; the new Presidential directive expanding the hiring of disadvantaged workers in private sector jobs through Federal economic development programs ; and flexitime experiments and employer technical services of the U.S Employment Service that help restructure jobs to fit workers ' needs Complete evaluations of most of these programs are not yet available. Some of them may prove effective on a small scale but may not work so well on a larger scale Programs to create public sector jobs provide an example of some of the difficulties faced by structural labor market policies. Such public jobs programs have three consequences which must be considered : First the existence of such jobs may attract such large numbers of people into the labor force that the reduction in unemployment is significantly less than the increase in employment. ( To the extent that new members of the labor force were previously too discouraged even to seek work this would of course be beneficial. ) Second the jobs may either displace some public sector workers or end up financing existing public sector jobs rather than providing new ones The limits placed on wages payable in public service jobs in the Administration-supported amendments to the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act ( CETA ) and other amendments should eliminate some of the " substitution " problems. Third such jobs are relatively short-term solutions for individual workers and may only postpone the transition for these workers without adequately preparing them for unsubsidized employment. To address this problem the CETA amendments increased the emphasis on preparing workers for unsubsidized jobs and the programs were also changed in other ways that should help workers adjust to labor market needs Both the Administration and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act recognize that the problems of disadvantaged and minority youth make this group a particularly appropriate subject for structural labor market policy. The Administration has tripled expenditures on Labor Department programs for youth training and employment. In anticipation of the expiration of authority for some youth activities this year and in recognition of the persistent needs of disadvantaged youth the President 's budget contains proposals that will form the basis of this Administration 's policies to alleviate the labor market problems of young people in the 1980s. These policies recognize that especially as the proportion of youths in the population declines there is no general youth problem ; but that employment problems are likely to be serious for the roughly percent of young people who are poor and suffering long-term unemployment. Not all of them require government help but many do. The decline in young people 's share of the labor force should make it more likely that training and job development will help that group The President 's new policies also recognize that the best time to confront the employment problems of the young is before they leave school and experience long stretches of unemployment. Better and more intensive training in basic skills for junior and senior high school students before they leave school must have high priority if we are to improve their opportunities to find employment. The need to reduce long-term unemployment among labor market entrants is made more urgent because one of its consequences is lower productivity and earnings in later years. Our economy can not afford to waste such human potential. So far however the amount of government money spent on compensatory education for secondary students has been relatively small The goals of the President 's new initiative are : ( ) to teach basic skills in the secondary school to those youths who did not master them in elementary school and who need special help ; ( ) to provide part-time employment and training to dropouts willing to undertake extended training to develop skills that will improve their labor market prospects ; and ( ) to provide intensive long-term training aimed at achieving unsubsidized private sector placements for older youths out of school. Under the proposal the funds will go largely to poor rural areas and central cities where a lack of basic skills and high unemployment are most serious For principal wage earners in low-income families with children the Administration has sent to the Congress a set of major proposals for welfare reform. One component of these proposals would provide training help in seeking jobs and work opportunities for employable persons. The other major component improves the cashassistance provisions of the welfare system. Together the two parts of the program would provide minimum income for those low-wage earners in need along with jobs for those who can work. The program is designed to make employment more attractive than cash aid Much remains to be learned about the design of effective policies aimed at other groups in the labor market. Perhaps most important the efficacy of training programs for adult low-income workers is uncertain. The CETA system and other programs provide such workers with both work experience and training. Although a new authority Title II-C of CETA can be used for retraining and aiding any displaced worker most of CETA has increasingly been targeted toward the disadvantaged and long-term unemployed. Evaluations of the training components of such programs show that they have modest positive effects especially for women. These effects seem to diminish for male participants in the course of time Another question in policy design is whether the government or the unemployed workers themselves are better informed about the type of training they need and can most benefit from. If the unemployed workers are knowledgeable about themselves and the market schemes giving them vouchers for training through either private or public programs should be considered. Some limited experiments using this approach for welfare recipients show promise A third issue is the success of programs to help workers relocate Relocation assistance is a feature of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act. The concept of providing relocation assistance is sound but few workers now take advantage of such assistance and many who do return to their home towns within a relatively short time As demographic changes begin to reduce some of the problems in the labor market remaining from the 1970s significant progress in helping those groups which suffer the worst unemployment problems becomes feasible. By improving the employment opportunities of these groups and by making them more productive labor market policies can increase our supply of goods and services improve our efficiency in using the Nation 's human resources and help people lead more satisfying lives INCREASING THE RATE OF CAPITAL FORMATION ( Investment Policy Report ) To reach a number of our important economic goals the share of national output devoted to capital formation will have to increase in the 1980s. Lifting the growth of productivity from the very low levels of recent years will require an accelerated rise in the stock of capital Environmental and related improvements will also demand large investments. Further as discussed earlier in this chapter we will need to invest very substantial sums in developing alternative sources of energy and improving the energy efficiency of the economy. A larger and more efficient capital stock would also help the United States to compete in world markets improve the foreign trade balance and strengthen the value of the dollar relative to other currencies in exchange markets Because of the importance of capital formation in determining the long-run growth of the economy the Humphrey-Hawkins Act places considerable emphasis on the performance of business fixed investment. One of the requirements of the act is that an Investment Policy Report be included in each Economic Report of the President. The following section touches on the topics specified in the act ; relevant matters such as policies dealing with Federal expenditures Federal regulation and international trade are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this Economic Report THE ADEQUACY OF RECENT INVESTMENT An examination of recent trends in investment raises a number of questions. The fraction of GNP devoted to investment in has approached the shares realized in the late stages of the last two expansions but this proportion was relatively low during the early stages of the recovery from the recession. Thus the addition to the stock over the past years has been relatively small especially when the depreciation of the stock during this period is taken into account. At the same time the growth in the labor force was larger than in earlier periods and hence the rate of growth in the capital stock available per worker fell substantially. Furthermore some of the recent investment has been devoted to meeting increased energy needs and the requirements of environmental health and safety regulations. While such investment is important to national goals it does not directly expand industrial capacity or contribute to meas- ured productivity. Finally the composition of investment has been more heavily weighted toward shorter-lived assets than it was in periods prior to the recession Since the share of gross business fixed investment has reached percent of GNP only during the last years ( Chart ) Moreover the gain occurred despite reduced growth in real investment expenditures ; real GNP grew at a still lower rate Chart Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real GNP PERCENT OF GNP TOTAL / y// ' ~ \ PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT \ \ s ' " STRUCTURES i i i i I I I I I I I I I I I i i i i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Historically it has not been uncommon for the share of such investment in GNP to rise as growth of the economy begins to slow. Similar behavior occurred in and again in The growth of investment does not always coincide with the overall growth of the economy because actual investment expenditures lag the planning and appropriation stages and because expenditures for ongoing projects are not necessarily curtailed in a downturn The composition of recent business fixed investment has been quite different from historical norms. In the share of investment in producers ' durable goods in real GNP ( percent ) was the second highest in the last three decades. Both motor vehicles and other equipment attained shares of GNP that approached record peaks for the year as a whole although purchases of vehicles declined sharply during the course of In contrast the share of real GNP accounted for by business investment in structures ( percent ) continued to be less than that realized in every year between and A variety of causes could be found for the changing strength of the major components of business fixed investment. One is Federal tax legislation which since has increased the investment tax credit for equipment while giving structures only partial coverage. Another is that the higher level of inflation in recent years has increased the tax burden on long-lived assets relative to short-lived assets. Uncertainty about future economic conditions and about the outcome of various regulatory processes has intensified and such uncertainty tends especially to penalize investments in assets with long-term payoffs As discussed in Chapter only part of the unsatisfactory productivity of recent years can be blamed on declining rates of capital accumulation. Nevertheless there is little doubt that increased rates of capital formation will improve productivity in the future. Capital accumulation increases labor productivity directly by giving labor more to work with and some technical advances contribute to productivity growth only when they are embodied in the capital stock Investment and Innovation The last point made in the preceding section takes on special significance in the light of changes in the average age of the capital stock. From through the average age of producers ' durable equipment and structures fell about years. The average age fell by about year from through Since the average age of business capital has not changed significantly. Because the gap between best-practice and average-practice technology is narrowed when innovations are put in place modernization of the capital stock is one way to diffuse innovation that will add to productivity. Not all technical progress is embodied in capital however and the quality of some new capital may change little. Thus the fact that the average age of the capital stock has remained constant may account for only a small portion of the recent declines in productivity growth A Domestic Policy Review initiated by the President recently assessed the proper role of the government in fostering industrial innovation. On the basis of this review the President sent an Industrial Innovation Message to the Congress in which he detailed a number of steps that the Administration had taken or would soon be taking Specifically the President 's budget proposes programs to encourage the development and transfer of technical information and to improve the patent system. The budget also contains proposals to stimulate small businesses devoted to high technology including direct support to small research and development firms. The President has directed the Small Business Administration to increase further the availability of venture capital to these firms. Finally also to increase the availability of venture capital Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulations have already been changed to allow pension funds to invest in small innovative firms Federal support for research and development measured in real terms fell substantially between and In more recent years the trend has been reversed. The Nation 's effort in basic research depends on the Federal Government for about two-thirds of its support. The budgets of the Administration have increased that support each year the increase amounting to percent in real terms between and The President 's budget proposal continues that policy SPECIAL INVESTMENT NEEDS Compliance with mandates to improve the environment health and safety requires substantial investment. The results of this investment cleaner air purer water and a safer working environment are not included in conventional measures of output although they benefit everyone. Investments to meet regulatory requirements are financed from the same sources as investments that directly increase industrial capacity. Thus any given fraction of GNP devoted to investment will yield less measured gain in productivity than historical relationships would suggest. Meeting requirements of the Clean Air and Water Acts alone is estimated by the Environmental Protection Agency to have absorbed percent of business fixed investment or percent of GNP in Over the decade of the 1980s the investment required to meet existing environmental regulations alone is expected to average to percent of GNP. To the extent that new regulations are imposed the share of GNP used may be larger The additional private investments directly attributable to increasing and diversifying our domestic energy supplies and improving energy efficiency will also be substantial. The requirements outlined earlier in this chapter including those stemming from the national energy program will add the equivalent of about percent of GNP to investment needs. There will be other indirect investment requirements. Since rapidly rising energy costs increase the rate at which the capital stock becomes obsolete replacement investment must also rise if a reduction in the Nation 's productive capacity is to be avoided Even without the special investment needs of energy and the environment it is difficult to imagine that healthy economic growth could be maintained by a ratio of business fixed investment to GNP of less than percent. The direct investment requirements for increased energy supplies plus environmental regulations currently on the books could raise this to over percent. Finally depending upon how much investment will be required by new environmental regulations and by the need to accelerate the replacement of industrial facilities made obsolete by higher energy costs the necessary investment ratio may be higher still. Achieving this level of investment will not be easy ; the highest share attained by the economy in the postwar period was percent in SAVING-INVESTMENT RELATIONSHIP The basic saving-investment relationship as measured in the national income and product accounts is presented in Table The reported values represent the amount of gross saving by the household business and government sectors along with gross investment by type of expenditure. Household saving equals disposable personal income less personal outlays which consist mainly of personal consumption expenditures. Business saving is defined as retained earnings plus depreciation. The government sector 's contribution to national saving depends on the budget surpluses or deficits of Federal State and local governments. The government sector adds to national saving when a combined budget surplus is recorded Gross investment consists of domestic investment and net foreign investment. Net foreign investment is conceptually similar to the current account deficit in the balance of payments with a surplus in the current account corresponding to positive net foreign investment. As Table shows saving and investment as fractions of GNP have increased in the last years although they remain slightly below the values of the period Whether business investment will grow enough to meet the country 's needs in the 1980s will depend on two key questions. Will investment incentives be sufficient to bring the demand for business capital goods up to the necessary level ? And will the share of national saving in GNP expand to permit that investment demand to be realized without adding to inflationary pressures on the economy ? While the two questions are related since additional saving tends to lower long-term interest rates and encourage investment demand it is useful to examine each of them separately TABLE Gross saving and investment as percent of GNP [ Percent ] Item Federal State and local. Gross saving Personal Business Government Gross investment Nonresidential fixed Residential fixed Change in business inventories... Net foreign Statistical discrepancy. Preliminary Includes net capital grants received by the United States not shown separately Saving and investment may not be equal due to rounding Less than percent Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) DEMAND FOR NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED CAPITAL Future trends in capital formation will reflect both past and future investment incentives. Last year 's Economic Report discussed many of the factors which appear to influence business decisions to invest Table presents data for a number of these factors Preliminary data for the year as a whole do not indicate a clear pattern. Two of the measures shown capacity utilization and the rate of return on stockholders ' equity rose and were above their average levels for the period. The other three declined and TABLE Determinants of business fixed investment [ Percent except as noted ] Nonfinancial corporations Period Cash flow as percent of GNP Rate of return on depreciable assets Rate of return on stockholders ' equity Ratio of market value to replacement cost of net assets average average First quarters Ratio of real investment to real GNP Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing l Federal Reserve Board index Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth ( physical capital component valued at current replacement cost ) Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets Seasonally adjusted Note. For annual figures for see Appendix Table B-85 Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers O were below their averages. The steady increases in capacity utilization rates since the recession reflect the strength and duration of the subsequent recovery as well as the relatively slow accumulation of additional industrial capacity. The rate of return on stockholders ' equity also rose ( see Table ) However this increase is not a good measure of the change in the rate of return available on new equity investments because it stemmed largely from unanticipated increases in inflation which reduced the real burden of corporate debt. The slowdown in the growth of profits in contributed to the declines in the rate of corporate cash flow and the rate of return on depreciable assets. The ratio of market value to replacement cost of net assets declined even further from its low level as inflation pushed the replacement cost of physical capital well beyond the market value reflected in equity and debt prices. All of the investment determinants except the ratio of market value to replacement cost of net assets and the return to depreciable assets were above averages but these averages themselves were equal to or below those of the period Federal tax policy has an important influence on business fixed investment. The Revenue Act of lowered the corporate tax rate across all income classifications. The investment tax credit was made permanent and was extended to a broader range of investment expenditures. The tax rate on capital gains was also reduced by allowing a larger proportion of capital gains to be excluded from an individual 's taxable income While these reductions in tax rates were occurring the increase in inflation tended to raise the tax burden on businesses. During periods of rising inflation the real tax burden increases because depreciation allowances are based on historical costs rather than on replacement costs. Partly for this reason the ratio of Federal corporate income taxes to profits measured on an economic basis was higher in than in despite the reduction in the corporate income tax rate which took effect in Since long-lived investment goods suffer larger declines in the real value of depreciation allowances over time inflation distorts both the amount and composition of investment THE SOURCES OF SAVING In periods of economic slack the production of additional capital goods does not require a reduction in the output of consumer goods In fact the expansion of wage income from the increase in output of investment goods will lead to a simultaneous rise in the demand for and the production of consumer goods In periods of relatively high employment however the growth of national output is limited to the 2V2 to percent rate given by the growth in potential GNP. Investment can grow more rapidly only if its share in GNP rises which in turn requires an increase in the share of GNP that is saved. In order to increase the share of investment in GNP during the 1980s therefore total saving will have to rise relative to GNP. Saving frees resources for use in the production of capital goods and provides the flow of funds needed to finance investment outlays. The amount of saving by governments business firms and individuals is thus the major determinant of the amount of total investment that can be undertaken. About one-fourth to one-third of national saving in the past has been absorbed by residential construction. The bulk of the remainder is available for business capital formation Recently as the Federal Government 's deficit has narrowed Federal Government dissaving has declined. The Federal deficit ( as measured in the national income and product accounts ) has declined in every year since from an average of percent of GNP in to percent in ( see Table ) Gross saving in the State and local government sector averaged percent of GNP during The bulk of this saving was from net additions to the surpluses of social insurance and pension funds Last year the operating budgets of State and local governments were approximately in balance. The combined budgets of Federal State and local governments recorded a net surplus in the first such surplus since In contrast to the recent changes in governmental budgets toward positive net saving the personal saving rate has declined substantially in recent years. For as a whole the rate was 4Vfe percent ; it was even lower by year end. A number of contributing factors have been cited as causes of the recent low saving rate. These include the high proportion of the work force consisting of younger people the increased number of two-earner households and in the efforts of consumers to maintain real consumption in the face of slow growth in real income. In addition inflationary expectations in conjunction with low rates of return on financial assets low real borrowing costs and the ready availability of credit may have reduced the personal saving rate by increasing the attractiveness of real assets relative to financial assets. The relative importance of these factors to the decline in the saving rate is uncertain Business saving retained earnings plus depreciation grew at a rate of percent in down moderately from the growth of recent years. Historically the rate of growth of business saving has var- ied substantially ; the most recent figure is well within past ranges Because business saving is an internal source of funds to finance expenditures on physical capital policies designed to increase business saving also tend to have a direct impact on business fixed investment The Revenue Act of strengthened this source of corporate financing by lowering the corporate income tax rate CAPITAL MARKETS AND THE AVAILABILITY OF CREDIT Financial markets and institutions play a major role in linking saving and investment. The business sector finances a significant portion of its long-term investment expenditures through such financial intermediaries as insurance companies and pension funds. Direct purchases of new equities and corporate bonds by households have recently been only a minor source of financial capital for businesses. In for example the nonfinancial corporate business sector raised $ billion in the corporate bond market while the household sector reduced its net corporate bond holdings by $ billion. Indirectly however workers and other individuals constitute an important source of business funds through pension funds and other forms of group saving During most of businesses had little difficulty in obtaining credit. Total financial capital raised by the nonfinancial business sector rose by an estimated percent in Short-term debt was an unusually important source of the business sector 's financing. Businesses preferred shorter-term issues because it was thought throughout most of the year that longer-term rates were at or near their cyclical peaks and would decline in the near future. In fact long-term rates rose sharply during but this increase had not been widely anticipated To help ensure that financial capital is available to businesses in the future the Administration is systematically reviewing Federal credit activities. In the budget for fiscal the Administration announced the development of a program to establish a credit-monitoring system which covers direct lending by agencies as well as guaranteed loan programs. The budget recommends limitations on annual appropriations for a wide range of activities involving Federal credit. This new monitoring system includes both on- and off-budget Federal loan and loan guarantee programs. Although some programs are exempt this review will lead to a more efficient allocation of both credit and real resources The availability of financial capital in the future will be maintained by improving the economic environment in the United States as outlined in this chapter and by selective policies designed to meet the needs of small businesses for financing. Through the continuing efforts of the Small Business Administration and the programs included in the President 's proposals to foster industrial innovation more credit will be available to small businesses. For the economy as a whole a reduction in inflation will enable monetary policy to ease thereby improving the flow of funds in financial markets SOME LIKELY PATTERNS OF NATIONAL SAVING IN THE 1980s Table illustrates a pattern for national saving that seems possible under a set of reasonable assumptions for the 5-year period The Federal budget is assumed to be balanced on average over the period. Continued control over spending should make it possible both to reduce taxes during the period and to have a balanced budget in most of those years. State and local governments are likely to continue on average the surpluses of recent years which stem from an excess of revenues over expenditures in pension and related funds for their own employees. Business saving will probably remain close to historical trends in the absence of future business tax cuts and the personal saving rate is assumed to increase to slightly above its average. In sum total domestic saving as a proportion of GNP can be expected to rise slightly in the period compared to recent years. But the inflow of investment from abroad which is the financial counterpart of the U.S. current account deficit should move toward zero as market forces bring receipts and expenditures in the current account close to balance. The share of GNP used for housing will increase slightly because of the energy requirements discussed earlier in this chapter. With inventory investment taking about the same share of saving as in the recent past the TABLE Actual and illustrative saving-investment balances [ Percent of GNP ] Actual Federal Government surplus State and local government surplus Gross business saving Personal saving Illustrative Equals : Total saving Less : Net foreign investment Residential fixed investment.. Inventory investment Equals-. Saving available for business fixed capital formation... Preliminary ; detail may not add to total because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers amount available for business fixed investment should be about percent of GNP It was estimated earlier that to improve productivity expand capacity make the adjustment to higher energy costs and meet environmental needs the ratio of business capital formation to GNP would have to rise to at least percent and possibly somewhat higher. The earlier discussion of factors underlying the demand for investment goods and the analysis of saving ratios in Table suggest that specific measures to increase investment and saving may be needed in later years THE PROSPECTIVE POLICY MIX Inflation and economic growth tend to increase average effective tax rates and thus the share of Federal taxes in GNP. Under current inflationary conditions and given the uncertainties in the economic outlook the highest priority in the use of additional Federal revenues is to reduce the budget deficit. This is the policy incorporated in the President 's budget proposals. However continued control of Federal spending will make possible tax reductions in future years that are quite consistent with the maintenance of an appropriate degree of fiscal restraint. Considering the need for additional investment incentives the design of future tax reductions should give a high priority to measures which strengthen investment Policies will also be needed to increase the amount of available national saving. One way to do so is to have smaller tax reductions and run a Federal budget surplus. A budget surplus would increase national saving and thereby provide additional sources of funds for investment. Alternatively some of any potential budget surplus could be used to reduce taxes in ways which increase the after-tax return to personal saving. There is considerable uncertainty about the likely size of the response of personal saving to increased after-tax returns It is clear however that each dollar of such tax reduction which lowers the potential Federal surplus ( and hence total national saving ) dollar for dollar will yield at most a small fraction of a dollar in additional personal saving Tax reductions devoted explicitly to business firms in the form of increased investment incentives on the other hand will tend to increase both business saving and investment. While some part of a business tax reduction will go toward higher dividends a fairly large fraction of it is likely to end up as increased retained earnings The fact that an increase in the ratio of saving to GNP may be necessary to make possible the desired expansion of investment does not imply of course that increasing the saving share will itself guarantee a rise in investment. A higher saving share will tend to reduce real interest rates and thus encourage investment. But that alone may not be sufficient. An overall economic climate with inflation being steadily reduced and output growing at a sustainable pace would be very conducive to investment. It may be necessary also as fiscal drag allows statutory tax rates to be reduced to provide a significant part of the reduction in forms which both raise the return to investment and increase business saving ADJUSTING T O EQUILIBRIUM IN AGRICULTURE During the past decade the role of U.S. agriculture in the national and international economy changed dramatically. This change has important implications for inflation agricultural productivity and the long-term performance of the farm sector Historically agriculture 's productive capacity increased so rapidly relative to demand that national agricultural policy had to concentrate heavily on protecting farm income from the consequences of overproduction. But rising world population increased consumption of animal products and the improved capability of some developing nations to purchase food and feed grains combined in the last decade with dollar devaluations and global crop shortfalls now require nearly full use of the land labor and capital available to agriculture Measured in constant dollars this sector 's total exports have increased more than percent since U.S. agriculture appears closer to resource equilibrium than it has been for many decades This situation is likely to persist. While year-to-year fluctuations in weather world economic performance or even international affairs may result in potentially troublesome periods of excess production the longer-term outlook strongly suggests that production will more typically be at or near capacity. Growth in world population and improved economic conditions in both developed and developing countries will increase their need for and improve their capability to purchase food and feed grains POLICY ISSUES The United States is now more vulnerable to agricultural price and income fluctuations arising from changes in worldwide demand for U.S. farm products than it was in the past. Sustained full use of farmland for example makes it more difficult to increase output in response to successive world crop shortfalls. Then too as exports are expanded U.S. agriculture becomes even more closely linked with world weather and the domestic policies of other nations. Since little can be done to influence these factors domestic agricultural policies must operate to cushion the sector and the Nation from the price and income shocks that they would otherwise experience. Reducing this vulnerability while improving the sector 's productivity and economic performance is a major objective of the Administration 's food and agricultural policy Supply Shocks The total demand for food is so inelastic that small changes in global food supply can lead to very large changes in price. And because the supply can not be increased quickly year-to-year price changes do little to alter the quantity offered for sale ; rather they increase the potential for generating oscillations in price and production. Widespread crop shortages can set off a general inflationary surge Bumper crops can reduce market prices below what is needed to cover variable operating expenses. These characteristics combined with the fact that food is a basic raw material leave us exposed to abrupt price changes in the food sector A clear demonstration that small variations in global food supply can lead to wide variations in producers ' incomes and food prices was furnished by the events of World food production declined only about percent globally in This modest decline led to an increase of percent in U.S. crop prices in and to another percent increase in Consumer food prices increased percent over these years. Net farm income was a record $ billion in percent higher than in The rise in grain prices touched off the most rapid liquidation of the domestic cattle herd ever recorded. Cattle prices fell as cattle marketings increased during through Grain prices also fell during the period a consequence of increasing world stocks. In net farm income was about equal to its level. Beginning in food prices rose reflecting strong consumer demand and the cut in meat supplies that resulted from the earlier slaughter of breeding herds. During and retail beef and veal prices increased more than percent Price and Income Support Government programs in the past have increased farm income by raising commodity prices. These artificially high price supports often interfered with adjustments in production and agricultural trade flows ; farmers frequently based decisions on government price guarantees rather than on basic forces of demand and supply. Production often exceeded market needs at government-supported prices and government stocks began to accumulate. As a result quotas and acreage allotments were adopted to control output. Agriculture was justifiably cited as an example of the inefficiency created by government interference in private markets The Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of ( see the Economic Report for detail ) represented a significant change in the philosophy underlying government support of farm incomes through commodity programs. For major crops the price support mechanism was augmented by a system of direct income payments under which market prices are allowed to fluctuate in response to supply and demand thereby promoting a more efficient allocation of agricultural resources among the crops. By this means consumers and grain-using producers can benefit from lower prices when harvests are large. When market prices fall below legislatively determined targets farmers receive direct income payments to make up for the income lost through the lower prices While the act changed the way incomes were protected the primary focus was still on the problem of low incomes. The act made no provision for cushioning farmers and consumers from the effects of instability resulting from increased reliance on market prices. It was generally believed that the rapid price increases of were largely an aberration and that sufficient commercial grain stocks would be available in the future to moderate the price fluctuations associated with occasional crop failures. Only in the years that followed did the inflationary consequences of a continuing policy of placing sole emphasis on minimum income protection become clear Agricultural Productivity A sustained and nearly full use of agricultural resources requires giving more attention to policies that improve the sector 's productivity. Crop production per acre increased at an average annual rate of percent from to Since then the average rate has been about percent per year. Without the excellent growing conditions in and which pushed yields per acre well above the trend the rate of increase would have been below percent per year The greater use of marginal lands during this decade has undoubtedly contributed to the slower increase in crop production per acre After steadily declining for more than years the number of crop acres harvested increased significantly in This number has remained at about the level despite the occasional use of acreage set-asides since then. The rise in agricultural exports has been a significant factor in increased land use. Today one-third of the U.S crop acres produce for export percent more than in the 1960s and percent more than during the 1950s Continued intensive use of cropland will lead to a depletion of soil and water resources unless specific resource management schemes are employed. These improved farming practices are becoming even more crucial to productivity improvements because the migration of labor from the sector has slowed and because prices for fuel and fertilizer are climbing THE ADMINISTRATION 'S AGRICULTURAL POLICIES In January world grain stocks and prices were returning to pre-1972 levels. The domestic cattle herd was being liquidated at a rapid rate and retail meat prices were lower than in Net farm income had fallen percent from Sentiment was growing for a reinstatement of farm programs designed to support producers ' incomes through higher commodity prices. It was uncertain whether the situation was an aberration or a signal that price and income stability would have to be the major consideration in future farm policy The Administration believing that conditions had indeed changed worked with the Congress in developing the Food and Agriculture Act of That legislation and the policy directions it implied became the basis for a broad range of food and agricultural programs to protect farmers ' incomes while supporting the principle of fullcapacity production and increased reliance on market prices Grain Reserves In a major departure from past policies the Administration 's programs went beyond minimal income protection for grain farmers and established a farmer-owned grain reserve. Using existing authority and the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) loan program the Administration announced the implementation of a farmer-owned wheat and rice reserve in April CCC loans on the crops were extended and farmers received government payments for crop storage. They were allowed to repay the loans without penalty whenever the market price reached percent of the loan rate on the crop In August the Administration announced its plan to establish reserves of million metric tons of food grain ( wheat and rice ) and feed grain ( corn sorghum barley and oats ) Most were to be owned by farmers but a small government-owned food reserve was also planned Passage of the Act formally authorized these reserves. It mandated the farmer-owned wheat reserve with essentially the same op- erating rules as those announced earlier by the Administration. The act also provided broader authority for incentives to use the farmerowned reserve to store crops. It authorized a reserve for feed grains as well and provided low-interest loans to expand facilities for grain storage at the farm. By October more than $ billion in loans were outstanding to farmers for constructing such facilities The Administration achieved its goal for the level of reserve stocks in less than years. By early more than million metric tons of wheat and million metric tons of feed grains had entered the reserve Explicit rules now govern release of the grain from the reserve Farmers may not redeem loans or sell the reserve stocks within the contract period ( generally years ) without penalty unless market prices reach a certain percentage of the loan value. If they do the reserve is " released " ; that is the government ceases storage payments and farmers are allowed ( but not required ) to repay the CCC loan and sell their reserve stocks. If the market price reaches a higher percentage of the loan rate the loans are " called " ; farmers are required to repay the CCC loans or forfeit the grain. This program thus makes it less likely that grain prices will rise significantly above the call price because grain is released from the reserve in stages The combination of the call price and the loan rate establishes a known corridor of market prices. Price movements within that range allocate resources among crops but the probability of excessive fluctuations which disrupt planning and increase volatility in agricultural production is much reduced. This arrangement helps to make the Nation less susceptible to the inflationary effects of crop shortages The first test of how well the managed reserve concept could weather a period of tight supplies occurred in the spring of Late plantings in the United States and most of the rest of the Northern Hemisphere increased the likelihood that would bring a poor harvest. Reports of a potentially serious production shortfall in the Soviet Union added to this possibility. The farm-level price of wheat rose percent between mid-May and mid-June alone. Feed grain prices also increased rapidly Even with the prospect that world carryover stocks might decline more severely than in a rapid rise in grain prices was avoided The price increases in late spring brought the wheat and the feed grain reserves into release status. At that point the government ceased storage payments and farmers were allowed to withdraw grain from the reserve without penalty. By mid-October percent of the wheat and sorghum and more than percent of the corn had been withdrawn. As this grain came into the market the price increase slowed. As a result producers of hogs poultry and dairy products could continue to expand their output and cattle producers could continue to rebuild their breeding herds The suspension of sales of agricultural products to the USSR in early will provide yet another test of the grain reserve concept Normally such an action would have substantially reduced farm prices. In announcing the trade suspension the President assured the Nation that the burden of that action would not fall unfairly on the agricultural sector. Shortly thereafter the Administration stated that the farmer-owned grain reserve would play an important role in isolating affected commodities from the market. To remove the immediate price-depressing effect of the Soviet grain suspension the CCC offered to assume the contractual obligations for the unshipped grains. Simultaneously the Administration announced that the rules governing the reserve were being changed to encourage farmers to place grain in storage. These two actions were expected to reduce the level of free stocks and counter downward pressure on prices Then as prices firmed the government-secured grain could be sold back to the market thus keeping season-average prices little changed The flow of grain into reserve stocks would support prices over the current crop year and serve as a buffer against future crop shortfalls The central role assigned to the use of farmer-owned reserves in this case underlines their usefulness as a major tool for cushioning supply shocks in the farm sector The reserve can thus be a moderating force on both the upside and the downside. If corn prices had reached $ per bushel in early as some thought possible the expansion in the cattlebreeding herd would have been delayed. Hog and poultry producers would have begun slaughtering their animals immediately. Total meat production in and beyond would have been lower than is now expected and food prices would have been higher. Then too the early suspension of agricultural trade with the Soviet Union in the absence of special policy actions would have resulted in a significant decline in commodity prices and farm income. Use of the farmer-owned grain reserve coupled with other policy actions will mitigate these impacts. In both cases food prices and farm income will have been stabilized and importantly stabilized around longterm market trends International Trade Agreements The avoidance of excessive price fluctuations in an agricultural sector operating at full capacity with an increased reliance on agricultur- al exports requires improvements in international trade arrangements. The grain reserve helps to cushion the effects of fluctuations in world trade of course but better commodity trade communication between nations is also essential Since the communication process has been made more formal in a number of ways perhaps the most important being passage of reporting requirements on export sales. The Agricultural Act of requires that all exporters of major agricultural products report weekly the type of commodity to be exported the marketing year of shipment and the destination if known. The Secretary of Agriculture is then required to publish the compiled data each week following the week of reporting. The law was amended by the Food and Agriculture Act of to allow the Secretary of Agriculture to require the daily reporting of export sales In addition to requiring these regular reports of export trade the Administration has been successful in several other related areas Completion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations ratified through subsequent passage of the Trade Agreements Act of is one example. In addition the President 's Export Council has been revitalized with a strong subcommittee on agricultural exports. Agricultural trade offices have been opened in several overseas locations and the rank of the U.S agricultural attache at important foreign posts has been upgraded. All these actions help to improve our network for international agricultural trade communications The Administration has also moved to moderate the volatility in domestic sugar prices. Acting in concert the world 's sugar producers and importers have established a mechanism for balancing world sugar supplies more nearly in accord with market needs. When the International Sugar Agreement is fully operational we should be less likely to see a repetition of the percent price increase of The Meat Import Act of which provides a new procedure for determining meat imports is further evidence that price stability in the food and agricultural sector is important to the Administration Under the predecessor to this legislation allowable meat imports were tied directly to domestic production and this served to accentuate cyclical movements in the beef industry. Presidents were often impelled to take action that would increase the amount of meat available to consumers and would moderate retail price rises in years when domestic production was low. But even suspension of the quota could not increase total supplies for domestic consumption by much since most cattle-producing nations are generally at the same phase in the production cycle The new authority automatically allows imports to increase when domestic supplies fall. With prior knowledge that the United States will accept greater quantities of imported meat when domestic production declines producers around the world can act in ways that help to stabilize beef production Humanitarian aid has long been an important aspect of U.S. agricultural policy. But when crop prices rose sharply in the food sent to aid the developing nations was substantially reduced evidencing the need for a policy that would not leave such nations so vulnerable to crop shortages and high prices. As a result the Administration has proposed an International Food Security Reserve which would isolate about million metric tons of wheat from the market and make it available to developing nations during emergencies. The Congress has yet to act on the legislation. Title III of Public Law the Food for Peace Program is also a major vehicle of the Administration 's policy related to international food aid. Under Title III qualifying nations are permitted to repay debts for food aid by investing in projects which improve their countries ' long-term economic prospects and thereby reduce the future need for emergency food assistance FUTURE POLICY PROBLEMS Significant progress has been made in refocusing food and agricultural policies toward making the Nation better able to withstand shocks in the food sector. Managing full-capacity production with grain reserves and better arrangements for long-term international trade and food aid represent a fundamental shift in policy. But much is still left to be done The concept of a farmer-owned grain reserve has been tested at least to a point and has proved capable of moderating volatility in grain prices. Important questions must still be answered however about its operation and impact on the sector 's productivity. There are misgivings about the appropriate size of the reserve and the price-trigger rules. There is also a danger that the target price could eventually be established " too high " and possibly lead to subsequent upward adjustments in both the release price and the call level. If that happens our grain will become less competitive in world markets and the flexibility of the reserve policy will largely be negated More emphasis needs to be placed on increasing the food and agricultural sector 's productivity. Past productivity gains in the sector were aided by the widespread use of relatively inexpensive energy inputs especially petroleum-based fertilizers and by the migration of the rural population to the cities. Today in the face of the world 's growing needs for food and increased anxiety about inflation environmental damage and the energy shortage other avenues to advanced productivity will probably need to be found. As an example the Food and Agriculture Act of provides targeted competitive grants for studying plant growth a field where research may disclose many possible ways to improve productivity Over the next several years food prices will continue to command attention. Although rising commodity prices have been a significant cause of past increases in retail prices programs to stabilize commodity prices by buffering annual fluctuations in production can not by themselves lead to significant reductions in food price inflation Marketing costs of which labor costs and the price of energy inputs are major components account for approximately two-thirds of every dollar spent on food. Long-term progress in lowering the annual rate of food price increases will therefore depend on reducing the underlying general inflation rate While we must expect future problems the accomplishments of recent years in certain key commodity areas have been encouraging. In a relatively brief time the agricultural sector has moved from excess capacity supported by policies designed to reduce production to nearly full utilization of the sector 's resources with sales at world market prices. This change in the operation of the sector made the economy more vulnerable to potentially rapid increases in food and commodity prices such as those in Administration policies in agriculture have aimed at reducing this vulnerability and the events of the past year are evidence of their promise CHAPTER The World Economy Testing Resilience ABROAD JUST AS AT HOME oil price increases dominated economic developments in Both the sharply higher price for oil and the likelihood that oil supplies will continue to be uncertain in the intermediate future raise difficult questions for economic policy in all countries. Substantial adaptations within and among the world 's economies are needed to respond to the changing energy situation Improvement in economic performance during had provided a solid base for further expansion in Outside the United States inflation pressures had eased somewhat. Growth had begun to increase partly in response to the less restrictive policies that the declining inflation made possible. As a result of previous changes in exchange rates as well as the altered pattern of relative growth among the United States and the major foreign countries external imbalances were diminishing rapidly. Actions in November to strengthen and stabilize the dollar helped to reduce uncertainties in financial markets Other circumstances also favored continued expansion abroad in Declining real oil prices during and the appreciation of most currencies against the dollar had improved the terms of trade for many countries. The resulting gain in real incomes began to be reflected in higher spending in late and early With diminishing margins of spare productive capacity strengthening profit positions and improving business expectations investment demand recovered sharply. Trade volumes also grew at a higher rate than had been generally expected despite a virtual collapse in exports to Iran Developments in oil markets however began to pose a growing threat to continued economic progress. In December the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) announced a schedule of gradual price increases to raise the average price of crude oil from about $ pqr barrel to about $ by the end of Following the temporary interruption of Iranian supplies official OPEC selling prices rose sharply and prices in spot markets soared even further. With continued tightness in oil markets stemming in part from a large inventory buildup by consuming countries world oil prices reached an average level of about $ by early January Thus in the course of months oil prices have more than doubled. The additional payments for oil imports resulting from this price rise represent just over percent of the combined gross national product ( GNP ) of the industrial countries. Measured in this way the oil shock of is fully as large as that of The dimensions of the price increase raise the question of whether the pattern of global recession and increased inflation will be repeated. There are a number of similarities in the two situations First direct transfer of purchasing power from oil consumers to oil suppliers can be expected to lead consumers to spend less on other goods and services. As in this reduced consumer spending will not be replaced fully in the near term by increased purchases by the oil-exporting countries. On the contrary internal conditions in a number of these countries suggest that the expansion of imports in response to higher revenues will be less rapid now than in Second as discussed in Chapter the policy dilemma that became apparent in reappeared in Large oil price increases depress demand output and employment. But by sharply raising consumer prices they also threaten to set off a new wage-price spiral as workers and other income recipients seek to prevent a reduction in real income. Stimulative fiscal and monetary measures designed to prevent the adverse effects on output and employment increase the likelihood that the oil price rise will become embodied in wages and other costs and thus in underlying inflation. On the other hand restrictive fiscal and monetary policies aimed at preventing a spillover of oil price increases into a more general inflationary surge exacerbate the harmful effects of the higher oil prices on output and employment Third international financial markets will once again need to recycle very large flows of funds from OPEC countries to countries with current account deficits. While the experience demonstrated the versatility and flexibility of these markets serious strains may still emerge There are also major differences between the current situation and the oil price shock. In one respect the situation is now more difficult. Following the rise in oil prices in the oil market began to ease and from to a buyers ' market prevailed. An extended easing is less probable in the current situation since moderate reductions in the demand for oil may be matched by reduced supplies. Sustained price weakness is not likely unless rapid and substantial conservation can be achieved 29H-289 In other respects however the situation is somewhat more hopeful. Perhaps most important there is now substantially less aggregate demand pressure on overall capacity and on labor markets than in the earlier period. All countries had reached cyclical peaks more or less simultaneously in early and clear signs of overheating had emerged. Inventory building in particular had become marked by speculative excess. In order to counter aggregate demand pressures government policies had turned sharply toward restraint. The shock of rising oil prices reinforced these other tendencies toward weakness and together they produced a global recession in The close synchronization of economic activity across countries in also intensified the transmission of recession from one country to another through rapidly declining world trade Currently elements of cyclical strength persist in a number of countries. Signs of a speculative surge in inventory building have not appeared and prospects are good that a large inventory cycle can be avoided. Continued growth in a number of the larger countries albeit at a much reduced rate will help to sustain world trade in the face of weakening activity and imports in the United States ; hence the secondary repercussions on growth from declining trade will be less pronounced Moreover a good deal has been learned since The major countries recognize more clearly the nature of the constraints imposed by the rise in oil prices. In at least some countries labor market participants appear to have recognized that higher oil prices can not be fully compensated through higher nominal wages. A " wage explosion " like that in many countries during is therefore less likely. Government policies too seem better prepared to limit the spillover effects from the oil market while avoiding the sharp swings of fiscal and monetary policy that characterized the earlier period. Finally the mechanisms for gaining international cooperation and policy coordination have been strengthened since though much more can be done in this regard Although oil price increases and the problems they bring dominate the current economic scene they can not be viewed in isolation from other developments in the international economy. Appropriate policies in trade international financial relations and energy can make it easier to adjust to the rise in oil prices. Conversely if protectionist trade actions multiply if energy policies work at cross-purposes or if financial markets become disrupted then overall economic performance will be that much worse The remainder of this chapter examines the direct economic aspects and policy implications of the oil price rise and then considers some broader questions of managing international economic interdependence The first section discusses recent and prospective overall economic performance in the industrial world and explores the challenges for fiscal monetary and energy policies to manage this performance The second section discusses recent developments in the international financial and monetary system. Three topics are of particular importance : the emerging pattern of international payments and the problem of recycling the OPEC surplus to finance the deficits of developing countries ; the evolution of a system of " managed floating " exchange rates among major currencies ; and the longer-run role of the dollar as the principal international reserve asset and medium of exchange The final section discusses trade and trade policies focusing on the process of adjustment to changing patterns of comparative advantage DEVELOPMENTS IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL ECONOMIES Despite the sharp rise in energy prices average GNP growth for the six major industrial countries other than the United States was about percent in roughly unchanged from The momentum of growth appears to have been surprisingly well maintained into the second half of the year in most foreign countries. While virtually all forecasts suggest that growth will slow sharply this year clear signs of a general weakening have not yet emerged Inflation rates in as measured by the personal consumption deflator averaged about percent for this same group of countries a moderate increase from During the course of the year however inflation accelerated sharply as higher oil prices began to work their way through these economies The most recent projections by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) are that the average growth of GNP for these six countries will fall to about 2V2 percent in and that inflation will rise to about percent ( see Tables and ) The further increases in oil prices that have occurred since this projection suggest that these forecasts understate the extent to which economic performance is likely to deteriorate TABLE Growth in real GNP in major industrial countries [ Percent change ] Country United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy Canada Average excluding United States Preliminary Forecasts by OECD and Council of Economic Advisers Data are for real gross domestic product Based on GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers GROWTH IN The fact that growth abroad remained strong while our own growth was slowing stems in part from differences in the earlier pace of recovery. Through mid-1978 economic recovery from the global recession of was far more complete in the United States than in most other industrial countries. For that reason economic policies here and abroad moved in different directions. In the United States where unemployment had fallen to a relatively low level and inflationary pressures were intensifying a shift toward more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies was made. In a number of other countries particularly Germany and Japan policies to promote faster growth were set in motion TABLE Inflation in major industrial countries [ Percent change in prices1 ] Country United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy Canada Average excluding United States Change in implicit price deflator for private consumption expenditures for United States Japan Germany United Kingdom and Canada. Change in consumer prices for France and Italy Preliminary Forecasts by OECD and Council of Economic Advisers Based on GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers Perhaps the most important factor accounting for higher growth abroad in however was the recovery in private investment which had been unusually weak since A pent-up demand for replacement investment and capacity expansion had developed because of low rates of investment over the preceding several years Consequently when business firms perceived a moderate improvement in the prospects for overall demand investment responded rapidly. The recovery of investment was reinforced by improving profits and higher cash flows for enterprises. A substantial part of the gains in the terms of trade experienced by the major foreign industrial countries during apparently accrued to businesses in the form of higher profits since the relative decline in the prices of imported goods was only partly passed through to final consumers. The generally moderate rise in wages in both and early also worked to strengthen profits. Profit positions were further improved in a number of countries by a sharp rise in productivity as output expanded The acceleration of growth in the second half of and the first half of was accompanied by an even sharper acceleration in the growth of imports. Import volumes which had increased at an average rate of about percent for the six major foreign industrial countries during the preceding year grew by more than percent over the year from mid-1978 to mid-1979. This more rapid increase in imports reflected not only higher final domestic demand but also a rise in inventory accumulation and for Japan the appreciation of the yen during The principal beneficiaries of this strengthened demand for imports were the United States and a number of the smaller countries of the OECD During the second half of last year imports by the major foreign countries slowed ; and their exports accelerated primarily because of the rapid growth of purchases by the oil-exporting countries. The continuation of relatively rapid growth abroad in the face of the growing burden of higher oil prices is explained in large part by this strengthening of net exports. Another factor is that abroad as well as in the United States consumers apparently reacted to accelerating inflation by reducing personal saving rates so that consumer demand slowed less than personal income It is difficult to judge whether the growth momentum that had become established abroad would have been sustained in if oil prices had not risen. Outside Germany Japan and a few smaller countries inflation rates were still very high. Because they probably would have begun to increase a strong recovery might have been difficult to sustain in any event. The serious structural problems brought on by rigid labor markets and other resource immobilities continue to limit the degree to which full capacity utilization can be approached without serious inflationary repercussions INFLATION IN With oil prices rising sharply inflation increased everywhere. Table shows the rate of consumer price increases during and in major countries. An attempt has been made to separate the changes in prices into energy and other components. For comparison import unit values are also shown TABLE Changes in consumer prices with and without energy and import unit values major industrial countries [ Percent change annual rate > ] Dec. June Dec. to Country and item to to June Dec. June United States Consumer prices Energy : i Other Import unit value Latest month ( ) Japan : Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value Germany : Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value France Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value United Kingdom Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value ItalV ' Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value Canada : Consumer prices Energy Other Import unit value Latest months over preceding months November September December September September September October September September September September September September October Consumer prices are seasonally adjusted ; import unit values are not seasonally adjusted Consumer prices with rent substituted for home ownership Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and gasoline motor oil coolant etc Fuel and light and gasoline Reflects increases in value-added tax rates in these countries Fuel and light only Note. All data for breakdown of consumer prices between energy and other are estimates Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers While it is not possible to distinguish precisely between " internally " and " externally " generated inflation a substantial part of the declining inflation abroad in can be traced to the relative modera- tion in import prices during This moderation resulted not only from the stability of dollar prices of oil and primary commodities but also from the appreciation of most currencies against the dollar Conversely the sharp acceleration in inflation in predominantly reflects the turnaround in import prices a development exacerbated in Japan by the sharp depreciation of the yen The judgment that the domestic component of inflation in most countries did not accelerate much in is borne out by the behavior of wages which have risen at a relatively constant rate in most countries ( see Table ) One exception is Italy where widespread indexation ( the scala mobile ) leads inevitably to a rapid transmission of higher prices into wages. In the United Kingdom very sharp wage increases in new contract settlements signed in October may also signal an acceleration in wages though the evidence is still scanty. Domestic cost pressures in most countries outside the United States were also eased by relatively strong productivity growth TABLE Changes in wages in major industrial countries [ Percent change ] Change from same period a year earlier to Country United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy.. Canada 1st half 2nd half 1st half latoct ? Latest month ( ) months December October October June October September July Source : National sources THE RESPONSE OF ECONOMIC POLICY TO RISING OIL PRICES The mechanism through which increases in OPEC oil prices reduce growth and worsen inflation is well understood and is much the same in all countries that rely heavily on imported oil Higher prices for imported oil raise the prices of petroleum products directly and also increase the costs and prices of goods and services requiring petroleum for their production. Consumers suffer a real income loss. The result is equivalent to a rise in excise taxes hence the term " OPEC tax/ ' Except temporarily this tax can not be offset by increases in nominal wages ; such increases when they occur tend to lead not to a restoration of real incomes but to a rise in other prices a sequence that builds the increase in oil prices into the underlying inflation rate In the longer run the loss in real income resulting from the OPEC tax need not result in a weakening of aggregate demand. To the extent that the higher receipts of OPEC countries lead to a commensurate increase in their demand for goods and services aggregate demand would be unaffected. Lower real spending by consumers of petroleum products would be offset by stronger exports. Jobs lost in the consumer goods industries would be replaced by new jobs in export industries. Indeed by the industrial countries as a group were exporting sufficient goods and services to the oil-producing countries to pay in full the tax imposed on them by the rise in oil prices In the short run however OPEC 's imports will not increase as rapidly as its receipts. Indeed as discussed in more detail below it appears probable that the gap between OPEC receipts and expenditures that has now reappeared will remain very large for a number of years The adverse effects on aggregate demand of the current rise in oil prices could be offset at least in the short run by changes in private spending. For example while the " oil tax " caused economic growth in the United States to decline in by more than had been expected early last year the drag on the economy has been softened by a drop in the personal saving rate. A similar though less marked decline has occurred elsewhere. This decline may not be sustained however. Historically the greater uncertainty associated with higher inflation the increased job insecurity resulting from adjustment to the higher oil prices and the desire of consumers to restore the real value of financial wealth that has been eroded by inflation have all induced more cautious behavior by consumers Policy responses of most countries during the past year have not compensated for the OPEC tax. On the contrary fiscal and monetary policies have shifted toward restraint. Germany and the United Kingdom both raised value-added tax rates during the course of though in the United Kingdom this was partially offset by reductions in income taxes. Almost everywhere government deficits in were smaller than had been projected at the beginning of the year Planned budgets for furthermore are generally more restrictive than those of last year Italy being the principal exception Monetary policies were also tightened during in all major countries. Short-term interest rates abroad rose by over basis points on average during the year as monetary authorities attempted to maintain growth of the monetary aggregates within target ranges in the face of rising inflation. The fact that these target ranges were not changed implies in itself greater monetary restraint on real growth since price levels are higher now because of the oil price rise than had been expected when the targets were set. A number of countries have announced lower targets for growth of the monetary aggregates for The major reason for pursuing relatively restrictive economic policies is the overriding need to limit the spillover from higher oil prices into higher nominal wages. In other countries as in the United States preventing an upward ratcheting of the wage-price spiral is viewed as the most pressing task of economic policy. Nominal wages in most countries have not so far shown signs of sharp acceleration Prospects for limiting wage acceleration seem better in Germany and Japan than elsewhere. In those countries and some others the process of wage determination is relatively concentrated in wage rounds that terminate each spring when annual labor contracts for most workers are negotiated. In such circumstances it is easier to enforce the perception that an accelerated growth of wage claims can not effectively raise real incomes. Synchronization of wage bargaining does not by itself assure a moderate wage outcome both Germany and Japan experienced wage explosions in when the " consensus mechanisms " broke down. Recognition of this fact perhaps explains why those two countries as well as most others,.are currently practicing restrictive demand management as the principal means of limiting the inflationary effects of higher world oil prices THE OUTLOOK FOR Most major countries thus face the prospect that growth in will be slowed by both the direct effects of higher oil prices and the shift to more restrictive policies needed to limit the rise in inflation However if real oil prices do not rise substantially beyond the $ per barrel average that appears to have been established by early growth will probably remain positive in all major countries except the United States and the United Kingdom. Investment demand in a number of countries may be relatively well sustained. Japan is likely to benefit from a stronger growth in the volume of exports during as a result of the lower value of the yen ( although the growth induced by yen depreciation will to some extent displace production in other countries ) The United Kingdom 's fall in output does not derive principally from the rise in oil prices but from the very sharp shift toward restrictive monetary and fiscal policies instituted by the new government For at least some countries the rise in inflation may be brief if the increases in oil prices now begin to moderate. To the extent that the cautious economic policies generally pursued during succeed in forestalling wage increases induced by higher oil prices there may be more room for policy actions to support economic activity in some countries as proceeds. Hence the slowdown in economic growth need not be prolonged It is clear however that the outlook is precarious. Further substantial increases in the price of oil could induce a widespread recession as well as higher inflation. If wages accelerate more sharply than is now assumed and in response monetary policies tighten further positive real growth will become less likely. Finally a sharper slowing of world trade because of a general move to reduce inventories increased protectionist barriers or forced retrenchment by developing countries unable to finance needed imports could also lead to weaker growth than is currently expected REDUCING WORLD OIL DEMAND The rise in petroleum prices reflects very tight conditions in world markets. If there are no further significant reductions in supply some temporary easing in market conditions is likely at least in because of price-induced conservation slower growth in oil-importing countries and reductions in the recent rate of stockbuilding demand Given the relatively low price elasticity of demand for oil in the short run however the margin between ease and tightness is very narrow Increased uncertainty of supply as well as the erosion of previously established buyer-supplier relationships in the petroleum markets have tended to raise the demand for oil inventories as a hedge against possible future scarcity. Decisions by a small number of oilexporting countries to reduce production in response to market weakness could undo some or all of the benefits of reduced demand Unless the reductions in demand are substantial upward pressure on oil prices could continue even as consumption declines and thus further undermine the prospects for economic performance The current situation is marked by strong interdependence among oil-consuming countries. Increased demand for petroleum in one country by putting pressure on world oil prices affects inflation and growth prospects in all other oil-importing countries. Conversely the benefits of lower consumption in one country tend to be shared by all in the form of reduced price pressure in the world oil market Such interdependence creates strong grounds for the coordination of energy policies among countries Considerable progress toward this end was made during But the problem is difficult given both the strong perception of national interest that colors each country 's views regarding adequate supplies of oil and the attendant pressure on each to secure its own position The basis for cooperation among oil-consuming countries since has been the Emergency Allocation Agreement within the Inter- national Energy Agency to which the major industrial countries except France belong. This agreement provides a mechanism for sharing available oil supplies among member countries when the supply shows a substantial shortfall ( a percent reduction or more ) The agreement however does not provide a mechanism for limiting competition among countries when the shortfall is below this threshold Early in it was agreed within the International Energy Agency and in parallel within the European Economic Community that by the end of the year each country should reduce its consumption by percent relative to trend. While the United States met this objective there was significantly less success in doing so among most other countries At the Tokyo Summit meeting last June the leaders of the seven major industrial countries took several important steps to establish a framework for cooperation in energy over the medium term. Of central importance was the acknowledgment of interdependence and recognition of the resulting need for each country to commit itself to import levels that in sum would not exceed the volume of oil likely to be available. Firm targets for were laid down. It was further agreed to pursue discussions in the International Energy Agency and other forums on steps to reach these targets and develop cooperative approaches to limit demand for imports during the intervening years These discussions resulted last December in a new agreement by the International Energy Agency setting out individual targets for each country 's oil imports in It was further agreed to review the targets each quarter and revise them if necessary to match reductions in supply. The successful carrying out of this approach would do much to moderate future upward pressure on oil prices since it provides a means of averting a competitive scramble for limited oil supplies Over the long run the cut in the availability of oil need not sharply check the growth of the world economy. Higher relative prices for oil will encourage conservation and additional production of energy from other sources. While the increased real price of energy may somewhat slow the substitution of energy-intensive capital for labor and thus curb the growth of productivity most studies indicate that this effect is likely to be quite small. In the shorter term however given the wage and price rigidities in all industrial economies the limited availability of oil acts as a constraint on growth through its impact on the price of oil and in turn on inflation. Coordinated policies to reduce the demand for energy and increase energy production are therefore essential tools not only of energy policy but of overall economic management THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF PAYMENTS In and early the major imbalances in current account positions were among the largest industrial countries : sizable surpluses for Japan and Germany and a large deficit for the United States. During and into these imbalances were eliminated The United States was near balance in and both Germany and Japan had deficits The large shift in Japan 's current account from a surplus of over $ billion in to a deficit of about $ billion in is particularly striking. Primarily as a result of the appreciation of the yen since mid-1977 the volume of imports into Japan began to accelerate sharply during while export volumes declined. From June to June import volumes grew by a remarkable percent. Until late in however these volume trends were not fully reflected in a declining current account balance. The reason was that the appreciation of the yen also caused the terms of trade to move strongly in Japan 's favor. Import prices in dollar terms grew moderately while export prices surged. In late the yen turned around. During the course of the yen depreciated by percent and at the same time both oil and other commodity prices rose sharply. The resulting percent rise in import prices ( October to October ) coupled with the trade-volume trends that had previously become established led to a very rapid shift toward deficit in the current account. More recently the growth in the volume of imports into Japan has begun to slow and export volumes to rise again as the lower value of the yen has made Japanese producers more competitive in both domestic and foreign markets. Since Japanese payments for oil will rise substantially further this year it is not now expected that these volume shifts will lead to a renewed current account surplus in While current account positions within the OECD have become more nearly balanced the increase in oil prices has led to a renewed and substantial imbalance in the pattern of payments among the three major groupings of countries the OECD the oil-exporting countries and the other developing countries Table which is based on estimates by the OECD shows the pattern of surpluses and deficits among major groups of countries in recent years. The final column gives projections by the Council of Economic Advisers for the distribution of current accounts among major groupings in Between and the OPEC surplus is projected to rise by more than $ billion. The counterpart to this is a near doubling of the deficits of the other developing countries and a shift into deficit of about $ billion in the aggregate position of the OECD countries TABLE Current account balances [ Billions of dollars,- OECO basis ] Country OECD countries > Other OECD Other developing countries United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom Italy.. Canada OPEC countries Preliminary Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers The projected rise in the combined deficits of the non-OPEC developing countries reflects not only the very substantial increase in their payments for oil but also more slowly growing export receipts Slower growth in the industrial countries will reduce the demand for the goods that developing countries export. Rising external debt at higher interest rates will also add to their deficits the more so because most of their debt to banks is contracted at a floating rate of interest In relation to GNP however the projected rise in the deficit of developing countries is less than that in To some extent this is explained by the generally better maintenance of world trade that is foreseen. As a further point in most developing countries chose to finance large deficits rather than reducing them by slowing their demand for imports. It seems probable that adjustment actions now will be somewhat more prompt. Most important however the collapse in prices of raw materials which greatly weakened the terms of trade of the developing countries in is not expected to be repeated. First raw materials prices are currently quite low compared with production costs whereas they had soared in Second low investment since to expand capacity for producing raw materials has resulted in fairly low levels of excess capacity. Finally international commodity agreements may moderate price fluctuations for a number of commodities THE RECYCLING PROBLEM The pattern of large surpluses for OPEC and large deficits for developing countries ( as well as for some more developed ones ) requires that international financial markets once again " recycle " funds on an enormous scale. The problem while not insuperable is more difficult than in in three respects. First the OPEC surplus is likely to persist longer. Second debt burdens for many developing countries are larger now than they were in The increased indebtedness that higher oil bills will once again impose comes on top of the debts incurred when oil prices rose in Finally banks and other lenders now have a substantially larger exposure in many developing countries than they did in and may become increasingly reluctant to add yet further to their exposure Persistence of OPEC Surpluses In it was widely predicted that large OPEC surpluses would persist for many years. In fact however the OPEC surplus of was cut roughly in half in largely because the recession in the industrial countries greatly reduced the demand for oil while OPEC imports continued to rise sharply. The surplus widened somewhat in and but was increasingly concentrated in the hands of a small number of " low-absorbing " countries whose revenues were large relative to their populations. In the overall surplus declined to modest proportions and a number of OPEC countries began to incur deficits The reduction of the OPEC surplus is likely to be less rapid and complete this time. After the initial marked increases in oil prices in world oil prices then declined relative to the prices of the goods that OPEC imported. Conditions in oil markets likely to prevail during the next several years however suggest that a sustained decline in the relative price of oil is less likely. In a number of important OPEC countries and most notably in Iran trends toward social conservatism may limit the growth of imports as governments scale back development plans in order to minimize the disruption and social strains that rapid growth sometimes entails Debt Accumulation Judgments differ on the rate of debt accumulation that developing countries can sustain. The external debts of developing countries have grown rapidly since Debt service obligations have increased even faster since maturities have shortened on average and interest costs have risen as a result of the increased role of commercial relative to concessionary financing. If developing countries incur deficits on the projected scale their indebtedness will accelerate substantially in coming years. However the debt-carrying capacity of many developing countries has also been increasing rapidly. With few exceptions the most rapid rises in indebtedness have been among countries whose growth rates are also high and whose exports are expanding rapidly. Consequently debt burdens as measured by the ratio of debt-service payments to exports for instance have not risen sharply on average. Where substantial increases have occurred they have been largely in those countries whose prospects for longerterm growth are quite favorable In such circumstances it is difficult to judge the appropriate combination of adjustment policies to reduce deficits and additional borrowing. Faced with sharply higher bills for oil imports a developing country may borrow to sustain the flow of imports devoted to investment and growth. If the borrowed resources are being effectively invested the productivity growth that is preserved by borrowing should more than cover the debt-servicing costs. While the country 's living standards will improve more slowly than they would have done in the absence of the oil price rise borrowing to pay for the increased oil import bill can be appropriate and manageable For most developing countries however some actions to curtail the growth of imports will be required to compensate for higher oil bills and weaker export revenues. Some countries where past adjustment has been inadequate may have to begin a stringent retrenchment. On balance a general shift to highly restrictive policies is not likely to be necessary if the rise of oil prices now begins to slow Lenders ' Exposure To some extent OPEC countries directly provide loans or grants to developing countries. To a far larger extent however they have deposited their surpluses in the banks of industrial countries and their foreign branches. These banks in turn have extended loans to countries needing to finance their balance of payments Balance of payments financing is not of course exclusively carried out through banks. Historically the largest portion of developing countries ' deficits has been financed through other mechanisms including direct investment flows official financing from international financial institutions and bilateral development assistance. In recent years however bank credit has become a major source of funds for an increasing number of developing countries. The sustainability of large deficits therefore depends very greatly on the amounts and terms of resources made available through this channel Banks making international loans incur a variety of risks. Two in particular have received the most attention : " maturity risk " and " country risk. " Maturity risk arises from the fact that banks use relatively short-term deposits to make longer-term loans. In some feared that this risk would inhibit the recycling process. If OPEC deposits proved volatile individual banks would have difficulty meeting sudden demands of depositors for cash. Such apprehension proved unwarranted partly because OPEC deposits were less volatile than feared. More important however was the functioning of the interbank lending market. While autonomous deposits in individual banks fluctuated the aggregate level of such deposits to the international banking system as a whole was fairly stable and on a strongly rising trend. Individual banks could therefore attract funds from other banks to offset deposit shifts. The depth of this interbank market is indicated by the fact that interbank deposits account for over two-thirds of total gross Eurocurrency liabilities Country risk arises from the recognition that countries may be unable or unwilling to repay all or part of the principal or interest on their loans thereby forcing a rescheduling of loans which might entail losses to the bank. Such reschedulings have occurred periodically with respect to individual countries and no doubt they will continue Nevertheless losses to banks from such events have been minimal. In for instance the ratio of losses on foreign loans to outstanding claims averaged percent for a sample of U.S. banks. The comparable loss ratio on domestic loans was percent. On the record to date at least international lending is comparatively safe. It is likely however that country risk will become an increasingly important consideration as the debt burdens of a number of countries rise beyond historical levels By far the greatest share in the projected rise of the other developing countries ' aggregate deficit will accrue to a small number of generally more prosperous nations that have been substantial borrowers in international markets for a number of years. A further acceleration in borrowing by some of these countries might encounter resistance from banks reluctant to increase commensurately their exposure to risk. To some extent banks may be restricted by internally set " country limits " which specify the maximum lending to be undertaken in any one country. National banking authorities moreover may exercise increased surveillance or as Japan seems to have done recently issue more direct guidance to their banks to limit the growth of international lending In practice however there appears to be a great deal of flexibility in banks ' international lending. The number of banks participating in international lending has grown rapidly. Even if individual banks become more cautious the overall flow could well be maintained. Indeed a striking development in the last few years has been the eagerness of the banking system to provide financing. Interest rate spreads over the London interbank offered rate have steadily tended down- ward for most developing countries seeking loans. These countries have used the opportunity to refinance outstanding debts and build up their reserves by substantial amounts. Larger demands for credit and somewhat tighter monetary conditions in national markets suggest that spreads over the London rate on new loans may widen over the coming year. Front-end fees have already become a little more expensive and maturities on new loans have shortened A widening of spreads can be expected to serve a useful rationing function. Wider spreads by raising the profitability of lending relative to the cost of obtaining funds may increase the supply of funds that banks make available. By raising the costs of borrowing wider spreads will also induce borrowing countries to shift their policies in the direction of greater adjustment in their current account and less financing. This process does not always work smoothly. A general widening of spreads may be difficult to achieve even when it is warranted by market conditions. Borrowers have resisted such movements strongly because they and other lenders view a narrow spread as an indicator of creditworthiness. If an increase in the spread is confined to one or a few countries other potential lenders to these countries might shy away with the possible result of a sudden sharp interruption of financing While judgments differ on the seriousness of these risks existing international channels are probably capable of preventing severe disruptions. The International Monetary Fund in particular has substantial resources that can be drawn upon temporarily by countries encountering financing difficulties while they institute programs to overcome problems with their balance of payments. Implementation of such programs in turn is likely to restore the confidence of private lenders Many developing countries particularly the poorer ones do not have sufficient standing to borrow on international markets. For such countries an incipient increase in deficits can not be financed by private recycling and in consequence a forced adjustment could arise While some adjustment may be necessary retrenchment is not an acceptable solution for poorer countries where large portions of the population are near or below subsistence levels In practice the poorer countries have received a substantial flow of resources through bilateral and multilateral development assistance from outside. This Administration like the governments of many other industrial countries and the International Development Banks have policies under which a growing proportion of official financing and other aid flows is directed to these countries. Further additions to such flows would be appropriate even in the absence of the incremental oil price rise http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis While current assessments indicate that existing financing mechanisms can prevent major widespread disruption the rise in oil prices cuts severely into the incomes of most countries. Even rapidly growing countries will be forced into some combination of higher debt service and lower investment both of which will adversely affect living standards. The poorer countries especially can ill afford any such losses. Furthermore financing mechanisms can not cope with any and all increases in oil prices and the associated financing needs. The cumulative effects of large further rises in oil prices could increasingly threaten to overload the international financial system FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS IN The strong coordinated actions taken by the United States and other major countries in November to strengthen the dollar which had been under almost continual downward pressure for more than a year had beneficial effects in exchange markets in On a trade-weighted basis against an average of foreign currencies the dollar fluctuated within a relatively narrow range during the year. In December the weighted-average dollar exchange rate was percent lower than a year earlier This relative stability of the dollar reflected divergent movements with respect to individual foreign currencies : a depreciation of about percent vis-a-vis the mark most other currencies of the European Monetary System and the British pound ; and an appreciation of about percent vis-a-vis the Japanese yen Shifts in expectations about inflation rates uncertainties about the oil market perceptions of central banks ' intentions with respect to intervention policy and perhaps most importantly the conduct of monetary policy by the major countries affected movements in exchange rates at various times during Except for Japan external balance considerations played only a small role since successful adjustments had been made. Occasional downward pressure on the dollar in the second half of primarily reflected the market 's assessment of the strength of continued inflationary pressure in the United States. Rising oil prices and a less secure supply of oil had an especially important effect on the yen. The United Kingdom 's favorable outlook respecting oil independence tended to strengthen the pound during much of the year despite an acceleration of inflation. The market 's perception of the new government 's policies particularly the emphasis on tight monetary policy also helped strengthen the pound Exchange rate movements between the dollar and the German mark as well as between the dollar and those currencies linked to the mark through the European Monetary System tended to reflect changes in the market 's expectations about relative rates of inflation in the United States and Germany and about the course of monetary policy. Prior to October exchange markets tended to consider interest rates in the United States to be low relative to those in Germany given the inflation rates in the two countries. The dollar strengthened notably vis-a-vis the mark after the Federal Reserve announced a shift in its operating strategy on October and shortterm interest rates in the United States rose strongly ; but at the end of the year the dollar weakened again largely because of the increased uncertainty caused by the Iranian situation The substantial depreciation of the yen is perhaps the most striking aspect of exchange market developments during the year. Some portion of the decline may represent a reversal from the overshooting during the yen 's previous period of appreciation but the reversal went beyond that. Of course Japan is particularly vulnerable to the rise in oil prices and to a diminished security of supply. Prices of other raw materials on which Japan is dependent have also risen sharply. For the major industrial countries Table shows estimated changes in terms of trade that would have stemmed from the changes in oil prices if exchange rates had remained at their December levels. The terms-of-trade loss is substantially larger for Japan than for other major countries except the United States. Unlike the United States Japan does not have large potential sources of alternative forms of energy. Some decline in the real value of the yen would thus be consistent with needed longer-term adjustments in exports and imports. Changes in long-term trade volume in response to exchange rate changes are large however and the actual depreciation of the yen may have exceeded the requirements of the adjustment process T A B L E Impact of oil price increase on terms of trade [ Increased oil bills at oil import volume as percent of value of merchandise exports ] Country Percent United States Japan. Germany France United Kingdom Italy Canada Sources : Central Intelligence Agency International Monetary Fund and Council of Economic Advisers The Japanese government generally resisted the depreciation of the yen notably through heavy intervention sales of dollars. Its monetary policies also became somewhat more restrictive although the rise of interest rates during the year was less in Japan than in a number of other countries At several times during the market 's perception of the intervention policy of central banks also affected exchange rates especially the dollar-mark rate. Early in the year the stability of the dollar may have been due to perceptions in the market that coordinated actions by central banks could effectively counter large short-term rate movements. Under such conditions market participants faced a " twoway risk " and acted in ways that helped to keep rates relatively stable. By contrast after midyear market participants were less certain about the goals of intervention policy and their testing of the intentions of the monetary authorities led to greater volatility in exchange rates. Problems of this sort inevitably arise when intervention is used as a tool for limiting erratic fluctuations in exchange rates. On balance however the mechanisms of coordination among monetary authorities have kept such problems minor. More important it is clearly and generally recognized that intervention per se has limited usefulness when the market is convinced that prevailing exchange rates are inconsistent with its perceptions of underlying economic conditions and of monetary and other macroeconomic policies Foreign exchange intervention and monetary policy actions affect exchange rates in different ways. Intervention results in a change in the market supply of financial assets denominated in one currency relative to those denominated in another. If demands for the two currencies are stable this shift in relative supplies leads to a rise in the exchange value of the currency whose supply is reduced. Because assets denominated in the major currencies appear to be close substitutes however this exchange rate effect is correspondingly small The consequences of intervention are therefore likely to be determined mostly by the way market expectations respond. Intervention is most likely to succeed in stemming large unwanted changes in rates if accompanying actions signal an intention to pursue policies that will justify the existing exchange rate level over the longer term Monetary policy affects exchange rates primarily by influencing the demands for different currencies. For example a rise in interest rates in the United States increases the demand for dollars because the interest return on dollar assets is raised. The result is a bidding up of the exchange rate for the dollar. There is a limit to such appreciation however if it is expected that the dollar exchange rate will subsequently move back toward its longer-run equilibrium value. For this reason exchange rate changes due simply to changes in interest rate differentials ought not to be very large. Stronger effects however are likely when shifts in monetary policy are taken to be a sign of changed objectives for overall macroeconomic performance. Thus a rise in interest rates that is interpreted as a shift to a more restrictive policy will lead to expectations of slower growth and less inflation Expectational effects will then reinforce the exchange rate movements generated by the attraction of higher interest returns How effectively monetary policy can be used to stabilize the domestic economy depends on how accurately exchange markets assess the policy implications of changes in interest rates. In recent years a number of countries have begun to define monetary objectives in terms of quantitative targets for one or more monetary aggregates rather than targets for interest rates. Last October the Federal Reserve Board modified its operating techniques to place greater emphasis on achieving target rates of growth in the monetary aggregates. In such a world even when monetary objectives remain unchanged short-term interest rates will tend to fluctuate in response to changes in real growth or the rate of inflation or other factors Thus an economy in which inflation is moderating or economic activity is weakening will experience a decline in interest rates in the context of unchanged monetary policy. To avoid unwarranted exchange rate movements exchange markets must recognize that such interest rate declines do not represent a shift in monetary policy toward expansion but in fact spring from developments that are anti-inflationary in character THE DOLLAR IN THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM For many years the dollar has been the key currency of the international monetary system. It is the largest component of official reserves although not the only one. Relatively smaller amounts of other currencies are also held ; holdings of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) and credit positions with the International Monetary Fund are also reserve assets. Gold holdings are counted in reserves though their official use is now quite limited The dollar is also the principal intervention currency. For example if Switzerland wishes to intervene to support the Swiss franc in relation to the German mark it is likely to do so by selling dollars to buy francs. This can put pressure on the dollar if the seller of the Swiss francs is unwilling to hold the new dollar balances Beyond its role in official transactions the dollar is also the principal international medium in private transactions ; international borrowing is conducted in dollars and settlements for international transactions in goods and services take place in dollars even for trade contracts denominated in other currencies. While an international monetary system based on a single currency offers certain multilateral advantages there is no inherent reason why the dollar should continue to play this dominant role. Indeed the international importance of other currencies has been increasing. International and foreign bond issues for instance were percent dollar denominated on average in the 1960s ; in only percent were denominated in dollars. Despite considerable reluctance by the Swiss and German monetary authorities to have their currencies held as official reserves such holdings have been growing. Recently the Swiss have allowed foreign governments to hold deposits of Swiss francs directly with the Swiss National Bank. Until now such holdings have been primarily Eurodeposits. Intervention in other currencies is also increasing particularly with the establishment of the European Monetary System where member countries often intervene directly in each other 's currencies to maintain bilateral rates within agreed margins Over the longer term a declining relative role for the dollar would seem a natural consequence of a changing world situation. The U.S economy today accounts for a smaller share of world trade than it did when the dollar-based system evolved and the U.S. economy has become relatively smaller. The European Economic Community 's GNP is almost the same size as that of the United States ; the Japanese economy alone is almost half the size of the U.S. economy. The relative preponderance of U.S. capital markets has also diminished The share of worldwide long-term funds ( essentially bonds and equity issues ) raised in the United States has declined from percent in the 1960s to percent in However the evolution of the international monetary system from a system based on the dollar to one based on a number of currencies could be unsettling. The process of reserve and private portfolio diversification through which such an evolution would proceed requires a gradual increase in the supply of assets denominated in foreign currencies and a relative reduction in dollar-denominated assets. If such shifts in relative supplies do not take place to match shifts in demand exchange markets would come under pressure. Furthermore demand shifts may not always be gradual. Pressures for diversification are likely to become greater when expectations for a weaker dollar are strongly held and to be arrested when expectations for an appreciation of the dollar predominate There are however certain constraints limiting the development of an international role for other currencies. Private holders of liquid dollar assets will continue to need these dollars to finance international transactions. Many holders of dollar assets also hold dollardenominated debts and would therefore increase their exposure to risk by selling dollars. Official diversification on a large scale has not taken place ; and it is inhibited by the limited availability of suitable alternative assets as well as by the recognition that the attempt to sell large quantities of dollars would weaken the dollar and hence cause capital losses on remaining reserves Nevertheless it is possible that if left to evolution the process of diversification could generate episodic downward pressure on the dollar. Such a result might not be welcomed internationally if it tended to generate large current account surpluses for the United States ; and it would be unwelcome domestically if it increased inflationary pressures It is also widely perceived that a multicurrency system even without considering the transition costs is far from ideal. Exchange rates in such a system might be destabilized as a result of shifts in the composition of reserve assets by central banks or of attempted shifts in private holdings. Transaction costs for both official and private agents would be raised by the need to manage complex portfolios Such considerations have given rise to renewed interest in an alternative movement that would place greater reliance on a single international reserve asset the special drawing right in preference to the development of a multicurrency reserve system. A number of steps have been taken to strengthen the role of the SDR. Most recently the International Monetary Fund has been considering the possible establishment of a substitution account into which countries could deposit dollars and perhaps other currencies and receive claims denominated in SDRs in exchange Such an account could not resolve all the issues raised by the current role of the dollar in the international monetary system. It would not directly address for example the role of the dollar as the principal intervention currency. Countries would still need currencies for intervention. SDR claims could only be used directly for intervention if they were widely held in private portfolios and so could be sold directly in foreign exchange markets to nonofficial participants a possibility that could be considered at a future stage of the evolution of the SDR. In the near term however a substitution account would establish a mechanism to reshape the trend toward a multicurrency system in a form that did not destabilize exchange markets In October the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund agreed that a properly designed substitution account could make a useful contribution to improving the international monetary system. A number of difficult and complex problems must be addressed however before such an account can be established and it is not clear when or whether these issues can be resolved. They will be the subject of continuing international discussion during the coming year WORLD TRADE : PATTERNS AND ISSUES The slower average rate of growth in the industrial world since and the more marked decline in the average growth of trade over the same period have tended in general to intensify the difficulties of absorbing the continuing structural adjustments that trade necessarily imposes. At the same time the large benefits that come from open trade are less visible when markets are growing more slowly. The challenges facing trade policy are difficult : to preserve and indeed enhance an open trading system in the face of strengthened protectionist pressures ; to accommodate and absorb the increasing ability of a number of developing countries to compete in a widening range of product markets ; and to ensure that market processes are not subverted as the primary determinants of evolving comparative advantage THE MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS The signing last December of the agreements reached in the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations strengthens the framework for world trade at a critical time. This set of agreements is an important commitment by industrial and developing nations to resolve current and future trade problems in ways that preserve the benefits to world growth that derive from free trade The Tokyo Round agreements include significant reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers to trade and they introduce through a series of codes a set of procedures designed to limit nontariff distortions of trade patterns. The United States and its trading partners have made reciprocal tariff cuts ; the U.S. reductions average about percent those of Japan percent and those of the European Economic Community percent. Negotiations have not been completed on a safeguards code to sharpen and clarify the conditions under which exceptional relief action could be taken. Five major codes however have been agreed upon in the Tokyo Round. The government procurement code significantly improves the opportunities for suppliers to compete equally for government orders. The agreement on standards should speed the certification of foreign products. The agreement on customs valuation ensures more consistent practices and thus reduces the scope for offsetting tariff concessions by changes in valuation rules. The agreements on subsidies and countervailing duties and on antidumping actions restrict the use of subsidies and clarify the circumstances in which countervailing and antidumping duties may be imposed These agreements may owe their greatest significance to the specific rules they establish to help regulate the process by which nontariff barriers to trade are implemented. They emphasize the importance of transparency that is making visible the requirements for licensing and bidding on contracts and using explicit rather than arbitrary measures to regulate imports when this is unavoidable. The role of procedures is stressed ; in practice trade policy is made on a case-bycase basis and procedural safeguards are needed to ensure that relevant information is brought to bear on any decisions. The agreements embody the realization that the processes whereby trade policy is implemented must be considered fair by all signatories The agreements themselves do not guarantee success in resolving these difficult and detailed nontariff issues. Only when they are applied in individual circumstances will the procedures specified in the agreements reveal their adequacy. But in facing these questions squarely the parties to these agreements have made significant progress in the continuing effort to reduce barriers to trade and strengthen the rules under which trade and investment are conducted. The agreements should improve markets for U.S. exports and help reduce inflation by lowering our own import barriers SOURCES OF RISING PROTECTIONISM Much needs to be done to consolidate the progress represented by the Tokyo Round agreements. The growing interdependence of the world economy and the increased frequency of shocks during the past decade have led in recent years to a growing skepticism about the benefits of trade. These doubts have several roots : the significant increase in current account deficits following the oil price increase of ; the recession and associated high unemployment experienced in many industrial countries for most of the last years ; the development of long-term structural difficulties in several leading industrial sectors ; and the rapid industrialization of a group of middle-income developing countries whose growing exports have increased competition in markets for certain manufactured goods Oil price increases in will give further impetus to calls for greater protectionism. Current account deficits have already widened substantially in a number of countries and are likely to be reduced at a much slower rate than that which followed the oil price rise Individual countries may attempt to curtail imports and accelerate penetration of foreign markets to pay for increasingly expensive oil The slower rate of growth of domestic markets over the next several years will also invite actions to limit imports and to subsidize exports The need to adjust capacity and employment so as to reflect changed patterns of world consumption and production became acute in several sectors of the major industrial economies after the recession. The steel industry has begun the process and its experience suggests the difficult choices that must be made in determining the burden of adjustment within and among countries. The shipbuilding industry has completed somewhat more of the requisite adjustment of capacity and employment. The automobile industry is in the early stages of a complex rationalization and consolidation. As the adjustments continue the temptation will be great to put off the difficult choices by limiting imports Calls for higher import barriers will intensify as industrialization continues in a number of developing countries. Though accelerated growth in these countries began in the 1960s the exports integral to the process aroused concern in the major industrial countries only during the period of rising unemployment after the recession. They can be expected to occasion continuing concern in the near future The world economy has witnessed several instances of rapid industrialization earlier in the postwar period. Italy in the 1960s is a particularly good example. Such developments in part reflect the exploitation of significant cost advantages in the use of labor or other resources. In part they are a natural consequence of the maturation of product design and technology which allows production to be transferred from more industrialized countries to regions that were initially served by exports. These regions subsequently become able to export back to the industrialized countries or to third countries. In recent years this cycle has accelerated. Technology has been diffused more quickly capital has moved more rapidly and labor skills have grown impressively outside the major industrial countries. The international spread of production processes by transnational companies has also quickened the cycle particularly for newly industrializing countries enjoying political stability The industrial countries whose own innovations triggered this process have responded by focusing production toward more sophisticated knowledge-intensive products the direction in which their comparative advantage is evolving. Problems of adjustment have occurred in particular because the increases in exports from the newly industrializing countries have been concentrated in a few very narrow product lines such as certain textiles specific standardized items of electronic equipment or footwear. In the aggregate the share of exports from newly industrializing countries to OECD countries is still quite small. Furthermore most of the former countries using the debt-servicing capability that rapid export growth provides have increased their imports by even larger amounts. Thus increased exports by these countries to OECD countries have been more than matched by an increased flow of goods ( especially capital equipment ) and services in the opposite direction NEEDED RESPONSES In developing policies to address these problems one must take into account a number of important considerations. The first is that protection even when it appears attractive from the point of view of an individual country is very costly to all countries including the one initiating protection once the likely retaliatory responses of other countries are taken into account. Trade actions when judged necessary must therefore be implemented in ways that minimize the risk of an escalating retaliatory cycle. The emphasis on transparency and procedural safeguards in the Tokyo Round agreements is important in this regard Another consideration is that the counterpart to the adjustment costs imposed on some industries that are facing increased competition from abroad is the benefit to consumers from cheaper goods and the benefit to the nation from lower inflation. In assessing the appropriateness of trade actions one must weigh such costs and benefits. The increased use of direct or indirect export subsidies by many countries creates particularly difficult problems in this regard In the short run subsidies provide importing countries with bargainpriced goods. In the longer run however the adjustments that the subsidies induce are likely to be generally harmful. A country that adjusts out of a sector in which its underlying comparative advantage is favorable because foreign subsidies have made the sector appear less competitive will ultimately face higher prices if foreign subsidies are removed in the future or if the market power that subsidies promote is later used to extract monopoly rents. Because in the long run export subsidies reduce the efficiency with which resources are allocated globally such subsidies are undesirable. Where foreign subsidies create injury to domestic sectors countervailing action may therefore be justified to assure an appropriate worldwide pattern of production A final important point is that over the longer term expanding imports will be matched by a concomitant growth of export markets through the adjustment process. The loss of jobs in sectors of declining comparative advantage will be offset by the growth of new jobs in higher-wage high-technology industries. The principal focus of trade policy must therefore be on adjustment not preservation. Only in this way can foreign trade approach its potential for improving productivity and reducing inflation Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Cordially CHARLES L. SCHULTZE Chairman LYLE E. GRAMLEY GEORGE C. EADS Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide economic analysis and advice to the President and thus to assist in the development and implementation of national economic policies. The Council also advises the President with regard to decisions on other matters that affect the health and operations of the Nation 's economy With the enactment of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act the chartering legislation of the Council of Economic Advisers was substantially revised for the first time since This revision left unchanged the basic mission of the Council of Economic Advisers but created a new framework for the government 's pursuit of its economic policies. This act was discussed in detail in the Report of the Council Charles L. Schultze Chairman and Lyle E. Gramley Member continued to serve in these positions throughout On February William D. Nordhaus Member resigned to return to Yale University where he is Professor of Economics and a member of the Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics. On June George C. Eads became a Member of the Council. He was formerly Director of the Regulatory Policies and Institutions Program of the Rand Corporation RESPONSIBILITIES Since its creation the responsibilities of the Council of Economic Advisers have grown steadily as new economic problems placed new demands on the Council and its staff. Over the last decade the Council 's activities have broadened with the growing recognition that many " noneconomic " decisions have major consequences for our economy. Today the Council is responsible for advising the President not only on Federal fiscal policies but also on regulation and regulatory reform energy policies and international economic policies Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below : Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt. Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin <ermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel William Nordhaus Position Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July March Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January February MACROECONOMIC POLICIES From the outset the Council 's fundamental role has been to advise the President on comprehensive economic policies designed to achieve the government 's objectives for employment output and price stability. To fulfill this responsibility the Council develops economic forecasts several times each year with the assistance of an Interagency Forecasting Committee. The members of this Committee include in addition to the Council representatives from the Office of Management and Budget and the Departments of the Treasury Commerce and Labor. This group which is chaired by a Member of the Council meets to analyze the outlook for individual sectors of the economy and to develop detailed economic forecasts for the period immediately ahead. The Chairman of the Council presents these forecasts to the Economic Policy Group ( EPG ) which is made up of the President 's principal economic advisers and meets each week to discuss and develop the Administration 's proposals touching on economic policy. The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers is a member of the EPG and of its steering group In the final months of each year during the preparation of the President 's annual budget the Council works with other members of the EPG to develop and present to the President proposals for the stance and structure of Federal fiscal policies during the coming fiscal year. The Council monitors the progress of the economy and offers advice on when changes in fiscal policies are in order. Advising the President on macroeconomic policy has remained one of the Council 's major responsibilities In addition the Council has been heavily involved in the anti-inflation program including the design of the second-year standards and the discussions with organized labor concerning the National Accord The Chairman of the Council also chairs the Interagency Committee on Housing and Housing Finance. In the Council coordinated efforts to ascertain the impact of the October change in monetary policy on the housing market and prepared a report to the EPG and the President on the available means for dealing with problems of housing finance MICROECONOMIC POLICIES Over the years the Council of Economic Advisers has become increasingly involved in the analysis of microeconomic issues those economic developments and policy actions that affect individual industries markets or sectors of the economy. In the Council took part in formulating and articulating the Administration 's policies on agriculture energy health insurance hospital cost containment youth employment welfare reform regulatory reform and international trade In the Council continued to chair the interagency Regulatory Analysis Review Group ( RARG ) created late in to review selected analyses of the economic effects of major regulatory proposals The President has ordered that each major regulatory proposal issued by a nonindependent regulatory agency must be accompanied by a regulatory analysis. The analysis is to be developed by the agency originating the proposal and made available in draft form for public comment before the final regulation takes effect. During the period for public comment the Regulatory Analysis Review Group evaluates a select few of these regulatory analyses and its appraisal is filed in the agency 's record of public comment In five regulations were reviewed by RARG : the Environmental Protection Agency 's hazardous waste standards and new source performance standards for electric utility plants ; the Department of Energy 's proposed and interim final coal conversion regulations for utilites and industrial boilers ; and the Department of Health Education and Welfare 's proposal for labeling to accompany prescription drugs. At year 's end reports were being prepared reviewing the Environmental Protection Agency 's air carcinogen policy ; its guidelines for water effluents in the leather-tanning industry ; and the Department of Energy 's building-energy performance standards. The Council 's staff served as part of the analytic staff for the RARG and prepared a number of the review group 's comments. The Council and the staff also actively contributed to the continuing progress of the Administration 's legislative proposals for regulation reform The Council had a strong role in the development and presentation of the Administration 's energy policy initiatives especially these : phased decontrol the windfall profits tax low-income energy assistance and the Energy Security Corporation. The Chairman serves as a member of the Executive Committee of the Energy Coordinating Committee INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES During the Council of Economic Advisers continued to take an active part in international economic affairs. The Chairman of the Council was elected to serve another year as Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) As such he chaired two meetings of the Committee which consists of senior economic officials from OECD member governments. The Chairman also coordinated the work of a group of senior officials from other countries in drafting a common position paper on economic policy issues for the Tokyo Summit The Council is active in the OECD Economic Policy Committee 's working parties on inflation balance of payments adjustment and medium-term growth. A Member of the Council chairs a task force of the special high-level group on positive adjustment policies. Council Members or staff economists represent the U.S. Government at periodic meetings of these working parties during the year Economic developments in most Western nations were strongly affected in by the continued sharp rise in energy prices and the uncertainty of supplies. Analysis of the impacts of and appropriate responses to the energy price and supply situation dominated many OECD meetings. The Council assisted in developing the United States position on energy issues for the Tokyo Summit and in preparing for the International Energy Agency Ministerial Meeting including the setting of an oil import quota PUBLIC INFORMATION The annual Economic Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration 's economic policies both domestic and international. Distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators a publication prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the supervision of Catherine H. Furlong. The Joint Economic Committee issues the Indicators which has a distribution of approximately copies. Information is also provided to members of the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Chairman Members and staff economists of the Council. In the Chairman and Members made appearances before Committees of the Congress to testify on the Administration 's economic policies ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed through discussions with the President and written reports on economic developments The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal and informal meetings of government officials He exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members directly supervise the work of the Council 's professional staff and are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council. They represent the Council at numerous meetings of public and private groups and they assume major responsibility for the Council 's involvement in the activities of the government that affect the economy The Chairman and the Council Members work as a team on most policy issues. Operationally however responsibility over major topics of concern is divided between the two Members. Mr. Gramley has continued to take primary responsibility for macroeconomic analysis including international monetary developments and the preparation of economic forecasts ; and for labor market policies. Mr. Eads has supervised microeconomic analysis including analysis of policies related to such matters as energy agriculture social welfare and international trade ; and the overseeing of regulatory reform activities PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of the Special Assistant to the Chairman senior staff economists staff economists statistician and junior staff economists The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : Susan J. Irving Special Assistant to the Chairman Senior Staff Economists William T. Boehm Paul N. Courant K. Burke Dillon David Harrison Jr Val L. Koromzay David S. McClain David C. Munro V. Vance Roley Daniel H. Saks Charles L. Trozzo Agriculture and Food Policy Public Finance Taxes State and Local Finance Social Security Health and Welfare Finance Money Housing and Urban Policy Regulation and Natural Resources International Financial and Economic Developments Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting Fiscal Policy and International Trade Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting and Energy Investment Research and Development and Potential GNP Labor Market and Anti-Inflation Policies and Education Regulation and Energy Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Staff Economists Michael J. McKee Kate Stith Pressman Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting Productivity Prices and Anti-Inflation Policies Regulation and Energy Junior Economists David W. Berson Lisa L. Blum Stephen G. Cecchetti Judith R. Gelman Matthew D. Shapiro Public Finance International Economic Developments and Trade Labor Market Policies Regulation and Health Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician continued to be in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary responsibility for managing the Council 's statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of all statistical matter in the Economic Report. She also oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro and Earnestine Reid assist Mrs. Furlong In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff. Also called on for special assistance in connection with the Report were Dorothy L. Reid and Dorothy Bagovich former members of the Council 's staff SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers provides general support for the Council 's activities. Nancy F. Skidmore Administrative Officer prepares and analyzes the Council 's budget and provides general administrative services Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council handles general personnel management coordinates the schedule for the Economic Report and provides general assistance to the Council and the Special Assistant in the management of the Council 's activities Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Patricia A. Lee Linda A. Reilly Lisa A Stockdale and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were Catherine Fibich Bessie M. Lafakis Joyce A. Pilkerton Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M. Sturniolo. Bettye T. Siegel provided secretarial assistance in connection with the Report. Robert L Gilliam served as a clerk during the summer months. Michael J. Handel served as an intern during preparation of the Report DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff members are in most cases on leave from universities other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year were Thomas C. Earley ( Schnittker Associates ) Robert J. Flanagan ( Stanford University ) Steven W. Kohlhagen ( University of California Berkeley ) Susan J. Lepper ( Senate Budget Committee ) David S. Sibley ( Civil Aeronautics Board ) Lawrence J. White ( New York University ) David A. Wyss ( Data Resources Inc. ) and John M. Yinger ( Harvard University ) Robert E. Litan staff economist resigned to accept a position with Arnold and Porter. Peter G. Gould also resigned from the position of Special Assistant to the Chairman to accept a position with the Department of Commerce Junior economists who resigned in were James P. Luckett ( Brookings Institution ) Robert S. Lurie ( Yale University ) Frederick W. McKinney ( Yale University ) Elizabeth A. Savoca ( University of California Berkeley ) and Wanda S. Tseng ( International Monetary Fund ) Florence T. Torrison secretary to the Chairman also resigned from the Council staff Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l Gross national product B-2 Gross national product in dollars B-3 Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-4 Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross domestic product B-5 Gross national product by industry in dollars B-6 Gross national product by major type of product B-7 Gross national product by major type of product in dollars B-8 Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-9 Gross national product by sector B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business B-l2. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business B-13. Personal consumption expenditures B-14. Gross private domestic investment B-15. Inventories and final sales of business B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars B-l7. Relation of gross national product and national income B-18. Relation of national income and personal income B-19. National income by type of income B-20. Sources of personal income B-21. Disposition of personal income B-22. Total and per capital disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars B-23. Gross saving and investment B-24. Saving by individuals B-25. Money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by race of head POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-26. Population by age groups B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-29. Selected employment and unemployment data B-30. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic B-31. Unemployment by duration B-32. Unemployment by reason B-33. Unemployment insurance programs selected data Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY Cont 'd B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments ^ aSe B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries B-37. Productivity and related data private business sector B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-39. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B-40. Industrial production indexes market groupings B-41. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-42. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing B-43. New construction activity B-44. New housing units started and authorized B-45. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-46. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-47. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-48. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders PRICES : B-49 B-50 B-51 Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups B-52. Changes in consumer price indexes major groups B-53. Changes in special consumer price indexes B-54. Producer price indexes by stage of processing B-55. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups B-56. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups B-57. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-58. Money stock measures B-59. Commercial bank loans and investments B-60. Liquid asset holdings of private domestic nonfinancial investors B-61. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-62. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-63. Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks B-64. Bond yields and interest rates B-65. Consumer credit outstanding and net change B-66. Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated B-67. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-69. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-70. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years B-71. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget B-72. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-73. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-74. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-75. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-76. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation B-77. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-78. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-79. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-80. Corporate profits by industry B-81. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-82. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group B-85. Determinants of business fixed investment B-86. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-87. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-88. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-89. Common stock prices and yields B-90. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-91. Income of farm people and farmers B-92. Farm output and productivity indexes B-93. Farm input use selected inputs B-94. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers B-95. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities B-96. Balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-97. Exchange rates B-98. U.S. international transactions B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category Page INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS Continued B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-102. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and B-104. World trade balance and current account balances and B-105. International reserves selected years B-106. Growth rates in real gross national product B-107. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries B-108. Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-109. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Gross national product Gross Personal private consumption domestic investexpendiment tures Net exports Government purchases of goods and services Federal Exports Imports Total Total National defensel Nondefense State and local Percent change from preceding period gross national product2 ST.3 * II III I V II III I V II III IV P This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in " The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Tntal IOI3I Durable nrtnric gooos NonHiirahlo auraDie Services goods Tntal i oiai Nonresidential Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment ~ " * C : | II Ill I V : II III I V : I I III IV ' See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Gross private domestic investmentcontinued Government purchases of goods and services Fixed investment continued Residential Year or quarter Nonfarm Total structures structures Producers ' durable equipment Farm Change in business inventories Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Percent change from preceding period gross n<sti Anol national product * " : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV P Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O T A B L E B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment1 Fixed investment Gross national productl Total Durable Nondurable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Structures Producers durable equipment " : II III I V : I II III I V : I I III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 continued Fixed investment continued Exports and imports of goods and servicesx Residential Year or quarter Percent change from preceding per od2 Government purchases of goods and services Gross Gross domestic Gross product national domestic product product implicit implicit price price deflator deflator Total Federal State and local II III I V II III I V : II III IV P * ProFarm ducers ' Exports Imports struc- durable tures equipment Total Nonfarm structures p Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross domestic product [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from preceding periodx Index numbers = Gross national product Year or quarter Implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Gross domestic product implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Gross domestic product Gross national product Implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Chain price index Implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Chain price index 68.'f " " II III I V II III I V II III IV Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexes shown here Quarterly data are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year Gross national product Agriculture forestry and fisheries Construction Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Transportation communication and utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Government and government enterprises All other Mining rest of the world and residual ( GNP in dollars measured as the sum of final products less GNP in dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry ) Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Auto Nondurable goods Services Struc- output tures Final sales Inventory change ? _ 1978p : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Services Struc- Auto output Inventory change " : I II Ill IV : I II Ill I. V. : I Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Cross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] ( lovernmen Persons Total1 Less- Interest paid and transfers Expenditures Net receipts Disposable personal income Year or quarter PerLess : Personal sonal TransEquals : consaving Tax and fers Total nontax sumption or interexcluding expendireceipts disest interest or tures saving and paid and ( ) accruals subsitransfers dies Total Equals : expendiNet receipts tures Surplus or Less : Equals : deficit PurTrans ( ) chases national fers of interincome goods and and product serv- accounts subsi3 ices dies fn 'd " See next page for continuation of table _ TABLE B-8. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] International Business Year or quarter Gross retained earnings4 Gross private domestic investment5 Net Excess of transearnings fers and or of interest investpaid to ment foreigners ( ) Net exports of goods and services Excess of net transfers and Equals : interest Less : Net or of Exports Imports exnet ports exports ( ) Total income or receipts Statistical discrepancy Gross national product or expend- iture iiure " Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Interest paid by consumers to business and net personal transfer payments to foreigners Government transfer payments to persons and foreigners net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements See Table B-14 Net transfers to foreigners by persons and government and interest paid by government to foreigners Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) less net foreign investment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sross domestic product Governmeni Business Year or quarter Gross national product Statis- Total Total Ni-m wonfarm Farm tical TICdl discrepancy Households and institutions Total Federal State and local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross domestic product3 * II ill I V II III I V II III IV P Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B l for percent changes in gross national product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Government3 Business Year or quarter Gross national product Total Total hlnn PociH nonfarm1 Farm KcSIQ- ual2 Households and institutions Total Federal State and local Percent change from Rest precedof the ing world period gross domestic product4 _ " I I II I I V I I II I I V I I I II I IV ! o Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises The difference between gross product in dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of gross product by industry Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B-2 for percent changes in gross national product in dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net domestic product Year or quarter Gross Capital domes- consumption tic product allowof ances nonwith financial capital Total corpo- consumprate tion busiadjustness ment Domestic income Indirect business tax etc.1 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total CompenProfits before tax sation of Profits after tax Profemploy- Total its ees Total tax Divi- Undislia- Total dends tributed profits bility Inven- Panital Net i>apiiai intertory valua- consump- est tion tion adjust- adjustment ment _ ^ ( _ -L9 " : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) l Total cost and profit2 Capital consumption allowIndirect Compenances busisation Net ness with of interest tax capital employ3 etc conees sumption adjustment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Output Compent hour of sation per hour all of all employ- employees ees ( ( dollars ) dollars ) uper Profits tax liability Profits after tax4 II III IV II III Current dollars dollars " II III IV Total Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-13. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods1 Year or quarter Personal consumption expenditures Motor Total vehicles and parts Services1 Nondurable goods1 Furniture and household equipment Total Food Clothing and shoes Gasoline and Fuel oil and coal Household operationx Total Housing Total Electricity and gas Transportation P : I I I Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I I I Ill IV P Total includes " other " category not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-14. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Total Residential Producers ' durable equipment Structures Total Total Nonfarm Total Total Nonfarm structures Nonfarm ProFarm ducers ' struc- durable tures equipment Total Nonfarm p : II III I V : II III I V II III IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Inventory final sales ratio Nonfarm Year and quarter Total Manufacturing Farm Total Fourth quarter : Wholesale trade Final sales Retail trade Total Other Nonfarm3 " : II III IV : II III I V II II I IV P End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Inventory final sales ratio Nonfarm Final sales ' Year and quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Manufacturing Total Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Total Nonfarm3 i | p : II III I V II III I V : II III IV End of quarter Annual rates Ratio based on total final sales which include a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning in and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O TABLE B-17. Relation of gross na ^ onal product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product PIUS : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer navments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income p ' U.3 _ : II III IV II III IV : II III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter National income Equals Plus Less Corporate profits with inventory valuation Net and interest capital consumption adjustments GovernWage ment Contribu- accruals transfer tions for less payments social disburseto insurance ments persons Business Personal Personal interest Dividends transfer income payments income : II III I V : II III IV P P : II III I V Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Year or quarter National income1 Total Wages and salaries Supplements to wages and salaries Inven- Capital tory valua- consumption tion adjust- adjustment ment Total Income _ g : I II IV P : I Income II Ill IV Total : Total Nonfarm Capital consumption adjustment Farm See next page for continuation of table -'.S TABLE B-19. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Capital Rental conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits before tax Total Profits after tax Total Total Profits tax liability Total UndisDividends tributed profits Inventory valuation adjustment Capital consumption adjustment _ ^ Net interest P II III IV : I II Ill IV ^ ^ 13L5 : : Ill IV P -R6 National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-17 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workmen 's compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursementsl Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing GovernOther Distrib- Service ment labor and utive indus- governincome1 indusment tries tries enterprises Proprietors ' income wnn inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm " : I | | III I V : | | | III IV ^ ^ 240il ^ ^ : II Ill IV See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-20. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Rental income of persons Personal Divi- interest with capital dends income consumption adjustment Transfer payments Total Old-age GovernGovernsurvivors ment ment disability employunemand Veterans ee ployment health benefits retireinsurinsurment ance ance benefits benefits benefits " : i II Ill IV : | | III IV : | | III IV P Aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) Other U 1./ 1J li U U ( ) ) 2.C ] Less : Personal Nonfarm contributions for personal income2 social insurance i 1J00.6 U97.6 4Z0 The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-19 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and agricultural net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] L .ess : Personal outlays Percent of disposable personal income Par Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total rersonal Interest Personal paid by transfer conpaysumption consum- ments ers to to expendibusifortures ness eigners ( net ) Personal outlays Equals : Personal saving Total Consump- Personal tion saving expenditures " A II III IV II III IV : II III IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars " I I I I I I V Current dollars I I I I I I V I I II I IV Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are average for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-23. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Year or quarter Gross private saving Total Personal saving Gross business saving Total Gross investment Government surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) * Total Gross private domestic investment Federal State and local Net foreign investment Statistical discrepancy Total ~ '.B _ L6 " : I II IV : I II IV : I II Ill IV P... Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDR ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-24. Saving by individuals 1946-79x [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Total5 Securities CurMoney rency SavCorpomarand ings Govern- rate ket acment and demand fund fordepos- counts securishares eign its ties bonds Net investment in NonMortInsurcorgage ance ConNonporate debt ConCorpoand sumei Other busisumer farm on rate pension duradebt67 credit ness nonhomes equibles reasfarm ties serves sets homes : in iv : I II Ill IV : I II Less : Net increase in debt Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Consists of U.S. sayings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities and State and local obligations : Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit policy loans noncorporate business mortgage debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-25. Money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Vaar FAMILIES * Percent with incomes Total number ( millions ) Median income $ Total number Below $ ( millions ) poverty and level over1 11A Percent with incomes Median income $ 3H2 $ Percent with incomes Total number Below $ ( milpoverty lions ) and level over1 Median income $ Below $ poverty and level over1 Below $ poverty and level over1 UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS Black White Total $ ^ Below $ 25,00C poverty and level over1 Below $ poverty and level over1 2I6 $ ^ ] 3J46 ! l ^ o r families restricted to " $ and over " for the years to and " $ and over " for the year ; for unrelated individuals restricted to " $ and over " for the years to Data for Black include " other " races Revised using population controls based on the census. Such controls are not available by race Based on revised methodology procedures Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflects different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family head and farm nonfarm residence. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY T A B L E B-26. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force participation rate2 Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional Armed popula- Forcesx tion1 Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian labor Unemforce ) ployment Employment Total Total Agricultural Total Males Females Nonagricultural Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over en en en en en I960 Thousands of persons years of age and over CO CO CO CO CO See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force participation rate Civilian labor force Year or month Noninsti- Armed tutional popula- Forces1 tion Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian Unemlabor Total Males Females force ) ployment Employment Total Agricultural Total Nonagricultural Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-27 through B-32 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historic comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment Unemployment Males Year or month Total Total years Females years and over Total Males Females Total years years and over Total years years and over Total years years and over I9601 l l \ : Jan Feb Mar fez : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar liajZZZZZZZZ June i y Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnote Table B-27 Note. See Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE Selected employment and unemployment data [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment as percent of population5 Unemployment rate l By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Males years and over Females years and over By selected groups Experienced wage and salary workers Married men Women who head families Full-time workers " " " ' Bluecollar workers4 Black and other White Total Aug Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mr a I June : July Sept Jan Feb Mr a My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Civilian employment as percent of total noninstitutional population Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-30. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; * monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other White Males Females Males Females Year or month Total Total years years and over Total years years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mr a Jan Feb Mr a Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31. Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Year or month Total unemployment Duration of unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration in weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over Jn a Fb e Mr a Ar p July May June Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e : Jn a Fb e Mr a My a June July Ag u sr Nv o Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Unemployment by reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total unemployment Job losers Job leavers Reentrants entrants Thousands of persons years o f age and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Percent of civilian labor force May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Insured Covered unemployment employ- ( weekly ment average ) Total benefits Insured paid unem ( millions of ployment dollars ) May June July Aug Sept Oct " Nov " Dec " Initial claims Exhaustions Insured Benefits paid unemployment as percent Total Average weekly ( millions of check covered of employ- dollars ) ( dollars ) ment Weekly average ; thousands Thousands " " 1978Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) and SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Mining Construction Government Transpor- Whole- Finance insurtation sale ance State and and Services and and public retail Federal real local utilities trade estate p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mininc Construction Finance Government Transpor- Whole- insursale tation ance Services State and and and public retail ano Federal and real trade real utilities local estate : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec May ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! " ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Note. Data in Tables B-34 through B-36 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-27 through B-32 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Wholesale and retail trade Total private nonagricultural > $ $ " Total private nonagriculturaM Manufacturing Year or month Construction Manufacturing Construction Wholesale and retail trade Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagriculturalz Index = Percent change from a year earlier Current dollars dollars3 Current dollars dollars $ $ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar \ Hvi ~ IZZ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index ( revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used ieginning ) Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places Note. See Note Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average gross weekly earnings Total private nonagriculturall Construction ( current dollars ) Wholesale and retail Current dollars dollars2 Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ $ $ $ Year or month Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural3 Current dollars dollars $ ' Jan Feb Mar t June July Aug a * Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Apr My a June July Aug Sept oct Nov " Dec " : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ( current dollars ) Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used beginning ) Based on unadjusted data Note. See Note Table B-34 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Productivity and related data private business sector. [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Hours of all persons2 Output > Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Compensation per hour3 Unit labor cost Implicit price deflator4 Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm business business business business business business business business business business business business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector " : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Changes in productivity and related data private business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Tear or quarter Output per hour of all persons Hours of all persons2 Outputx Voor nr Compensation per hour3 Implicit price deflator * Unit labor cost Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm business business business business business business business business business business business business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector ^ _ " II III IV II III IV II III IV " Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Current doffar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-39. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industrial production Mining Total proportion * Jn a Fb e Mr a Apr May June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Jn a Fb e Mr a My a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nov Dec " Utilities Nondurable Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System except as noted Durable TABLE B-40. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Materials3 Final products Year or month Total industrial production Equipment2 Consumer goods1 Total Total Automotive products Home goods Total Intermediate products Total Business NonDurable durable goods goods Jan Feb Mr a Ar p My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec t June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " proportion Jan Feb Mr a Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes defense and space equipment not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System except as noted TABLE B-41. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total Iron and steel Fabricated metal products NonElectrieleccal trical machinmachinery ery Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Total Motor vehicles and parts Foods proportion. Jan Feb. Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Lumber Apparel Printing Chemicals and and prod- publish- and products products ing ucts : : Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers. Where unadjusted data are not available for months data are averages of seasonally adjusted indexes shown Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System except as noted TABLE B-42. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Wharton series3 Commerce series2 FRB series ' AdPrimary- Advanced NonNonTotal Total Total Primary vanced procmanufac- Durable durable manufac- process- process- manufac- Durable durable processed goods goods essed goods goods turing turing turing goods ing ing goods Year or quarter " II III I V II III I V II III I V II III I V II III I V | II Ill IV ' For description of the series see " Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization " February Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers " The Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization : A Ten Year Perspective Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section American Statistical Association Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Wharton School of Finance TABLE B-43. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Presidential buildings and other construction * Residential buildings ' Total Public construction Total2 housing Total Commercial3 units Total Industrial Other4 Federal State and local * New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-43. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings1 Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction ' New Total housing Total Commercial units Industrial Total Federal State and local Other : t June : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec MPay " .Z June July Aug Sept Oct Nov ' Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to I960 included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-44. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized2 New housing units started Private1 Private and public * Type of structure Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Total Type of structure Nonfarm Total One unit to units I960. " One unit 2to4 units units or more units or more Seasonally adjusted annual rates : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov " Dec " Jan Feb. Mar : Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Note. Only the series on private and public nonfarm housing units started is available prior to See " Economic Report " for this earlier series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-45. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 1947-80x [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total NonDurable durable Total goods goods Transportation Mining Railroad Public Commu- Commerutilities nication cial and other2 Ar Other i : I I II I IV : I I II I IV : I33 II ? Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators- medical legal educational and cultural services ; and nonprofit organizations These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data incTude investment by farmers professionals nonprofit institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in late October-December Plans are adjusted when necessary for systematic bias Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-46. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Retail trade Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Year or month Sales l Inventories2 Ratio3 Sales1 Inventories2 Ratio3 Sales Inven3 tories2 Ratio Sales Inventories2 Ratio Jan Feb Mar June : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-47. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments1 Year or month Total Inventories ' Dura- Nonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries Durable goods industries Total Total Mate- Work rials in and procsupplies ess Nondurable goods industries Finished goods Total Mate- Work in rials procand supplies ess Finished goods Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1979Jan Feb Mar t June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-48. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders1 Unfilled orders shipments ratio Unfilled orders2 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries tries nondefense Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec.. Jan Feb Mar MPay June July. Aug Sept Oct : Jan. Feb Mar : Nov... Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-49. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Year or month All items : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Food and beverages Total * Food Total Housing Other Apparel Trans- Medical EnterRent Home Fuel and and portation care tainment goods Enerand gy4 resi- owner- other upkeep services dential ship utilities Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately. Series beginning not comparable with series for earlier years Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and other utilities and public services Gas ( piped ) and electricity ; fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; and gasoline motor oil coolant etc Note. Data beginning January are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-50. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ = ] Homeownership Food and beverages Fuel arid other utilities Household fuels Food Year or month Mnmo Total Total At home Away from home Total purchase ing " taxes and insurance Maintenance and repair Total Total Gas and electricity Fuel oil coal and bottled gas Other utilities and public services I960 L968 June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr | y | 3y June 159.C 159.C 159.S 158.fi 161.C : Jan Feb Mar tHayZ'Z.' July Aug Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-50. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = ] Medical care Transportation Private Year or month Total Total Used cars cars Gasoline Maintenance and repair Other Public transportation Total Medical care services Medical care commodities MPay June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec : Jan Feb Mar 1979Jan Feb Mar Not available Note. Data beginning January are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-51. Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups [ = ] Special indexes Services Commodities Commodities less food All items Year or month All commodities Food Al l All NonDurable durable services Rent Services less rent Al l All All items items items less less less food food energy and energy ^ ^ 185J ^ ^ Jn a Fb e Mr a May June ' July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e : Jan Fb e Mar Ar p May : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : June July * Aug Sept Ot c Nov.. Dec Note. Data beginning January are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-52. Changes in consumer price indexes major groups [ Percent change ] Commodities All items Year or month Total Dec to Dec Year to year Commodities less food Food All items less food Services Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec. ' Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year _5 _ i Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year is Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally adad- justed ad- justed ad- justed ad- justed ad- justed justed justed justed justed justed justed justed : Jan June '.7 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Apr My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Feb Mr a t Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning January are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items less food All items All items less energy All items less food and energy1 Dec to Dec.3 Dec to Dec.3 Dec to Dec.3 Voor nr mnnth Tear or rnonin Dec to Dec.3 Year to Year Year to Year Year to Year Year to Year All items less home purchase and finance2 Dec to Dec.3 Year to Year * Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUn- sonally Un- sonally Un- sonally Un- sonally Un- sonally adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted : jan Feb Mr a My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mr a ' coco May June bo bo '.e Seasonally adjusted data are estimates All items less home purchase and financing taxes and insurance. All data are estimates Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning January are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-54. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month : Jan Fb e Mr a t June July Aug Sept Ot c Nv o Dec : * Jn a Fb e Mr a May June July Aug Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Total finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Crude Processed Total Total consumer finished goods Total NonDurable durable See next page for continuation of table Capital equipment Consumer goods Total 160F TABLE B-54. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds2 Materials and components Other For manufacturing Crude materials for further processing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fKyZZZZZZZZ : Jan Feb Mar fc : : : : = Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-55. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Finished goods Crude materials for further processing Excluding food and energy Total Consumer Capi- goods tal excludequiping ment food and energy Year or month Total Food Energy Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Total Crude materials Foodexcluding stuffs agriculand Energy tural feedproducts stuffs and energy t June July Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug 8fc = Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Jn a Fb e Mr a Nfay June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Farm products ' Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power l Chemicals and allied productsl 47.'4 Jn a Fb e Mr a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-56. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Year or month Pulp NonRubber Lumber paper Metals Machinery Furniture metallic and and and and and and plastic metal equipment household mineral wood allied durables products products products products products Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment3 61V8 Miscellaneous products : Jan Fb e Mr a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feu Mr a a ; June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ 29U-289 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-57. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Total finished goods Consumer finished foods Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Dec to Dec.1 Capital equipment Consumer goods Total Year or month Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Dec to Dec Year to year Finished goods excluding food and energy Dec to Dec.1 Year to year _ _ A Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Seasonjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ j L9 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-58. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Overall measures1 Components and related items Deposits at commercial banks Time and savings Year and month Ml M1 M2 M3 Currency Demand Time Savings ! Total Large CDs2 Other Checkable Depos- deposits U.S its at at Governnonment bank nonbank deposits thrift thrift ( unadinstitu- institu- justed ) tions tions ( unadjusted ) I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Jan.. Feb Mar t June July Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar t June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec.. M l is currency plus demand deposits ; M is M l plus savings deposits at commercial banks and checkable deposits at nonbank thrift institutions ; M2 is Ml plus time and savings deposits at commercial banks other than large certificates of deposit ( CDs ) ; and M3 is plus deposits at nonbank thrift institutions M2 Negotiable time certificates of deposit ( CDs ) issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks Includes negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts at commercial banks Average of the beginning and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks savings capital at savings and loan associations and credit union shares Includes negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts at thrift institutions credit union share draft accounts and demand deposits at mutual savings banks Deposits at all commercial banks. Includes Treasury note balances beginning November Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-59.- Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans Total loans and investments Investments End of month * Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Total Period Commercial and industrial Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates U.S Treasury securities Other securities Seasonally adjusted Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Average for month2 Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec " Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " ' Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates ) Data are averages of Wednesday figures and are for domestically chartered banks and foreign-related institutions. Lease financing receivables are included in the total loans and investments total loans and loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates As of December loans sold to affiliates were reduced $ billion as a result of data corrections. In addition comparability of the data may also be affected by bank mergers liquidations loan reclassifications etc Note. Data adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and domestic interbank loans only beginning January Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods. Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( then about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank ( then about $ billion ) are included in other securities rather than in loans. Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only. Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes ( then about $ billion ) are classified as other securities rather than as loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-60. Liquid asset holdings ofprivate domestic nonfinancial investors [ Average outstanding ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Currency and deposits Time deposits Year and month Total liquid assets Total Demand Currency1 deposits l Commercial banks l Nonbank thrift institutions U.S. Treasury securities " ? Short- certificates term of Savings market3 deposbonds able it securities Other private money market instruments : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec I960 : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " " Money stock components ( see Table B-58 ) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors As published in money stock statistics Series E and H savings bonds other savings bonds and savings notes held by individuals Short-term marketable U.S. Treasury securities excluding official foreign and financial institution holdings Certificates over $ at weekly reporting banks except foreign holdings Commercial paper bankers ' acceptances Federal funds security repurchase agreements and money market mutual fund shares held outside banks and other financial institutions Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-61. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] U.S. Government Foreign Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations.. Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential. Commercial Farm Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors Item Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other _ AA By borrowing sector : Total.. Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Debt instruments Equities Other debt instruments. State and local governments... Households... Nonfinancial business Total funds suppled to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by.Private domestic nonfinancial sectors. Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market funds and repurchase agreements * At banks Credit and equity instruments U.S. Government related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Credit market instruments Corporate equities Foreign funds See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-61. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarterly flows Item I seasonally adjusted annual rates I II 40.V Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Debt instruments Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors U.S. Government Foreign Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Equities Total funds supplied to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits Demand deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market funds and repurchase agreements Corporate equities Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System At banks Credit and equity instruments U.S. Government-related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Foreign funds Credit market instruments TABLE B-62. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves2 Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total Dec : Dec : Dec U.S Government and Federal agency securities Member bank borrowings Othar1 umer * Total Tntal PomiiroH Cvrocc Required excess Seasonal : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec " 12',986 4O'lO5 40'548 ^ _2 136'696 l'344 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Ag u sept " : : " : : : : : : : : : Ot c Nov p Dec 121J491 123'603 Mainly float Beginning December part of currency and cash held by member banks allowed as reserves ; beginning November all such currency and cash allowed Beginning November includes reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Transition period ended after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Data are for licensed banks only Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements3 Member bank reserves * Year and month Total NonReborrowed quired Monetary base Total Demand Time U.S and savings Private Government Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements4 Member bank reserves Total ReNonborrowed quired Monetary base : Dec I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec " July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov Dec " : Jan... Feb Mar.. t : June. Series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and M. In addition to earlier breaks in the series effective November a supplementary reserve requirement of percentage points was imposed on time deposits of $ or more. This action increased required reserves approximately $ billion in the week beginning November Effective October an percentage point marginal reserve requirement was imposed on " managed liabilities. " On October reserves of Edge Act Corporations were included in member bank reserves. In the week beginning October these last two actions raised required reserves $ million and $ million respectively { ncludes total reserves ( member bank reserve balances in the current week DIUS vault cash held two weeks earlier ) ; currency outside the U.S. Treasury Federal Reserve Banks and the vaults of commercial banks ; and vault cash of nonmember banks Includes total time and savings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from domestic commercial banks Reserve aggregates series have been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with marginal reserve requirements the inclusions of Edge Act Corporation Reserves and other changes in Regulations D K and M Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-64. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Treasury securities Year or month Bills ( new issues ) x 3month month Constant maturities2 Aaa years Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Newhome mortgage yields ( FHLBBP Prime commercial paper Prime rate charged by banks4 months Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York years Federal funds rate See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-64. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Treasury securities Bills ( new issues ) Year or month Constant maturities2 Aaa years years Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Newhome mortgage yields ( FHLBB ) Prime commercial paper Prime rate charged by banks4 months 3month 6month June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 63/4-6 % % -7y4 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June / July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr fay Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York 6V4-6V4 6V4-6V4 6y46 % % % 73/4-73/4 -8y 8y2-9 -9y % ioy4 ioy -iiy llV2-ll3/4 ^ lPA H /4-ll /4 H /4-ll /4 ll % -H /4 n % i2y4 I2y4-i3y2 I3y2-i5 I 5y45y i I5y2-i5y4 Federal funds rate % % % % -6y 6y2-6y2 6y2-6y2 6y2-6y2 6y2-7 -7y 7y4-7 % % -8y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y -9y 9y2-io i o y 10V -ll Rate on new issues within period Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assumed on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates Average effective rate for the year ; opening and closing rate for the month Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Beginning November data are for 6-months paper Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-65 Consumer credit outstanding and net change [ Millions of dollars ] Net change from preceding period Amount outstanding ( end of month ) Installment credit Year and month Total Total : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Automobile Revolving2 Mobile home Other Noninstallment credit Installment credit Total Total Automobile Noninstallment credit Seasonally adjusteds : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb... Mar.. JuneJuly... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends For installment credit computed as the difference between extensions and liquidations ( both seasonally adjusted ) ; see also Table B-66. For noninstallment credit computed as the change from one month to another in the seasonally adjusted amount outstanding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-66 Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total Year or month Ex Automobile Ex June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p My a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o : Other Ex X Ex Fb e Mr a Mobile home Liquidated tended Liquidated : Jan Revolving1 Ex tended tended Liquidated tended Liquidated tended Liquidated Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Not reported separately prior to July Note. Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments Liquidated credit includes repayments chargeoffs and other credit See also Table B-65 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System outstanding by type of property and of financing TABLE B-67. Morti [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Nonfarm properties Conventional3 Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family prop- properhouses erties ties to 4-family houses Total2 Total VA FA H guarinsured anteed Total to 4family houses II III I V II III I V II III Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Other holders Commercial banks * Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals others II III I V II III IV : I II Ill Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-69. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Federal funds Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receiptsDeposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System. All other BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense. International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-69. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Transition quarter Estimate BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions- Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds.. Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other BUDGET RECEIPTS... Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions... Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other BUDGET OUTLAYS.. National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services.... Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement Interest received by trust funds Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis. The period July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-70. Federal budget receipts and outlays fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Transition quarter * Estimates Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period Known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-71. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures _ RECEIPTS Total budget receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note. See Note Table B-70 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-72. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] State and local government Federal Government Total government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit ( ) ( ) national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures ( ) national income and product accounts " II III I V I I III I V : II III IV Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-73. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Surplus Subsior dies Grantsdeficit Purless in-aid chases Net current national to of State inter- surplus income goods To est of and and To and foreign- local paid governproduct serv- persons ment ers governaccounts ices enterments prises Transfer payments Year or quarter Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals ContriIndirect butions business for tax and social nontax insuraccruals ance Total Fiscal year : Calendar year : " : I I I Il l IV : | | | II I IV P Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-74. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments to persons Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Federal grantsin-aid Total Net interest paid ! " I V : II Ill IV : | II Il l : | II Ill IV Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-75. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source2 Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual i.icome taxes Corporation net income taxes Fiscal year l Total General expenditures by function Revenue from Federal Government All other3 Total Education Highways Public welfare All other ; Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-76. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] Nonmarketable Marketable End of year or month Total interestbearing public debt securities Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total U.S savings bonds Foreign government and public series2 Government account series3 Other Total Bills Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : : Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes Treasury deposit funds and some special issues formerly included in " Other. " Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-77. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month Total2 Held by Held by Govern- Federal ment Reserve Total3 accounts Banks Cornbanks4 Mutual savings Miscelbanks State and Indi- laneous and Corporalocal insur- tions govern- viduals7 inves-8 tors ance ments companies Fiscal year : ' My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Jan Feb Mr a U.S savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value As of July public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the data in this table For comparability with published data published data for have been adjusted to exclude notes of the International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in each year through These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department of Treasury the Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-59 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-78. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Years Millions of dollars Months Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June- July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec.. MPay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec.. : : Jan Feb Mar Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-79. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Year or quarter " : I II Ill IV : II III I V Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments : I | | III Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 5Z8 TABLE B-80. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Nonfinancial Financial ' Rest of the world Year or quarter Total CpHpral rcQcldl Total Total Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing2 Wholesale and retail trade Utilities Other " I I II I I V I I II I I V : I I II I See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-80. Corporate profits by industry Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Domestic industries Financial1 year or quarter Total Nonfinancial PoHoral Total reoerai Reserve banks Other Total Total Manufacturing2 Poet Kesi of the world Wholesale and retail trade Utilities Other p II III IV II III IV II Ill Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-81 for industry detail Consists of transportation communication and electric gas and sanitary services Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-81. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Nondurable goods Year or quarter Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Total manufacturing Total Fabricated metal products Machin- Electric Motor and ery elec- vehicles except tronic and electri- equip- equipcal ment ment Primary metal industries Other Total " Other I I III I V I I III I V I I III See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-81. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances with inventory valuation adjustment Durable goods Nondurable goods Year or quarter Food and kindred products Chemi- Petroleum cals and and coal allied prod- products ucts Fabri- Machin- Electric Motor and ery cated elec- vehicles and metal except tronic prod- electri- equip- equipment cal ucts ment Other Primary metal industries Total manufacturing Total ' " II III I V II III I V II III Other Total Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-82. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Sales / _x \ n ( net ; Profits Profits Profits Year or quarter Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Before income taxes ' After income taxes Stockholders ' equity2 Sales ( net ) Before income taxes * After income taxes Stockholders ' equity2 Sales ( not \ ( net ; Before income taxes l After income taxes Stockholders ' equity2 14C.0 II III I V II III I V II III I V New series IV II III I V II III I V II Ill I V ' In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Federal Trade Commission Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Year or quarter manufacturing Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable Roods industries All manufacturing corporations industries Nondurable goods industries U.2 Durable goods : IV : IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV New series : : | | | III IV : | II.. Ill IV : | II Ill IV : I II Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-82 Source : Federal Trade Commission http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/2 294Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent * Industry Durable goods industries Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical Electrical and electronic equipment Transportation equipment2 Motor vehicles and equipment Aircraft guided missiles and parts Instruments and related products Other durable manufacturing products Nondurable goods industries Food and kindred products Tobacco manufacturesTextile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products2 Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products II III III IV II Ratios based on equity at end of quarter Includes other industries not shown separately Source : Federal Trade Commission IV ill All manufacturing corporations... Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents manufacturing III TABLE B-85. Determinants of business fixed investment [ Percent except as noted ] Nonfinancial corporations GNP2 Year Ratio of real investment to real GNP Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing1 Rate of return on depreciable assets Rate of return on stockholders ' equity4 Ratio of market value to replacement cost of net assets Cash flow as percent nf OI : First quarters6 Federal Reserve Board index Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth ( physical capital component valued at current replacement cost ) Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets Seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-86. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinanciaI corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Uses Sources External Year or quarter Total Internal ' Credit market funds Total Total Longterm Shortterm Other Total DiscrepPurchase Increase ancy of in ( sources physical financial less uses ) assets assets ^ II III I V II III IV : I | | III : Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits Maturity split is aproximate : Long-term consists of stocks bonds multi-family and commercial mortgages and percent of bank loans. Short-term consists of home mortgages percent of bank loans commercial paper finance company loans bankers ' acceptances and U.S. Government loans Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-87. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current End of year or quarter Total Cash1 U.S Government securities assets Current liabilities Notes and accounts receivable Other Inven- current tories assets Total Net Other Notes Current current working ratio and capital accounts liabilities payable All corporations i SEC series : Nonfinancial corporations6 SEC series : FTC-FRB series : II III I V : I II Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Total current assets divided by total current liabilities Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Based on data from " Statistics of Income " Department of the Treasury Excludes banks savings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Based on data from " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " July for details regarding the series Note. SEC series not available after Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-88. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter State Corporate securities offered for cash and Industry of corporate issuer municipal Type of corporate security securities offered Total for cash corporate Common Preferred Bonds Manufac- Electric Transpor- Communi ( princi- offerings and cation turing * gas and tation stock stock pal water notes amounts ) Other : II Ill IV : I II.. Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-89. Common stock prices and yields Common stock 5yields ( percent ) Common stock prices1 Year or quarter New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance DowJones industrial average3 Standard & Poor 's composiie index ( = ) Dividendprice ratio6 Earningsprice ratio7 May June July Aug Sept Ot c Nov Dec : Jan Fb e Mr a JUIJ Jan Fb e Mr a May June July Aug Sept JUIJ Ot c Nv o Dc e Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index are averages of weekly closing prices Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of quarterly earnings after taxes ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day of quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow-Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-90. Business formation and business failures Business failures1 Index of net business formation ( ) Year or montn New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate2 Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jn a Fb e Mar May June July ' Aug Sept Ot c Nov Dec : Jn a Fb e Mar June July Aug Sept Ot c Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-91. Income of farm people and farmers [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income received from farming3 Personal income received by total farm population Not tr nei TO i at in GrOSS inhume UCIUIC iiiveuiuiy adjustment Year or QUdrier From farm all sources sources * From From nonfarm sources Cash receipts from idincuug : > Production stock and products penses Total4 Total operators after inventory adjustment5 ex- Crops Current dollars dollars6 II III I V II III I V II Ill Net income to farm operators after inventory adjustment less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Estimated income of farm residents from nonfarm sources ; based on survey benchmarks with extrapolations to current year Includes government payments Also includes government payments and nonmoney income and other farm income furnished by farms not shown separately Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor TABLE B-92. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Productivity indicators Farm output Crops Year Total1 Feed Food Total grains grains Oil crops Livestock and products Farm output Crop propr e unit duction of per total acre input Farm output per hour iwo Total Crops Livestock and products P Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-93. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population / A n r ; i I ( April l \ ) i1 Year As percent hor Del of total ( thou- populasands ) tion2 Selected indexes o input use ( = LOO ) Farm employment ( tnousanas Num- Total Crops harFam- Hired vested ( millions of work- work- acres ) ers ers Feed MeTntal Farm labor Farm real estate chanical Agripower cultural and chemimachin- cals5 ery cooH Seed and liveliwo stock purchases6 " x Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-29 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm farm population is in and ( preliminary ) in Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-94. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = ] Prices paid by farmers Prices received by farmers Year or month Al l farm products Crops June Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dec : July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Wage rates3 ' rucIS and energy Jn a Fb e Mr a My a May June July Ciialc Fertilizer Fb e Mr a Total2 Tractors ad n selfpropelled machiney r : Jan Production items Liveand products STOCK ctnrb Al l commodities services interest taxes and wage ratesl Includes items used for family living not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately Seasonally adjusted ; annual data are averages of seasonally Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre adjusted data Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through and for February beginning Monthly data are for first of month Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-95. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Imports Exports Year Total Feed Food grains grains2 ( ) ( ) Oilseeds and products PI j PI Cotton Tobacco Animals and Total * products Crops fruits and vegetables3 Animals and products Coffee AgriCocoa cultural beans trade and prod- balance ucts ( ) ft ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) /1 I A Jan-Sept : ( Total includes items not shown separately Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations " i Less than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-96. Balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Financial assets Other physical assets Beginning of year Household equipment and furnishings Deposits and currency Real estate Livestock Machinery and motor vehicles Other debt Proprietors ' equities Total Crops2 U.S savings bonds Investments in cooperatives Total estate debt Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-97. Exchange rates [ Cents per unit of foreign currency except as noted ] Year and month Belgian franc Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen : Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Mar Mar Mar June Sept Dec 1Q74 ly/'j Mar June Sept 1Q7C iy/o Mar June Sept Dec June Sept Dec : June Sept Dec Mar June Sept Dec Netherlands guilder : Mar June Sept Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound United States dollar ( March = ) Multilateral trade-weighted average Bilateral tradeweighted average Mar Mar Dec Mar June Sept Dec Mar June Sept Dec June Sept Dec : June Sept Dec Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-98. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise12 Investment income3 Year or quarter Exports Imports Net balance ceipts Payments Net Net Net travel and military transac- transportions tation receipts Other services net Remittances Balance on goods pensions and other and unilateral servtransices fers Balance on current account : I II Ill IV : I II IV : I Ill " Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the national income and product accounts although the two may differ because of revisions special handling of certain items etc ( See next page for continuation of table. ) TABLE B-98. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Statistical discrepancy Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] Foreign official assets Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets6 Total Total Assets of foreign official reserve agencies Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy U.S private assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Other U.S Government assets : I II Ill IV I II III IV 1979I II Il " l Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for changes in U.S. official reserve assets U.S. private assets abroad and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonpetroleum Nonagricultural Year or quarter Total Agricultural Total Total Capital goods Other goods Petroleum and products Total Industrial supplies Other goods : II III IV : II III IV : I II Ill " Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Item Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Africa Zealand and Developed countries Exports South OPEC2 Other3... Developing countries.. Developed countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Africa Eastern Europe Imports Developing countries.. OPEC ^ Other3 Eastern Europe Zealand and South First quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate ; preliminary. Detail will not add to totals because of seasonal adjustment discrepancy and rounding Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less petroleum exporting countries and the International Monetary Fund Includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund not in area detail Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise exports1 Merchandise imports Year of month Total domestic and foreign Total exports2 Food beverages and tobacco Crude Manumaterifactured als and goods5 fuels Total Food beverages and tobac- Crude Manumaterifactured als and goods5 fuels Total c.i.f value7 Exports less imports customs value Exports less imports f.a.s Exports less imports c.i.f co F.a.s. value Merchandise trade balance General imports6 Domestic exports Customs value F.a.s. value : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan... Feb Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. ! : Nov Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Total excludes Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments through They are excluded in Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( costs insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration ) TABLE B-102. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Foreign assets in the United States. Foreign official assets U.S. Government securities * Other U.S. Government liabilities Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other official assets Other foreign assets. Direct investments in the United States ( book value ) Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere U.S. Treasury securities Other U.S. securities2 Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks. Direct investments abroad ( book value ) Foreign securities Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks U.S. private assets U.S. loans and other long-term assets U.S. short-term assets other than reserves Other U.S. Government assets Gold Special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Foreign currency reserves U.S. official reserve assets U.S. assets abroad Net international investment position of the United States. Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks Note. Gold is valued at SDR35 per ounce throughout. The SDR value is converted to dollars at $ 1/SDR before December at $ 1.08571/SDR from December through January at $ 1.20635/SDR from February through June and as measured by the basket valuation of the SDR beginning July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-103. World trade : Exports and imports and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country Exports f.a.s. United States Canada Japan European Community4 Developed countries France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries Developing countries OPEC Other Communist countries6 U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL. Imports c.i.f.7 Developed countries3 United States Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries. Developing countries OPEC5 Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China TOTAL... Preliminary estimates Free-alongside-ship value Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Cost insurance and freight value except Eastern Europe ( except Albania ) and U.S.S.R. which are f.o.b ( free on board ) Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-104. World trade balance and current account balances and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country l World trade balance2 European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom- Other developed countries- Developed countries United States. Canada Japan Developing countries OPEC5.. Other Communist countries6.. U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China TOTAL7 Current account balances8 Other TOTAL OECD.. United States... Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Developing countries OPEC9 Other Preliminary estimates Exports f.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) less imports c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and N i i O Sdi Venezuela l Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage classification timing and valuation in the recording of transactions by the countries involved OECD basis Consists of countries in footnote plus Bahrain and Qatar Includes Communist countries and non-OECD developed countries Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-105. International reserves selected years [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country November All countries Industrialized countries United States Canada Japan Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands. Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Norway and Sweden ) Switzerland United Kingdom Other Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Oil exporting countries ' Iran Nigeria Saudi Arabia Venezuela Other Other less developed areas Other Western Hemisphere... Other Middle East Other Asia Other Africa Includes Cuba Includes Luxembourg Data beginning April exclude the foreign exchange coyer against the note issue Algeria Indonesia Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar and United Arab Emirates Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Mainland China and Cuba ( after ) Source.- International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-106. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] Area and country annual average * U.S. dollar value in ( billions ) Other OECD4 Communist countries5 OECD countries United States Canada Japan European Community3 Ml France West Germany Italy United Kingdom U.SSR Eastern Europe China -2il Less developed countries OPEC Other " TOTAL Preliminary estimates Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for except for those of the Communist countries which were converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Growth rates are for OECD countries other than the Big Seven ( United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy and the United Kingdom ) Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately annual average annual average Note. For Italy and United Kingdom data relate to real gross domestic product. For France data relate to real gross domestic product excluding nommarket activity such as compensation of employees in the government sector Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-107. Industrial production and unemployment rate major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) : II ( II IV : II III IV Unemployment rate ( percent ) II III IV II III IV Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom and West Germany All data exclude construction Unemployment rates adjusted to U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland Data are preliminary except for United States and Canada Ten-month average seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-108. Consumer prices and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ = ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Consumer prices ^ s.o ^ o.e II III IV II Il l Hourly compensation I960 Data for and are for Paris only Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-109. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December [ Millions of dollars ] Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Total net Investment in international financial institutions Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Under assistance programs net Net new economic and technical aid grants Gross new grants Less * Reverse grants and returns Net new c r e d i t s New credits Less * Principal collections Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Currency claims acquired Sales of farm products Second-stage operations Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country Other uses Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation claims ) of foreign currency Developed countries net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation claims ) of foreign currency Negative figures ( ) occur when the total of grant returns principal repayments and/or foreign currencies disbursed by the Government exceeds new grants and new credits utilized and/or acquisitions of foreign currencies through new sales of farm products July through December Yearly average is for 4V years Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the special funds of the African Development Fund Asian Development Bank Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Development Association and Internationa ! Finance Corporation Net new grants are not adjusted for settlements of postwar relief and other grants under agreements and net new credits exclude prior grants converted into credits. Repayments on these settlements are included in net new credits Outstanding credits on December totaled $ million representing net credits extended since organization of ExportImport Bank February less chargeoffs and net adjustments due to exchange rates ( $ million ) and excluding World War I debts. The amount repayable in dollars at U.S. Government option was $ million ; the remainder was repayable in foreign currencies commodities or services at the option of the borrowers ( See next page for continuation of table. ) TABLE B-109. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance July to December Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Yearly average or calendar year Type and geographic distribution Total.net " Net new military grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Other grants credits and other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) net Investment in international financial institutions3 Under assistance programs net Net new economic and technical aid grants Gross new grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Net new credits4 New credits Less : Principal collections Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Currency claims acquired Sales of farm products Second-stage operations Less : Currencies disbursed Economic grants and credits to purchasing country... Other uses a ( * ) Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance Developing countries,8 net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Developed countries,8 net total Net new economic and technical aid grants Net new credits Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Equivalent value of currencies still available to be used including some funds advanced from foreign governments and after loss by exchange rate fluctuations ( $ million ) was $ million on December Includes foreign currencies acquired from triangular trade operations and principal and interest collections on credits originally extended under Public Law which since enactment of Public Law are available for the same purposes as Public Law currencies Developed countries include Australia Canada Japan New Zealand Republic of South Africa and all countries in Europe except Cyprus Gibraltar Greece Malta Portugal Spain Turkey and Yugoslavia. Developing countries include all other countries. This classification is on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Hess than plus or minus $ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis based on information made available by operating agencies U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 29H-289