Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER FROM RECESSION TO RECOVERY AND GROWTH CHAPTER T H E DUAL PROBLEMS OF STRUCTURAL AND CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY : STRAINS ON THE SYSTEM CHAPTER INCREASING CAPITAL FORMATION CHAPTER T H E BURDEN OF ECONOMIC REGULATION CHAPTER REVIEW OF AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page IS ( Ill ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : Two years ago I came to Washington with a deep personal commitment to change America 's economic future. For more than a decade the economy had suffered from low productivity growth and a rising rate of inflation. Government spending absorbed an increasing share of national income. A shortsighted view of economic priorities was destroying our prospects for long-term prosperity The economic program that I proposed shortly after I took office emphasized economic growth and a return to price stability. My tax proposals were designed to encourage private initiative and to stimulate saving and productive investment. I have supported and encouraged the Federal Reserve Board in its pursuit of price stability through sound monetary policy. My Administration has slowed the growth of Federal regulation strengthening the forces of competition in a number of economic sectors. And I have worked with the Congress to enact legislation that has reversed or limited the growth of government programs that have become too large or outlasted their usefulness Although the full effect of these changes in government policy will take time to develop some of the benefits have already become apparent. The rate of consumer price inflation between December and December was only percent about one-third of the rate in the year before I took office. Interest rates are now lower than when I took office and have fallen rapidly during the last months The Administration will propose many additional measures over the next several years to strengthen economic incentives reduce burdensome regulations increase capital formation and raise our standard of living. It is easy to lose sight of these long-term goals in a year like when the economy was in an extended recession. I am deeply troubled by the current level of unemployment in the United States and by the suffering and anxiety that it entails for millions of Americans. The unemployment that many of our citizens are experiencing is a consequence of the disinflation that must necessarily follow the accelerating inflation of the last decade. Allowing the upward trend of inflation to continue would have risked even greater increases in unemployment in the future. In spite of the present high unemployment rate and the accompanying hardships it is essential that we maintain the gains against inflation that we have recently achieved at substantial cost. Continuing success in restraining inflation will provide a stronger foundation for economic recovery in and beyond Reducing Unemployment The Federal Government can play an important role in reducing unemployment. I believe however that the government should focus its attention on those groups that will continue to face high unemployment rates even after the recovery has begun. By helping them to develop their job-related skills we will foster productive careers in the private sector rather than dead-end jobs. This emphasis on training and private sector employment is the focus of the Jobs Training Partnership Act that I supported and signed into law in I am proposing additional steps this year to strengthen Federal training and retraining programs and to help the structurally unemployed find lasting jobs It is understandable that many well-meaning members of the Congress have responded to the current high unemployment rate by proposing various public works and employment programs. However I am convinced that such programs would only shift unemployment from one industry to another at the cost of increasing the Federal budget deficit Although programs to help the structurally unemployed are important only a balanced and lasting recovery can achieve a substantial reduction in unemployment. There are now over four million more unemployed people than there were at the peak of the last business cycle. Nine million new workers are expected to join the labor force by Only a healthy and growing economy can provide the more than million jobs needed to achieve a progressively lower level of unemployment over the next years The Prospects for Economic Recovery There are now signs that an economic recovery will begin soon. By December the index of leading economic indicators had risen in of the last months. Housing starts have risen substantially over the last year and by December were percent higher than months earlier. Inventory levels have fallen sharply so that increased sales should translate quickly into increased production and employment. Both long-term and short-term interest rates have fallen substantially. The Administration 's economic forecast predicts that the gross national product will begin to rise in the first quarter of and will then rise more quickly as the year continues. Most private forecasters also predict a recovery in Monetary policy will play a critical role in achieving a sound and sustainable economic recovery. If the monetary aggregates grow too slowly the economy will lack the level of financial resources needed for continued economic growth. But if these aggregates are allowed to expand too rapidly an increase in inflation and a short-lived recovery will result. I recognize the difficulties that the Federal Reserve has faced and will continue to face in guiding the growth of the money supply at a time when major regulatory changes have made it difficult to rely on old guidelines. I expect that in the Federal Reserve will expand the money supply at a moderate rate consistent with both a sustained recovery and continued progress against inflation Investment and Economic Growth An economic recovery beginning in should bring not only a reduction in unemployment but also an increase in business investment over the next several years. A higher level of investment is an important ingredient in raising productivity and economic growth The Accelerated Cost Recovery System that I proposed and that the Congress enacted in was designed to encourage a substantial expansion of business investment above the relatively low levels of the 1970s. Since that time the adverse effects of the recession have outweighed the positive effects of the new tax rules. As the economy turns from recession to recovery however incentives to invest will become more powerful. But business investment may not grow rapidly unless measures proposed by the Administration to reduce potentially large Federal budget deficits are enacted Federal borrowing competes with private investment for available savings. If the government continues to borrow large amounts to finance its deficit the real interest rate will remain high and discourage private investment. This process of " crowding out " will tend to depress private investment in the years ahead unless the budget deficit is progressively reduced Fiscal Year Budget Proposals It is important to distinguish the cyclical part of the budget deficit from the structural part which would remain even at the peak of the business cycle. Approximately one-half of the budget deficit is due to the depressed state of the economy. With earnings and profits reduced tax receipts have significantly decreased and expenditures have increased. As the economy recovers the cyclical part of the deficit will shrink. But cyclical recovery alone will not bring the deficit down to an acceptable size In the budget I am now submitting to the Congress I am proposing the dramatic steps needed to reduce Federal budget deficits in future years. My budget proposals are designed to reduce the deficit by dealing directly with the rapid growth of the domestic spending programs ( apart from interest payments ) of the Federal Government In these programs accounted for percent of the gross national product and percent of Federal spending. By these programs had grown to percent of gross national product and percent of the budget. I remain committed to the idea that we can reduce budget deficits without increasing the burden on the poor without weakening our national defense and without destroying economic incentives by counterproductive tax increases Rapid congressional enactment of the budget would provide clear and credible evidence that the Federal Government intends not to place heavy burdens on the capital markets in future years. Such reassurance should hasten the decline in interest rates especially longterm interest rates on bonds and residential mortgages and improve prospects for the recovery of the housing automobile and capital investment sectors of the economy I recognize the special importance of protecting the social security and medicare programs for aged retirees and their dependents These programs now face very serious financial problems. The bipartisan National Commission on Social Security Reform has recently recommended a series of measures which I have endorsed to eliminate the cumulative deficiency of $ billion to $ billion projected for the social security system in the years through It is critically important at this time to make changes in the social security programs that will protect their solvency and financial viability for the years to come The Remaining Burden of Federal Economic Regulation For many decades the Federal Government has regulated the price and entry conditions affecting several sectors of the American economy. Much of this regulation is no longer appropriate to the conditions of the contemporary economy. Over time most of this regulation by restraining competition and the development of new services and technologies has not served the interests of either consumers or producers. Since deregulation of some markets began several years ago the experience has been almost uniformly encouraging My Administration has supported these step-by-step efforts to reduce these regulations in markets that would otherwise be competitive. It is now time to consider broad measures to eliminate many of these economic regulations especially as they affect the natural gas transportation communications and financial markets Interest Rates and the U.S. Trade Deficit The very high levels of real interest rates over the last several years are a principal cause of the sharp rise in the exchange value of the dollar relative to foreign currencies. This rise has reduced the ability of American exporters to compete in foreign markets and increased the competitiveness of imports in the domestic market. Largely as a result the U.S. merchandise trade balance showed a substantial deficit in Our current trade deficit is a reminder of the importance of international trade to the American economy. The export share of U.S gross national product has more than doubled over the last three decades. American workers businesses and farmers suffer when foreign governments prevent American products from entering their markets thus reducing U.S. export levels. While the United States may be forced to respond to the trade distorting practices of foreign governments through the use of strategic measures such practices do not warrant indiscriminate protectionist actions such as domestic content rules for automobiles sold in the United States. Widespread protectionist policies would hurt American consumers by raising prices of the products they buy and by removing some of the pressures for cost control and quality improvement that result from international competition. Moreover protectionism at home could hurt the workers farmers and firms in the United States that produce goods and services for export since it would almost inevitably lead to increased protectionism by governments abroad. I am committed to a policy of preventing the enactment of protectionist measures in the United States and I will continue working to persuade the other nations of the world to eliminate trade distorting practices that threaten the viability of the international trading system upon which world prosperity depends Trade in goods and services is only one aspect of our economic relations with the rest of the world. The international flow of capital into the United States and from the United States to other countries is also of great importance. The United States should play a primary role in preserving the vitality of the international capital market Severe strains on that market developed in as several nations found it difficult to service their overseas debt obligations. In the Federal Government worked closely with debtor and creditor nations and the major international lending agencies to prevent a disruption in the functioning of world capital markets. Now with the cooperation of a wide variety of creditors countries with especially severe debt-servicing difficulties are establishing economic and financial programs that will permit them to meet their international obligations The Years Ahead We are now at a critical juncture for the American economy. The recession has led to strong pressures from some members of the Congress and from others to abandon our commitment to a policy that is aimed at long-term economic growth capital accumulation and price stability. There are many who urge new government spending programs and forcing the Federal Reserve to raise monetary growth rates to levels that would rekindle inflation I am convinced that such policies would prove detrimental to the long-run interests of the American people. Our economy despite the recession is extraordinarily resilient and is now on the road to a healthy recovery. It is essential in the year ahead that the Administration and the Congress work together take a long-term perspective and pursue economic policies that lead to sustained economic growth and to greater prosperity for all Americans ( j ^ February CTVAJULAA ^ \ C J L ^ M J ^ K ^ THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely N \ Cutter Martin Feldstein CHAIRMAN William A. Niskanen CONTENTS Page CHAPTER FROM RECESSION TO RECOVERY AND GROWTH Legacies of the 1970s Rising Unemployment Declining Productivity Growth Rising Inflation The Recession The Decline in Velocity The Economic Recovery Implementing a Stable Monetary Policy The Budget Deficit CHAPTER THE DUAL PROBLEMS OF STRUCTURAL AND CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT The Recent Recession The Composition of Cyclical and Structural Unemployment Demographic Composition Reasons for Unemployment The Dynamics of Unemployment Combating Cyclical Unemployment The Limits of Macroeconomic Policy Public Works Employment Programs Combating Structural Unemployment The Problem of Youth Unemployment Policies to Reduce Youth Unemployment Long-Term Unemployment and Structural Change The Effects of Unemployment Compensation Conclusions CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD STRAINS ON THE SYSTEM ECONOMY : Long-Run Trends in U.S. Competitiveness : Perceptions and Realities Aggregate Performance of the United States and Other Developed Countries The Changing Structure of the U.S. Balance of Payments The Issue of U.S. Trade with Japan Page The Problem of Uncompetitive Sectors Challenges to U.S. Trade Policy Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments Causes of the Dollar 's Strength An Undervalued Yen ? Effects of a Strong Dollar on U.S. Trade Responses to the Strong Dollar Macroeconomic Problems in Europe The International Debt Problem Debt-Financed Growth in the 1970s Causes of the Liquidity Problem Implications of the Debt Problem CHAPTER INCREASING CAPITAL FORMATION The Historical Record An International Perspective The Importance of Capital Formation Measuring National Saving Budget Deficits and Saving Tax Rules and Personal Saving Financial Regulation and Private Saving The Role of International Capital Flows The Allocation of Capital Tax Policy and Investment Conclusions CHAPTER THE BURDEN OF ECONOMIC REGULATION A Brief History of Economic Regulation The Traditional Rationale for Economic Regulation... Problems of Economic Regulation Energy Policy Steps Toward a Market-Oriented Oil Policy Natural Gas Pricing and Allocation Emergency Preparedness Transportation and Communications Effects of Aviation Deregulation Effects of Partial Deregulation in Surface Transportation Further Deregulation of Surface Transportation Common Carrier Telecommunications Broadcasting Deregulation of Financial Markets Depository Institutions Stock Exchanges Opportunities for Further Deregulation in the Financial Industry Page Conclusions CHAPTER REVIEW OF AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK Overview of Major Sectors of Aggregate Demand Personal Consumption Expenditures Residential Investment Business Fixed Investment Inventory Investment The Farm Economy Foreign Trade Government Purchases of Goods and Services Labor Market Developments Wages Productivity and Prices. Credit Markets Interest Rates Monetary Developments Prospects for Prospects and Policies Beyond APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Median Family Income by Unemployment and Family Status Educational and Labor Market Activities of Youth Aged to by Sex October Structure of the U.S. Balance of Payments as Percent of GNP Trade Balances by Commodity Group as Percent of GDP United States Japan and the European Economic Community Trade Balances by Region as Percent of GDP United States and Japan U.S. Trade Balances by Sector as Percent of GDP Real Appreciation of the Dollar Against Major Currencies to August Economic Performance by Major Industrial Countries Employment and Unemployment in the European Economic Community List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Alternative Measures of Capital Formation Comparison of Capital Formation in Six OECD Countries Net Saving as Percent of GNP Investment Incentives under Different Tax Laws Growth in Major Sectors of Real GNP Real Household Income Consumption Saving and Residential Investment Labor Market Developments Changes in Wages and Compensation Productivity Costs and Prices in the Nonfarm Business Sector Price Changes Funds Raised by the Nonfinancial Sector of the Economy Components of Ml and M2 Economic Outlook for Projections of Economic Goals Charts Distribution of Unemployment by Age and Sex Distribution of Unemployment by Family Status Distribution of Unemployment by Race Distribution of Unemployment by Reason Distribution of Unemployment by Duration Structural Changes in the Current Account Balance Composition of Trade Real Exchange Rates of Major Currencies Against the Dollar International Real Short-Term Interest Rate Differentials Measures of Capital Formation International Comparison of Investment and Productivity Growth Three-Month Treasury Bill Rate and Regulation Q Maximum Rate on Savings Accounts Interest Rates Index of Leading Indicators and Real GNP Debt Burden Ratio Real Inventory/Sales Ratio and Industrial Production Nominal and Real 3-Month Treasury Bill Yield CHAPTER From Recession to Recovery and Growth THE MAJOR ECONOMIC ACHIEVEMENT OF was a dramatic reduction of inflation to its lowest rate in a decade. The percent increase in the gross national product ( GNP ) implicit price deflator between the fourth quarters of and was less than half the percent rate of increase between the fourth quarters of and This decline in inflation has moderated the earlier widespread fears that inflation would accelerate. While some of this improvement in inflation was transitory reflecting such special factors as the appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar the largest share was almost certainly due to a decline in the underlying rate of inflation. The reduced rate of inflation is a major step toward the Administration 's goals of full employment healthy economic growth and price stability The progress made in reducing inflation however was accompanied by a painful slowdown of the economy. Beginning in July the Nation suffered the second of two back-to-back recessions that brought the unemployment rate to percent in December At that time approximately million more people were unemployed than in January when the first of the two recessions began The increase in long-term unemployment poses a particularly severe problem. In January about people had been unemployed for more than months. In December there were more than four times as many. Long-term unemployment is particularly serious in that it causes substantial financial hardship and is associated with a loss of job skills that may reduce future income significantly Some temporary decline in real economic activity was probably unavoidable in the process of reversing the upward trend of inflation The United States entered the 1980s with a high rate of inflation and with widespread public expectations that the rate would remain high and perhaps increase. As high inflation persisted it became embedded in the plans and contracts of firms and workers and lowering it involved a painful process. The decline of real GNP since early was in large part the price the United States paid for failing to control inflation in the late 1970s LEGACIES OF THE 1970s In the 1960s many economists believed that the Federal Government could keep unemployment down permanently by accepting a higher rate of inflation. Steady rises in productivity and living standards were taken for granted. During the 1970s these views proved to be incorrect. By the closing years of the 1970s both the unemployment rate and the inflation rate were higher than they had been in the 1960s and the rate of productivity growth was lower Why did unemployment productivity growth and inflation all worsen in the 1970s ? These developments occurred in part because of factors outside the government 's control such as changes in the size and composition of the work force and rising world energy prices. But the economy also suffered from long-standing government policies that exacerbated inflation and distorted the incentives to work save and invest RISING UNEMPLOYMENT Total employment grew rapidly in the 1970s but so did the rate of unemployment. The civilian labor force participation rate rose from percent of the population in to percent in The unemployment rate averaged percent in the first half of the 1970s greater than the percent average of the 1960s. The recession of took the unemployment rate to a monthly high of percent. Unemployment then declined to a monthly low of percent in only to begin rising again to a peak of percent in July In addition to cyclical fluctuations in the economy a number of structural factors contributed to the rise in the unemployment rate over the decade. These included the changing demographic structure of the labor force the increased number of workers dislocated by changes in technology and international competitiveness and the work registration requirements in a number of government welfare programs A more detailed analysis of unemployment and the labor market consequences of macroeconomic policy is presented in Chapter DECLINING PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH From to real output per hour in the private sector rose at an annual rate of percent ; from to it rose at a rate of only percent. Labor productivity growth would probably have slowed somewhat in the 1970s regardless of the policies adopted The sharp increases in the price of oil caused by supply disruptions in and reduced productivity growth as firms substituted capital and labor for energy. Furthermore as the post-World War II baby-boom generation entered the labor force and the percentage of working-age women seeking employment rose the proportion of less experienced workers increased further depressing productivity The slowdown in productivity growth was however exacerbated by a decline in rates of capital formation. Net investment in fixed business capital fell from percent of GNP in the 1960s to percent in the 1970s and the rate of growth of capital per worker fell even more sharply from percent per year in the 1960s to only percent in the 1970s. The interaction of the tax system with inflation played an important role in reducing the rate of capital formation Another cause of slow productivity growth was an increase in government regulation. In some sectors of the economy Federal regulations directly reduced labor productivity ; in others they diverted capital investment away from the improvement of productivity into the satisfaction of regulatory requirements. Some of these regulations served useful purposes but some imposed economic costs that exceeded their economic benefits The tax changes proposed by the Administration and enacted by the Congress in and were designed to lead to faster growth and higher productivity by stimulating saving investment and individual effort. In addition the Administration 's policy of reducing government regulation is intended to enhance the efficiency of individual markets and thereby increase total production RISING INFLATION Of all the economic problems that this Administration inherited when it came to office in the most urgent was the problem of rising prices. Double-digit inflation had created serious economic distortions. An equally serious concern was that the trend rate of inflation was rising over time From to the GNP deflator rose at an average rate of percent per year. Between and the average rate of inflation by this measure was percent. Then aggravated by the sharp jump in world oil prices and other special factors inflation reached percent during but by it was down to percent. In the next years which included the second oil price shock in inflation increased continually until it reached percent again in Over short periods of time a variety of factors influence the rate of inflation. One important factor in the 1970s was supply-determined changes in commodity prices resulting from fluctuations in harvests and disruptions in the supply of foreign oil. Another important factor was the increasing level of expected inflation. Once the expectation of continuing inflation has become firmly entrenched prices and wages may continue to rise even in the face of declining demand and the cost of reducing inflation may increase These factors however only affect the rate of inflation for a limited time. The popular axiom that attributes inflation to " too much money chasing too few goods " reflects a basic truth : it is difficult to imagine a sustained inflation that is not supported by excessive money growth. Over long periods of time an additional percentage point in the rate of growth of the money stock will tend to produce an additional percentage point of growth of nominal GNP that is GNP measured at current prices. If the rate of real GNP growth does not change the entire increase in nominal GNP growth will take the form of increased inflation. Although the relations between money growth nominal GNP growth and inflation are considerably more variable over shorter periods than they are in the long run the impact of money growth on nominal income and inflation remains powerful even in the short run THE RECESSION The substantial decline in the rate of growth of the Ml measure of money that occurred between the end of and the end of was a principal contributor to the decline in nominal income growth in a decline compounded by a marked change in the velocity of money. Part of the slowdown in nominal GNP growth took the form of lower inflation and part of it took the form of a decline in real economic activity The adverse short-run effect of a slowdown in nominal GNP on real economic activity is a basic feature of our economy that reflects the stickiness of wages and prices in most markets. If prices and wages were perfectly flexible reduced nominal GNP growth would translate immediately and painlessly into reduced inflation. However not all wages and prices are flexible. When expectations of future inflation are deeply embedded prices and wages may continue to rise for some time despite excess supplies of goods and labor. A change in inflationary expectations together with the direct pressures exerted by excess supplies eventually causes prices and wages to adjust to new market-clearing levels. But until that occurs a slowdown in nomi- nal GNP growth is reflected in a slowing of real growth as well as in a slowing of inflation The severity of the recession in reflected a combination of circumstances which caused a very sharp decline in nominal GNP growth between and Between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of nominal GNP grew at a rate of percent ; in contrast nominal GNP rose only percent last year About one-third of the percentage point drop in nominal GNP growth between and was reflected in a percentage point decline in the real GNP growth rate from an increase of percent in to a decline of percent in The reduction in inflation accounted for the remaining two-thirds of the drop in nominal GNP Although some slowdown in nominal GNP growth and in inflation in was a predictable effect of tighter monetary policies the very sharp decline actually experienced did not reflect a decrease in the growth of the monetary aggregates. Rather the exceptional severity of the slowdown in nominal GNP growth can be traced to a combination of factors that led to an unusually sharp decline in the velocity of money that is in the ratio of GNP to the money stock THE DECLINE IN VELOCITY The decline in the velocity of money as measured by the velocity of either the Ml or M2 monetary aggregates was historically atypical. Between and Ml velocity rose at an average annual rate of percent while the velocity of M2 remained essentially constant rising at an average annual rate of percent. In contrast in the velocity of Ml fell percent and M2 velocity fell percent on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. By either measure the growth of nominal GNP was well below the rate that would have prevailed if the Ml or M2 measures of velocity had grown at their average historic rates. These velocity declines were the largest since the earliest year for which the Federal Reserve has published data on the monetary aggregates under the definitions currently in use If these velocity shifts had not occurred the rise in nominal GNP in would have been between and percent. While it is uncertain how this hypothetical change would have been distributed between real activity and inflation it is likely that real GNP would have increased enough to have ended the recession sometime before the final quarter of Although the cause of the large velocity shift that occurred in is not fully understood it is likely that major changes in asset demands of individuals and businesses played an important role. More precisely an increase in the demand for Ml or M2 at any income level decreases the corresponding velocity of money. Such shifts may occur because of regulatory changes that provide new financial opportunities like the introduction of nationwide interest-bearing negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts or because of changes in asset preferences like the increased demand for money market mutual funds instead of long-term securities The uncertain cause of the recent decline in velocity is characteristic of the problems that the Federal Reserve has encountered in applying the new monetary control procedures that it adopted in October Changes in banking regulations and the development of new financial instruments by the private sector have compelled the Federal Reserve to make frequent revisions to the definitions of the monetary aggregates and reassessments of their economic impacts. In a complete revision of the definitions of the monetary aggregates was introduced. In the next year a " shift adjusted " Ml-B was defined in an effort to adjust for shifts from savings deposits to NOW accounts. Most recently in and early definitional changes in Ml and M2 were required to deal with the advent of the new money market deposit account which was added to M2 and the new super NOW account which was added to Ml The Federal Reserve was aware throughout and that the relationship between the monetary aggregates and economic activity was in a state of flux and that future velocity trends were uncertain While sustained but unanticipated shifts in velocity growth can be identified in hindsight it is nearly impossible to know at the time they occur whether unusual quarter-to-quarter changes in velocity will continue or reverse themselves. The presumption on the basis of past experience is that most velocity changes are temporary Thus increasing the rate of money growth in response to temporary declines in velocity runs the risk of providing excessive liquidity and increasing inflation while a failure to recognize a continuing shift in liquidity preference or velocity runs the risk of providing inadequate liquidity and reducing real GNP. Given the circumstances of the somewhat greater growth in the monetary aggregates than initially intended by the Federal Reserve appeared to be an appropriate way to balance those risks ECONOMIC RECOVERY The Administration believes that the American economy will soon recover from the recession that began in July The forecast presented in Chapter projects that economic recovery will begin in marking the start of a long period of sustained growth with low inflation. More specifically the Administration forecasts that real GNP will rise percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of and that nominal GNP will rise percent Realization of the economic forecast and steady noninflationary growth in subsequent years will depend upon the implementation of appropriate monetary and fiscal policies IMPLEMENTING A STABLE MONETARY POLICY The Administration has repeatedly indicated that the fundamental guiding principle of monetary policy in an inflationary economy should be a gradual reduction in the rate of growth of the money stock until the rate is consistent with price stability. This principle is consistent with the general approach enunciated in recent years by the independent Federal Reserve The basic challenge for monetary policy at present is to balance the principle of stable money growth with the need to take account of changing asset preferences that may alter the velocity of money While maintaining the approach of setting specified target ranges for money growth the Federal Reserve will also need to use its judgment to adjust money growth rates and the corresponding targets to reflect lasting changes in asset demands The extent to which a policy of predetermined money growth rates is appropriate depends on the stability and predictability of the velocity of money. Strictly speaking inflexible monetary growth rates are appropriate only if the trend in income velocity is constant or has purely random disturbances. The advisability of a strict policy rule depends on the degree of predictability of velocity disturbances. The more predictable velocity disturbances are the more they can be offset by countervailing shifts in the money stock. The less predictable they are the more likely it is that any attempt at countervailing shifts in the money stock will add to the overall volatility of nominal GNP The task of making appropriate adjustments to the monetary targets is enormously difficult. An excessive increase in the money stock will cause a period of increased inflation while an insufficient increase in the money stock will not provide adequate liquidity for the needs of an expanding economy. Eventually such deviations are selfcorrecting but only after a period of accelerating inflation or weak economic performance One possible way to avoid such periods is to use the obseryed behavior of nominal GNP to guide a gradual recalibration of the monetary growth targets recognizing that there are uncertain lags between money stock changes and the resulting changes in nominal GNP Basing the recalibration of monetary targets on nominal GNP is con- sistent with the basic principle of pursuing a stable monetary policy Indeed it is the relatively stable long-run relationship between the monetary aggregates and nominal GNP that justifies the Federal Reserve 's policy of setting targets for the growth of Ml and M2. This implies that caution in revising these targets is appropriate. The principle of targeting money growth rates is not an end in itself but only a means of achieving control of nominal GNP Disadvantages of Interest Rate Targeting From World War II until the mid-1970s the Federal Reserve like most central banks conducted monetary policy by focusing on interest rates and money market conditions. Over the 1970s increasing emphasis was given to targeting monetary aggregates. More recently under new procedures first adopted in October the Federal Reserve has given greater emphasis to keeping the growth of the monetary aggregates within pre-announced target ranges even though it was recognized that this could result in greater variations in interest rates Since both long-term and short-term interest rates have proven more variable than in the past. Many critics attribute this change to the increased emphasis on monetary targets and the level of bank reserves as the operational basis for monetary policy. Although some have argued that the Federal Reserve should drop monetary targeting in favor of targeting interest rates the Administration believes strongly that targeting interest rates either nominal or real would prove to be a serious error The nominal rate of interest is a very unreliable indicator of the thrust of monetary policy. The financial variable important to borrowers and lenders is not the nominal interest rate but a real interest rate determined by subtracting the rate of inflation from the nominal interest rate. Borrowers and lenders take into account the fact that the dollars repaid when a loan matures do not have the same purchasing power as the dollars originally borrowed. When inflation is expected lenders insist that the nominal rate of interest include a premium to compensate them for the declining purchasing power of the dollar and borrowers are willing to pay such a premium Although the real interest rate is more closely linked to borrowing and lending decisions than the nominal interest rate the real interest rate is also not an appropriate target for monetary policy. There are several basic reasons for rejecting the policy of real interest rate targeting First real interest rate targeting might well lead to an inflationary monetary policy. Any given real interest rate is compatible with a wide range of inflation rates. For example a real interest rate of percent could occur with a percent nominal rate and a percent inflation rate or with a percent nominal rate and a percent inflation rate. Thus achieving a real interest rate target would provide no assurance of price stability Second the real interest rate that governs economic behavior is the difference between the nominal interest rate and the expected rate of inflation. Since expectations of inflation are not observable the monetary authorities can not as a practical matter measure or target the expected real interest rate A third reason why real interest rate targeting is not feasible is that the relevant interest rate is not merely the real rate but the real netof-tax interest rate. Because net-of-tax rates of interest vary among individuals and businesses in different tax positions there is no way for the monetary authorities to determine the relevant average real net-of-tax interest rate in financial markets. Compounding the problem further different rates of inflation can result in very different net-of-tax real interest rates corresponding to the same pretax real interest rate even for a particular taxpayer. For example a taxpayer with a marginal tax rate of percent earns a real net-of-tax return of percent if he receives a nominal rate of percent and there is percent inflation ; that same taxpayer earns a real net-of-tax return of percent if he receives the same real return of percent but there is zero inflation. Similarly the real interest rate and the real net-oftax interest rate can easily move in opposite directions when the inflation rate changes There is a final and even more fundamental reason for rejecting real interest rate targeting. Even if the expected real interest rate were measurable there would remain the virtually impossible task of determining what level of that interest rate is actually compatible with noninflationary growth. The problem of identifying the equilibrium interest rate is made even more difficult by the interaction of tax rules and inflation Monetary Rules and Discretion There is no simple solution to the problem of guiding monetary policy in a time of rapid institutional change. Interest rate targeting as shown above is not a desirable approach. Instead the monetary authorities should be guided by the principle of keeping money growth within a prespecified target range while adjusting those targets when a careful consideration of the evidence indicates that sustained shifts in asset demands have occurred The combination of monetary rules and discretion must be applied with great care and judgment. The observance of rules must not become a doctrinaire attachment to arbitrary standards and the exercise of discretion must not degenerate into unprincipled fine tuning Instead the monetary rules must be understood as a way of achiev- ing an appropriate long-run path for the economy. The exercise of discretion in recalibrating monetary targets must be subject to the discipline that such revisions are ultimately compatible with the desired long-run path of nominal GNP. With rules and discretion balanced in this way monetary policy can support a sound recovery that leads to sustained and noninflationary growth THE BUDGET DEFICIT The Federal budget deficit has become a major problem for the American economy. Without the savings proposed by the Administration in its budget plan for the years through the United States is forecasted to experience a series of deficits that would consume more than percent of GNP in each of the next years. Although budget deficits have been a nearly constant feature of our Nation 's economic life for the past two decades the prospective budget deficits that would result if no legislative actions were taken to reduce them would be far larger than those previously experienced in the postwar period. The economic effects of such deficits are beyond our previous experience The fiscal deficit is partially a result of the recession. Any recession reduces tax collections and increases outlays for unemployment benefits retirement benefits and certain other activities. A reasonable approximation is that the change in economic output associated with a percentage point change in the unemployment rate would raise the fiscal deficit by about $ billion. The Administration forecasts that the unemployment rate for fiscal will average percent. If the unemployment rate were percent instead the budget deficit would be about half the $ billion now forecast for fiscal The cyclical component represents a similarly large share of the fiscal deficit Economic recovery and growth in the years ahead will reduce the cyclical component of the deficit. The Administration 's forecast projects a decline in the unemployment rate by percentage points between fiscal and fiscal leaving only a negligible cyclical component in the fiscal budget. Unless the Administration 's proposals are enacted a current services budget deficit of $ billion is forecasted to materialize To see the origin of these large deficits it is useful to compare the components of the current services budget with the same components for Between those years taxes decline very slightly as a percentage of GNP from percent in to percent in The defense share of GNP remains unchanged at percent of GNP in both years. By contrast nondefense activities excluding interest rise from percent of GNP in to percent in an increase of about one-fourth. In addition the accumulation of previous deficits raise the net interest component of the budget deficit from percent of GNP to percent of GNP Deficits and Long-Term Growth A succession of large budget deficits is likely to reduce substantially the rate of capital formation. The government 's borrowing to finance such deficits would compete directly with borrowing by private businesses and households. With a limited amount of savings available for borrowing high budget deficits would cause interest rates to rise until private demand for funds was reduced to the amount that remained after the government 's borrowing needs were satisfied The magnitude of the potential crowding out of private investment is immense. During the past two decades the net saving of households and businesses totaled only about percent of GNP. Prospective deficits of more than percent of GNP would represent virtually all of current net saving. Even though existing saving would be augmented by borrowing from abroad and by some increase in the private saving rate the reduced rate of capital formation would be very substantial A lower rate of capital formation would have adverse consequences because the accumulation of capital is a key determinant of future increases in productivity and economic growth and therefore of higher real wages and standards of living. Further reductions in the rate of capital formation would be particularly unfortunate because as Chapter discusses in detail the U.S. rate of capital formation has been undesirably low for several decades. In the years since net private investment has averaged only percent of GNP significantly less than the rate in most major industrial countries. Moreover since half of this percent has gone into housing only about percent of GNP has been available for productivity-increasing investments in plant and equipment. Deficits of the level implied by the current services budget could reduce the rate of net investment in plant and equipment enough to preclude any increase in the amount of capital per worker. If this occurred the process of increasing capital intensity would cease to contribute to rising productivity and real wages Deficits and the Recovery The adverse effects of large budget deficits are not limited to the distant future. The deficits that would occur without the budget actions proposed by the Administration could seriously affect the degree to which various economic sectors share in the benefits of recovery from the current recession. The crowding out of private investment which would accompany large deficits could depress the level of output in the construction industries the steel industry the machinery and equipment industries and industries that produce other durable goods In addition large budget deficits raise the exchange value of the dollar relative to foreign currencies by attracting foreign capital to the United States. This weakens the competitive position of U.S. exports in the world economy and hurts those domestic industries that compete with imports from abroad. The nature and magnitude of this effect are discussed in Chapter of this Report A " lopsided " recovery in which some sectors remained relatively depressed might prove more fragile than a recovery which was broadly based. An increase in economic activity limited to some sectors and regions might result in greater upward pressure on prices and wages at any given level of total output and employment than would be the case if there were balanced expansion among industries. In addition an unbalanced recovery would produce more inflation and less real growth regardless of the rate of expansion of nominal GNP The prospect of large budget deficits in the second half of this decade may also have an adverse effect on the prospects for recovery in If the financial markets respond to expected future deficits by keeping real long-term interest rates higher in than they would otherwise be the level of spending in on interest-sensitive purchases may remain depressed. Clear evidence of the willingness of the Administration and the Congress to reduce Federal budget deficits substantially in the second half of the 1980s can play an important part in ensuring a healthy and balanced economic recovery in the more immediate future CHAPTER The Dual Problems of Structural and Cyclical Unemployment UNEMPLOYMENT IS THE MOST SERIOUS ECONOMIC PROBLEM now facing the United States. By December the number of unemployed had risen by more than million since the beginning of the recession in July The unemployment rate was higher in December than at any point since the Depression with over million persons counted as unemployed. Even after the economy recovers from the recent recession it is likely that the unemployment rate will reach a plateau between and percent This chapter analyzes the two major types of unemployment : cyclical and structural. The high level of cyclical unemployment now prevailing in the United States is a major problem but it should prove transitory. Only a healthy and sustained recovery from the recent recession can effectively diminish cyclical unemployment. Even after full recovery however a serious structural unemployment problem will remain unless measures are taken to improve the functioning of labor markets. Reducing structural unemployment will require attacking the special problems of young people and the long-term adult unemployed This chapter begins by describing the dimensions of the cyclical and structural unemployment problems. It then examines the potential of public employment programs and macroeconomic policies to lower cyclical unemployment. Finally policies for reducing structural unemployment are considered THE RECENT RECESSION The unemployment rate in December stood at percent of the civilian labor force. Since the recent period of economic slack that began in January the unemployment rate has risen by percentage points. During the recent recession which began in July the unemployment rate rose by percentage points Historical experience suggests that the unemployment rate tends to increase for several months after the level of production bottoms out and it is possible that the unemployment rate will reach percent at some point during Beyond those officially counted as unemployed the recent recession has prevented many Americans from working as much as they would like. In December there were over two million persons involuntarily working part time. The Bureau of Labor Statistics also reported that there were over million discouraged workers in December. These are individuals who have given up looking for work because they believe they can not find jobs Unemployment is often linked to economic hardship. While many of the unemployed receive unemployment insurance and live in families that have other members who work many unemployed individuals and their families suffer economic distress. Table presents information on the incomes of families in which the husband wife or head of household experienced unemployment during ( Data for are not yet available. ) Three types of families are distinguished : ( ) families in which both husband and wife worked ( ) families in which only the husband or male head worked and ( ) families in which only the wife or female head worked. For all of the family types unemployment experienced by husband wife or head of household significantly lowered median family income. For example single-earner families in which the husband ( or male head ) was never unemployed had a median income in of $ In contrast the median income of similar families in which the male head experienced to weeks of unemployment was $ Families in which the male head was unemployed for more than weeks had a median family income of $ TABLE Median family income by unemployment and family status ( current dollars ) Unemployment status of husband wife or head of household Family status Person never unemployed Husband and wife both work Person unemployed less than Person unemployed more than weeks weeks $ $ $ Only husband or male head works. Only wife or female head works Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The financial losses of the unemployed are not the only costs of a prolonged economic decline. Considerable anxiety and emotional distress is experienced by those who have lost their jobs or who fear that they might lose their jobs in an economy with a declining number of employment opportunities. Protracted unemployment is frequently associated with poor heafyh psychological problems and gradual erosion of job-related skills THE COMPOSITION OF CYCLICAL AND STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT The unemployment problem can be divided into two components cyclical and structural unemployment. The term cyclical unemployment is used to refer to the unemployment associated with cyclical downturns in aggregate economic activity. The incremental unemployment associated with the recent recession would fall into this category. The term structural unemployment is used to refer to the unemployment that remains even after cyclical recoveries in aggregate economic activity In large part structural unemployment is a natural concomitant of a dynamic economy with constantly changing patterns of demand Labor markets are in constant flux with people entering and leaving the labor force losing or quitting old jobs and looking for and acquiring new jobs. Some amount of structural unemployment is an inevitable aspect of a large modern industrial economy such as ours. It is important to realize that although expansionary macroeconomic policies can not reduce structural unemployment permanently certain microeconomic policy interventions can affect the ease and speed of the process that matches workers with jobs Some insight into the differences between cyclical and structural unemployment can be obtained by comparing the characteristics of the unemployed in and in a period of low cyclical unemployment. Since the unemployment rate in was percent close to most observers ' estimates of full employment data from that year will be used to illustrate the characteristics of structural unemployment. The next two sections examine the composition of the unemployed population in and in terms of demographic composition and reasons for unemployment. A third section analyzes the dynamics of unemployment DEMOGRAPHIC COMPOSITION Chart provides information on the demographic composition of the unemployed population in and in The chart shows that young people under age account for a substantial fraction of unemployment both when the economy is weak and when it is strong. Persons under accounted for percent of total unemployment during and percent of unemployment in The decline in the share of youth unemployment reflected the large increase in unemployment among adult males in cyclically sensitive sectors of the economy such as manufacturing Chart Distribution of Unemployment by Age and Sex ADULT MALES AND OVER % ADULT MALES AND OVER % ADULT FEMALES AND OVER % NOTE. DATA RELATE TO PERSONS YEARS AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR A pattern that appears in Chart is the cyclical sensitivity of unemployment among those who provide the primary financial support for a family. The share of unemployment among husbands wives and family heads in families without a working spouse rose from percent in to percent in Because unemployment undoubtedly imposes its greatest hardship when it hits a worker upon whom others depend for their sole support this increase is particularly distressing A continuing tragedy in both good and bad times is the very high rates of unemployment of blacks and other minorities. This group accounts for a share of unemployment that is greatly disproportionate to its share of the labor force. While blacks and other minorities comprised percent of the labor force in they comprised approximately percent of the unemployed. Chart shows that the recent recession raised the unemployment rate of blacks and other minorities proportionally less than that of the rest of the population However black and other minority unemployment rates increased sharply during the recession and continue to greatly exceed those of the entire population. The unemployment rate for black and other minority adult males was percent in compared to percent for white males. For black and other minority teenagers the unemployment rate was percent compared to percent for white teenagers Chart Distribution of Unemployment by Family Status HUSBANDS SPOUSE WORKING % HUSBANDS SPOUSE WORKING % 'HUSBANDS AND WIVES WHOSE SPOUSE DOES NOT WORK AND PERSONS WHO MAINTAIN FAMILIES NOTE. ^ DATA RELATE TO PERSONS YEARS AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR REASONS FOR UNEMPLOYMENT Analyzing the problem of unemployment requires understanding the process by which people become unemployed. The unemployed are often described in stereotyped terms as the victims of permanent layoffs by firms that are either partially or fully shutting down. Even during the recent recession however this characterization applied to less than half of the unemployed As part of the monthly Current Population Survey the unemployed are asked a number of questions designed to elicit the reasons for their unemployment. The answers to these questions permit a breakdown of the unemployed into five groups : ( ) persons laid off who can expect to return to the same job ; ( ) persons who have lost jobs to which they can not expect to return ; ( ) persons who have quit their jobs ; ( ) reentrants who are returning to the labor force after a spell of neither working nor looking for work ; and ( ) new entrants who have never worked at a full-time job before but are now seeking employment Chart shows that the distribution of the unemployed among these categories is very sensitive to cyclical conditions. The share of persons who have lost their jobs either temporarily or permanently Chart Distribution of Unemployment by Race NOTE. DATA RELATE TO PERSONS YEARS AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR is particularly sensitive rising from percent in to percent in Over this period the number of job losers on temporary layoff tripled and the number of permanent job losers more than doubled. The decline in alternative employment opportunities resulted in a decline in the share of unemployment traceable to workers leaving their jobs voluntarily during the recession from percent in to percent in Finally because the number of labor force entrants and reentrants is relatively constant their share in total unemployment declined somewhat during the recession The data on reasons for unemployment indicate a major difference between cyclical and structural unemployment. Almost percent of the increase in unemployment during cyclical downturns involves increases in job losses and layoffs as firms respond to declines in demand for their products. On the other hand almost percent of structural unemployment is comprised of voluntary job leavers labor force entrants and reentrants. The remainder are job losers. As described below the very different causes of cyclical and structural unemployment suggest that different policy responses are appropriate Chart Distribution of Unemployment By Reason NOTE. DATA RELATE TO PERSONS YEARS AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR THE DYNAMICS OF UNEMPLOYMENT An essential feature of the unemployment problem is its dynamic character. The appropriate design of policies to reduce unemployment depends on whether most of the unemployed are out of work for a long time and must wait for an economic upturn to find jobs or whether they are a group whose membership changes rapidly even during recessions The principal source of information on the duration of unemployment is the monthly Current Population Survey which asks persons who report themselves as unemployed to report how long they have been unemployed. Chart presents information on the duration of unemployment in and The clearest difference between cyclical and structural unemployment emerges in the incidence of long-term unemployment. In the number of unemployed individuals who reported that they had been out of work for or more months was almost three times the corresponding number in when the economy was operating without significant cyclical unemployment While the incidence of long-term unemployment increases sharply during recessions it is important to recognize that many of the un- Chart Distribution of Unemployment by Duration NOTE. DATA RELATE TO PERSONS YEARS AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR employed find jobs or withdraw from the labor force relatively quickly. Of all the persons who became unemployed in September over percent were no longer unemployed by October and over percent were no longer unemployed by November. However evidence on the duration of unemployment is not purely indicative of the ease or difficulty with which persons find jobs since almost half the unemployed leave the labor force without finding jobs While most persons who become unemployed look for work only briefly this group does not comprise a large part of the unemployment problem. It is long-term unemployment that is of special concern. A recent study found that in more than percent of total unemployment was due to the percent of the unemployed population who were out of work a total of months or longer during the year. This concentration of long-term unemployment among a relatively small group of the unemployed is particularly pronounced during cyclical downturns. Data on this subject are not yet available for During however when the unemployment rate was percent an estimated percent of unemployment was due to the percent of the unemployed population who were out of work more than months These findings suggest several conclusions. First even during recessions most persons who become unemployed either find jobs or leave the labor force relatively quickly. Second the unemployment problem is most serious for those who are unemployed for prolonged stretches. Third the incidence of long-term unemployment is very sensitive to cyclical conditions which suggests that it will diminish as the economy recovers. Even after a recovery is well underway however a sizable fraction of total unemployment will involve protracted joblessness. The needs of the long-term unemployed deserve special recognition in the designing of policies to attack structural unemployment COMBATING CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT High rates of cyclical unemployment which the American economy is now experiencing are largely a consequence of fluctuations in aggregate demand caused by macroeconomic policies and shocks to the economy. As described in Chapter the historical experience of the United States and other countries suggests that disinflation is generally associated with lost output and increased unemployment. During periods of disinflation and recession the measures available to reduce the pain of the transition from accelerating inflation to price stability are limited. Greater fiscal or monetary stimulus might increase employment but only at the risk of igniting inflation. Chapter describes the principles that the Administration feels govern sound macroeconomic policies THE LIMITS OF MACROECONOMIC POLICY The only way to reduce current high levels of cyclical unemployment is for the United States to achieve a sound recovery from the recent recession. Avoiding future recurrences of high cyclical unemployment requires avoiding an expansion so rapid as to lead to rapidly increasing inflation. Historical experience suggests that the change in the rate of inflation depends both on the rate at which economic activity is expanding and on the level of economic slack. If the slack in the economy declines too rapidly or capacity utilization is held at too high a level inflation will tend to increase. The lower limit on unemployment below which inflation will tend to increase is referred to as the inflation threshold unemployment rate While it is not easy to pinpoint the inflation threshold unemployment rate precisely it probably lies between and percent. Econometric studies of historical data suggest that when unemployment is close to percent the rate of inflation tends to accelerate. For example during when the unemployment rate was percent infla- tion as measured by percentage changes in the gross national product ( GNP ) deflator rose to percent from percent in An even larger increase occurred in when the unemployment rate averaged percent The Effect of Demographic Factors There are a number of reasons to believe that the inflation threshold unemployment rate increased during the 1960s and 1970s. Many economists believe that demographic factors may have contributed to the increase. Persons with little labor market experience tend to have high rates of unemployment as they move from job to job in an effort to obtain a desirable career position. In the last years the children of the baby boom have reached maturity thus raising substantially the share of inexperienced workers in the labor force. In addition women with little recent labor market experience have entered the labor force at an unprecedented rate during the last years. It has been estimated that if the labor force had the same demographic composition today as it had in the unemployment rate would have been about three-quarters of a percentage point lower in The share of young people in the labor force will decline sharply over the next decade due to a dramatic reduction in the birth rate throughout the late 1960s and the 1970s. This provides grounds for cautious optimism that the inflation threshold unemployment rate will decline Social Insurance Programs Other factors which have increased the inflation threshold unemployment rate in recent years are less likely to be reversed in the next decade. These include the effects of social programs. While providing important financial support to their recipients these programs also have both behavioral and reporting effects on the measured unemployment rate Behavioral effects of social insurance programs such as unemployment insurance include the encouragement of firms to lay off workers and the inducement of persons to prolong their spells of unemployment. These effects are discussed in more detail below. Reporting effects occur when programs induce persons to change reporting of their labor force status without changing their behavior. For example some experts believe that the Federal Supplemental Benefits program instituted during the recession caused persons who otherwise would have withdrawn from the labor force to report that they were unemployed because of job search requirements. There is some evidence to suggest that the work registration requirements in the food stamp and AFDC programs have had a similar effect Wage Rigidity A number of studies show that wages and prices are much more rigid now than prior to World War II and that rigidity has increased within the post-War period. Increased wage rigidity is likely to raise the economy 's inflation threshold level of unemployment since less flexible wages increase the inevitable unemployment associated with the sectoral shocks which buffet the economy The reasons for this change are not well understood. A side effect of the provision of a " safety net " program is that employees may become more resistant to wage reductions leading to increases in wage and price rigidity. To the extent that the two-earner family is a form of private " safety net " against the financial losses of unemployment the recent growth in the number of two-earner families may also have contributed to increasing wage rigidity in the United States over time Increasing Structural Change A final factor that may have contributed to a rising inflation threshold unemployment rate is the increasing rapidity of structural change in the economy. This acceleration which is in part caused by the economy 's increasing sensitivity to events in the world economy is evidenced by increasing dispersion across industries and localities in rates of unemployment. Because transfers of human and physical resources are costly and take time increased unemployment is a concomitant of structural change While the separate impacts of these factors changing demographic composition larger social insurance programs increased wage rigidity and increased structural change are difficult to quantify it is reasonable to conclude that together they may have significantly increased the inflation threshold unemployment rate. Expansionary macroeconomic policies are unlikely to reverse the effects of these changes PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS Direct provision of public works jobs by the government is a politically popular response to cyclical unemployment during recessions Available evidence suggests however that public works programs adopted in past recessions proved counterproductive and that the inherent capability of public works programs to combat cyclical unemployment is limited The Timing of Public Works Expenditures Public employment programs that produce useful goods or services generally take time to plan and implement. Therefore such programs often have their greatest effects on public employment long after an economic recovery has begun. For this reason public employment programs have sometimes exacerbated rather than mitigated cyclical fluctuations in aggregate demand. A study of the Accelerated Public Works program enacted in September by the Congress to combat the high unemployment rate of the early 1960s found that the number of jobs created by the program peaked in June months after the bottom of the recession. More recent experience also confirms that lags in implementation are long. A recent study by the Office of Management and Budget found that percent of the outlays for local public works projects designed to stimulate recovery from the recession occurred more than 2J6 years after the trough of the recession. The lags in implementing public works programs result in their having destabilizing effects since a large share of the resulting spending occurs during periods of economic expansion The Effect of Federal Funding of Public Works on State Expenditures Even when spending for these programs begins immediately after they are enacted many public works projects do not yield a net increase in employment. Because of the long planning and implementation lags most of the projects available for immediate funding are those that were planned before the recession began. Thus Federal expenditures on these projects often substitute for outlays that would have taken place anyway A major effect of Federal public works expenditures may be to alter the timing of public works projects. The expectation of new public works programs may induce State and local governments to delay making outlays during the early stages of economic downturns in the hope that they will receive Federal funds for projects they have " on the shelf/ ' The importance of this possibility is suggested by experiences with the Local Public Works Capital Development and Investment Act of and the Public Works Employment Act of programs intended to spur recovery from the recession Three characteristics of these programs may have created incentives for local governments to delay their own discretionary spending until they could see whether the Federal Government would pay their entire bill : ( ) projects were financed fully by the Federal Government ; ( ) grants were limited to quick-starting projects ; and ( ) there was considerable uncertainty and lengthy delays in the process of awarding money to State and local governments. One study found that State and local public works expenditures fell substantially in mid-1976 and decreased further between and It suggested that this may have occurred because States and local governments delayed projects in anticipation of funds becoming available under the and public works programs. The study also suggested that these measures may have caused the postponement of as much as $ billion in total government spending Crowding Out of Private Sector Employment Another reason for discounting the efficacy of public works measures is their adverse side effects on private employment. If public works outlays are financed by additional taxes the income and spending of consumers are reduced decreasing the number of jobs in the private economy. Alternatively insofar as public works outlays are financed by borrowing from the public interest rates are raised crowding out some forms of private spending and reducing private employment. The higher interest rates resulting from increased Federal borrowing also discourage capital investments that help create future employment Benefits to Workers An additional reason to discount the efficacy of accelerated public works projects is their limited value to participants. Most jobs in countercyclical public works projects are of extremely short duration and are unlikely to provide participants with lasting job skills. Under the Public Works Impact Program initiated in fiscal year the average duration of employment amounted to only weeks. Almost percent of all employees worked weeks or less. Data for the local public works programs initiated in and and described above indicate that the average job lasted only weeks Although public works programs are motivated by a desire to provide jobs for the unemployed very few jobs are actually filled by unemployed workers. Under the Public Works Impact Program only percent of all jobs were filled by the previously unemployed. Under the more recent public works programs of and it has been estimated that only percent of all jobs were filled by previously unemployed workers COMBATING STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT The preceding analysis suggests that it would be imprudent to use macroeconomic policies to reduce the unemployment rate below its inflation threshold level of to percent. Such an effort would increase inflation and ultimately prove counterproductive as increased inflation was followed by recession. This does not mean that unemployment rates in the to percent range are either inevitable or desirable. The inflation threshold level of unemployment can be reduced by policies that consider the special problems of two groups of workers : ( ) young people and ( ) adults experiencing long-term unemployment. It can also be reduced by reforms of the unemployment insurance system which while providing valuable insurance may increase the incidence of unemployment THE PROBLEM OF YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT At times of low cyclical unemployment about half the unemployed are young people between the ages of and Close to one-fourth of all the unemployed are teenagers aged to While unemployment clearly imposes hardships on youths it has very different economic impacts than it does for adults. Many unemployed youths are in school and looking for part-time work. Most of this group and many other young people who have left school are not economically independent but rather live at home and rely on their parents for financial support. Many other young people experience only brief periods of unemployment as they move from one job to the next Table provides information on the labor market activities of young men and women aged to in October when the teenage unemployment rate was percent. Data for are not yet available. As the table reveals only percent of all teenagers were out of school and measured as unemployed ( because they were looking for work ) A striking feature of the youth labor market is the large fraction of young people who are out of school but are neither working nor looking for work. Over percent of female and percent of male out-of-school teenagers were not in the labor force. The factors underlying this labor force withdrawal by young people are not well understood. In some cases young people may withdraw from the labor force because they are discouraged about their prospects for finding suitable employment. In other cases labor force withdrawal may reflect a desire for leisure The observations about the dynamic character of unemployment made elsewhere in this chapter are especially true of young people TABLE Educational and labor market activities of youth aged to by sex October Item Number ( thousands ) Percent of subgroup Percent of population Number ( thousands ) Males Total population Enrolled in school.. Employed Unemployed Not in labor force Unemployment rate ( percent ) Not enrolled in school Employed Unemployed Not in labor force Unemployment rate ( percent ) Percent of population Females Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Percent of subgroup Most young people find jobs or leave the labor force fairly quickly. It was recently estimated that of those male teenagers who become unemployed in a given month only percent remain unemployed in the next month Youth unemployment is nevertheless a critical economic problem A large part of the youth unemployment problem is traceable to the small group of teenagers who experience extensive unemployment More than percent of all unemployment experienced by teenage males aged to in was due to the percent of the male teenage population of this group who were out of work for more than months during that year Evidence also suggests that certain teenagers who suffer extensive unemployment earn lower wages later in life. The direction of causation is very difficult to establish since persons with low skills may simply fare poorly both early and late in life. However the best evidence available suggests that poor labor market experiences early in life cause reduced wages during adulthood. This suggests the importance of developing policies to improve employment opportunities for the long-term unemployed and to reduce job turnover Training Unemployment and the Minimum Wage A major problem in the youth labor market is the dearth of * 'career-oriented " employment opportunities. While people who participate in post-secondary schooling are generally subsidized by the public sector public support of equivalent magnitude has not been available for the post-high school training of youth who choose to enter the labor force after high school Employers may find it very difficult to offer such training because of the constraints imposed by minimum wage legislation. These laws discourage employers from hiring unskilled workers at very low wages and compensating them further by providing training. This may help explain very high job turnover among youths as they move rapidly in and out of " dead-end " jobs. Another consequence of minimum wage laws is that they prevent some young people from acquiring the training that would permit them to find steady well-paying employment as adults. Statistical studies provide evidence that minimum wages significantly depress the accumulation of valuable skills and .resulting growth in earnings among youths who are paid the minimum wage. There is also evidence that the negative effects of the minimum wage on employment and training are concentrated disproportionately among youths with the fewest labor market skills Thus although the stated purpose of the minimum wage is to reduce poverty experience suggests that it may actually decrease the lifetime earnings of some of the poor and thereby increase income inequality POLICIES TO REDUCE YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT Almost all observers agree that mitigating the problems of instability and high unemployment in the youth labor market requires increasing the availability of career-oriented employment and training This can be accomplished through public support of training minimum wage reforms and employment tax credits The Job Training Partnership Act The Job Training Partnership Act ( JTPA ) of represents a major Federal initiative to reduce structural unemployment among youth and adults. The JTPA departs from previous Federal employment training programs by establishing a formal partnership between private industry the public sector and vocational training institutions for the purposes of planning designing and providing federally financed training. Federal resources are targeted to individuals identified as most in need : economically disadvantaged youth low-skilled and chronically unemployed adults and skilled workers who have lost jobs in declining industries and regions. The problems faced by the latter group are discussed more fully later in this chapter The JTPA is intended to fill an important niche in the national employment and training system by serving individuals who are unable to make use of job training provided by more traditional institutions : high schools vocational-technical schools community colleges universities and employers. Federally funded training programs such as JTPA provide a second chance to youth and adults experiencing trouble in the labor market. The JTPA is administered at the State and local level. This allows training programs to be tailored to the particular needs of workers and employers in local labor markets Minimum Wage Reforms The Administration will propose a summertime differential minimum wage for young people under the age of Between May and September of each year the minimum wage for this group would be reduced to $ from $ This measure would encourage firms to hire young people just out of school and give them the experience needed to compete effectively in the labor market. It will also encourage employers to provide youth who remain in school with valuable work experience during the summer months The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit An alternative policy avenue for encouraging employment and training of young people is to provide tax credits or wage subsidies to employers who hire youths. Tax credits are currently provided to firms that employ economically disadvantaged youths aged to under the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program. The credits are also targeted to welfare recipients and economically disadvantaged Vietnam veterans cooperative education students handicapped persons and ex-convicts The tax credit lasts for up to full years. In the first year it is equal to percent of an individual 's earnings up to a maximum credit of $ In the second year it is equal to percent of earnings up to a maximum credit of $ Participation in the program has been limited since its inception in This is an apparent consequence of administrative problems encountered by the agencies responsible for determining program eligibility ( especially the Job Service ) reluctance on the part of eligible recipients to use the tax credit as a self-marketing tool and employers ' reluctance to let government programs influence hiring decisions Recent legislation added a second component to the tax credit program by providing a tax credit for summer employment targeted at economically disadvantaged youths aged and The tax credit for this group is quite large equaling percent of wages up to a total summer income of $ The summer Targeted Jobs Tax Credit program in effect allows employers to hire eligible youths who are paid the minimum wage for a net cost to the firms of cents an hour. The program will be in place for the first time during the summer of A virtue of measures which subsidize employment and on-the-job training for youth is that they counteract the large bias toward formal schooling over on-the-job training inherent in current policies. In part because of large public subsidies to higher education during the last two decades the percentage of young people aged to enrolled in higher education rose very sharply from percent in to percent in This shift toward increased formal schooling was accompanied by a decline in the relative wages of college graduates and high school graduates. The ratio of the average annual incomes of college graduates to that of high school graduates aged and over fell from in to in LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT AND STRUCTURAL CHANGE An especially visible and serious component of the unemployment problem is composed of adults suffering protracted unemployment At present most long-term unemployment is a consequence of the recession and the resulting reduction in the demand for labor. But as discussed earlier in the chapter long-term unemployment will remain a significant problem even after the economy recovers Structural Change and Economic Adjustment A large part of long-term unemployment among adults can be traced to structural changes in the economy. An increasingly important source of structural change is the growing interdependence of the U.S. economy with that of the rest of the world. The share of export and import-competing industries in GNP has increased over the last several decades and many industries have consequently felt the cold winds of economic change. By December the unemployment rate had reached percent in the motor vehicle industry and percent in the primary metals industry. Other industries including mining construction and lumber have also contracted rapidly leaving behind a significant number of long-term unemployed These figures reflect both changes resulting from foreign competition and the sharp declines in the demand for manufactured goods caused by the recent recession. The gradual decline of the dollar in foreign exchange markets to historically prevailing levels a drop in real interest rates and general economic recovery would contribute to easing the problems of troubled industries as explained in Chapter However most observers believe that foreign competition will present persistent problems in some domestic industries even in the long run In a number of these industries significant adjustments will need to take place. If foreign firms can continue to produce goods at lower costs than U.S. firms either domestic production will contract forcing workers to leave the affected industries or workers will have to accept constant or even declining real wages. The former option is particularly painful in industries like automobiles and steel where workers have become accustomed to high standards of living. Because wages in these industries are substantially greater than wages in other manufacturing industries workers find it difficult to locate suitable alternative jobs Programs which inhibit the transition of workers from declining industries to growing industries would raise the level of structural unemployment in the economy. Included in this group are programs which would provide financial assistance to industries without providing incentives for employee relocation or wage and price flexibility In a dynamic economy subject to the pressures of domestic and foreign competition our economic health depends critically on the ability of workers and firms to respond quickly to changing economic conditions Policies to Alleviate Long-term Unemployment The centerpiece of Federal policy to alleviate long-term unemployment is Title III of the new Job Training Partnership Act discussed earlier in the chapter. Title III established State-administered programs of employment and training assistance for dislocated workers defined broadly to include individuals who have become unemployed as a result of plant closures laid-off workers who are unlikely to return to their previous industry or occupation and individuals experiencing long-term unemployment in occupations with limited employment opportunities. Matching grants are provided to States on the basis of their unemployment conditions. Title III authorizes States to establish a wide variety of employment and training activities including job search assistance job training relocation assistance and employment counseling. Individuals receiving Title III assistance may also receive unemployment compensation if they are eligible The Administration in its budget has introduced two new approaches to the problem of reducing long-term unemployment. First it has proposed that Federal unemployment laws be amended to permit States to use a portion of the unemployment insurance taxes they collect to support retraining and job search assistance for their unemployed workers. Second the Administration has proposed that the Federal Supplemental Compensation program be replaced when it expires with a new temporary program that provides incentives for work as well as compensation for long-term unemployment. As an alternative to added weeks of unemployment compensation this program would give recipients the option of receiving assistance in securing work through a system of tax credits to employers. This will give employers a significant incentive to hire the long-term unemployed THE EFFECTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION For more than years unemployment compensation has given valuable support to millions of unemployed workers and has provided an important source of security to millions more who are employed. Along with these beneficial consequences however the present structure of the unemployment insurance system has altered the incentives faced by employers in hiring and firing decisions and the incentives of unemployed workers to accept new employment opportunities. As a result unemployment compensation seems to have increased the incidence and duration of unemployment The current system of unemployment compensation produces two distinct but related adverse incentive effects. First for those who are unemployed it reduces the cost of unemployment providing an incentive for longer durations of unemployment. Second current methods of financing unemployment insurance increase the incidence of unemployment by increasing the size of seasonal and cyclical flucuations in unemployment and by making temporary jobs more common Incentives to Prolong Unemployment Payments to the unemployed clearly raise the level of household expenditures that can be maintained when one or more family members are not working. Such payments reduce the economic pressure to find work immediately encouraging a longer period of job search during which the unemployed worker hopes to find a more attractive job than might otherwise be found. For some workers unemployment insurance replaces more than percent of after-tax wages during periods of unemployment. Economic research indicates that there is a positive relationship between duration of job search and the level of unemployment benefits Workers who take longer to find jobs because of unemployment compensation are in no sense " loafing " or " cheating. " An unemployed person who does not expect to be recalled by his previous employer can expect on average to find a better job the longer and more carefully he looks. Unemployment insurance by reducing the cost of additional weeks without work encourages unemployed workers to continue searching for better employment opportunities Incentives for More Unstable Employment A second avenue through which the unemployment insurance system as currently financed tends to increase the economy 's rate of structural unemployment is by increasing seasonal and cyclical fluctuations in the demand for labor and the relative number of shortlived casual jobs The effect of unemployment compensation is to offset the market forces that would otherwise decrease at least somewhat the amount of unstable employment in the economy. Insofar as unemployment compensation provides a subsidy to unstable employment practices it reduces the wage differential required to attract workers to seasonal cyclical and temporary jobs. And because employers pay a relatively small premium for unstable employment practices under current methods of financing unemployment insurance they have little incentive to reduce this instability The current subsidy to unstable employment patterns would be reduced if unemployment insurance were financed through a more completely experience-rated employer tax that more accurately reflected the expected level of unemployment benefits to a firm 's laidoff workers in the future. The theory of experience rating is clear : if an employer pays the full cost of the unemployment benefits that his former employees receive he will not have an incentive to make excessive use of unstable employment practices. Recent statistical research demonstrates that there is in fact a strong positive relation- ship between incomplete experience rating and employment instability Most States use experience rating to some extent in that some employers contribute to the State unemployment compensation fund partially on the basis of the unemployment experience of their own employees. The degree of experience rating is highly imperfect however for two reasons First a significant share of benefits paid are not directly charged to firms but rather are spread across all the firms in a State. These include benefits paid to job leavers benefits to employees of firms no longer doing business in a State and allowances for dependents. Extended benefits which are available in high unemployment States to workers who have exhausted their regular unemployment insurance are also not directly charged to employers Second employer contributions are limited by minimum and maximum tax rates. Firms stuck at the maximum or minimum tax rates will find that their tax rates do not change even if the unemployment experience of their workers is altered. As a consequence they face reduced economic incentives to smooth employment fluctuations One measure of the extent of experience rating is the proportion of benefits received that are not effectively charged to the former employer. A value of percent represents perfect experience rating. A recent study of nine States over the period found that on average less than percent of total benefits were experience rated by this definition. The degee of experience rating fell to percent during the recession and reached a high of percent in a year with relatively low unemployment The problem of imperfect experience rating has been partially remedied by a provision of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of which raised the federally proscribed lower bound on State maximum unemployment insurance tax rates from percent to percent of employers ' taxable payroll. Because of this change fewer firms are likely to face the maximum tax rate CONCLUSIONS The dual problems of cyclical and structural unemployment are both extremely serious. Increased unemployment during cyclical downturns and the high levels of unemployment that prevail even after the economy recovers impose large costs on the unemployed and the economy as a whole. Fortunately both can be ameliorated by prudent public policy. Sound macroeconomic policies will avoid recurrences of the rising inflation of the 1970s and subsequent in- creases in cyclical unemployment. Policies directed at young people and the long-term unemployed and reform of the unemployment insurance system can significantly reduce the level of structural unemployment CHAPTER The United States in the World Economy : Strains on the System DURING THE 1970s the world 's market economies became more integrated with each other than ever before. Exports and imports as a share of gross national product ( GNP ) reached record levels for most industrial countries while international lending and direct foreign investment grew even faster than world trade. This closer linkage of economies was mutually beneficial. It allowed producers in each country to take greater advantage of their country 's special resources and knowledge and to take advantage of economies of scale At the same time it allowed each country to consume a wider variety of products at lower costs than it could produce itself Underlying the growth in world trade and investment was a progressive reduction of barriers to trade. The postwar period was marked by a series of agreements to liberalize trade : both multilateral like the Kennedy Round and bilateral like the Canada-U.S. auto pact In spite of its huge benefits however this liberalized trading system is now in serious danger. Within the United States demands for protection against imports and for export subsidies have grown as a combination of structural changes sectoral problems and shortrun macroeconomic developments has led to a perception that we are becoming uncompetitive in world markets. In Europe a growing structural unemployment problem aggravated by the recession has increased protectionist pressures. In the developing countries a financial crisis threatens the integration of capital markets and is pushing many countries back toward the exchange controls and import restrictions they had begun to dismantle These problems must not be allowed to disrupt world trade. If the system comes apart if the world 's nations allow themselves to be caught up in a spiral of retaliatory trade restrictions a long time may pass before the pieces are put back together This chapter reviews the strains on the international economic system and the policies by which the United States is attempting to overcome them. It is divided into four sections. The first section discusses long-term changes in U.S. competitiveness. The correction of widespread misconceptions about the competitive position of the United States is essential if we are to get through the difficult period ahead without making major policy mistakes. The second section of the chapter is devoted to financial developments and their effects on trade especially the appreciation of the dollar and its likely effects on the U.S. trade balance. Two final sections examine macroeconomic and financial problems in Europe and the developing countries LONG-RUN TRENDS IN U.S. COMPETITIVENESS : PERCEPTIONS AND REALITIES Concern over the international competitiveness of the United States is as high as it has ever been. It is argued with increasing frequency that U.S. business has steadily lost ground in the international marketplace. This alleged poor performance is often attributed both to failures of management in the United States and to the support given to foreign businesses by their home governments. Feeding the perception of declining competitiveness is the persistent U.S deficit in merchandise trade especially the imbalance in trade with Japan Changes in U.S. trade performance must however be put into the context of changes in the U.S. role in the world economy. This wider approach reveals that much of the concern about long-run competitiveness is based on misperceptions. Although the recent appreciation of the dollar has created a temporary loss of competitiveness the United States has not experienced a persistent loss of ability to sell its products on international markets ; in fact in the 1970s the United States held its own in terms of output exports and employment. Changes in the relationship of the United States to the world economy however have made the United States look less competitive by some traditional measures AGGREGATE PERFORMANCE OF THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Discussion of U.S. competitiveness often gives the misleading impression that the United States has consistently performed poorly relative to other industrial countries. The U.S. share of world trade and world GNP did in fact decline throughout the 1950s and 1960s reflecting the recovery of the rest of the world from World War II together with the narrowing of the huge and unsustainable U.S. technological lead. In the 1970s however this long decline leveled off From to real gross domestic product ( GDP ) in the United States grew at an annual rate of percent compared with percent in the other Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) countries From to the U.S. share of OECD exports remained nearly constant declining from to percent Over the same period employment in the United States grew at percent a year compared with only percent in the rest of the OECD countries The United States in part as a side effect of its relatively rapid growth in employment did do poorly by comparison in one respect productivity growth. Output per worker grew at only percent in the United States compared with percent a year in the rest of the OECD countries. Productivity is of course crucial to living standards ; ultimately the level of consumption per capita depends on the level of output per worker. But there is no necessary relation between productivity and competition in international markets. Slow growth in productivity only hampers a country 's international competitiveness if it is not offset by correspondingly slow growth in real wages. If U.S. workers for example were to receive real wage increases equal to those granted in other countries while their productivity failed to increase at a comparable rate U.S. industry would find itself increasingly uncompetitive. The fact is however that this did not occur as the comparative experience of the United States and the European Economic Community illustrates. From to output per manufacturing worker in the European Economic Community rose at an annual rate of percent but real compensation rose at an annual rate of percent. By contrast output per worker in the United States rose percent annually while real compensation rose only percent annually. In fact until the recent rise in the dollar 's exchange rate it was workers in the European Economic Community rather than those in the United States who were probably pricing themselves out of the world market in spite of their relatively good productivity performance The overall performance of the United States then does not suggest a long-term problem of competitiveness. The shift from persistent trade surplus to persistent deficit which occurred over the last decade is however often misinterpreted as a sign of an inability to compete. In fact changes in the structure of the U.S. balance of payments are more the result of changes in the U.S. saving and investment position than of slow productivity growth THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF THE U.S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS In the 1950s and early 1960s the United States normally had a trade surplus and invested heavily in other countries. In the years after however the United States normally had a trade deficit and annual investment by foreigners in the United States began to approach annual U.S. investment abroad. The shift in the U.S. trade balance was closely connected with the shift in investment flows Taken as a whole U.S. international transactions always balance Any force tending to increase or decrease the balance in one category of transactions sets in motion a process leading to exactly offsetting changes in balances in other categories. For example an increase in foreign demand for U.S. exports tends directly to improve the trade balance but this improvement leads to a rise in the dollar 's exchange rate against foreign currencies. The exchange-rate appreciation in turn leads to increases in imports a worsened balance on services and so on. Similarly an increased desire by foreign residents to invest in the United States is reflected in an increase in the capital account but leads to an appreciation of the dollar and an offsetting decline in other parts of the balance of payments The shift in the U.S. trade balance from persistent surplus to persistent deficit was largely an offset to changes in the U.S. capital account. In the 1950s and the first half of the 1960s rates of return on capital were lower and wage rates were higher in the United States than in other industrial countries. Since the United States suffered no war damage its capital stock was intact and the diffusion of U.S. technology abroad created a demand for new capital investment in the recipient countries. The result was that returns to investment were higher abroad than in the United States and the United States was a heavy net foreign investor. The counterpart to this foreign investment was a persistent surplus on current transactions including merchandise trade By the 1970s the other industrial countries had narrowed or eliminated these differences in capital and labor costs. The result was that the demand for new capital abroad was no longer a great deal larger than it was in the United States. At the same time the supply of savings in the United States was restricted by a low national saving rate ( the lowest among the major industrial countries ) Thus the United States ceased to be a major net exporter of capital and the current account of the balance of payments moved from surplus to rough balance. Meanwhile the U.S. balance on items other than merchandise trade improved : the deficit in military transactions fell the surplus in services rose and in particular the accumulation of past foreign investments began to yield increasing income. This meant that a balanced current account was associated with a deficit in merchandise trade Table and Chart show how the structure of the U.S. current account has changed measuring its components as percentages ofGNP TABLE Structure ofthe U.S. balance ofpayments as percent of GNP Percent of GNP Type of balance Change percentage points Merchandise trade Investment income Military transactions Travel and services Remittances Current account Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Chart Structural Changes in the Current Account Balance PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT INVESTMENT INCOME NOTE. DATA ARE 16-QUARTER WEIGHTED CENTERED MOVING AVERAGES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE THE ISSUE OF U.S. TRADE WITH JAPAN The perception of diminished U.S. competitiveness stems not only from the U.S. trade deficit but from an impression that U.S. trade performance compares poorly with that of other countries especially that of Japan. Japan runs a huge surplus in its manufactures trade while the United States runs only a small one and Japan also has a large surplus in its bilateral trade with the United States. These facts are often attributed to Japanese trade restrictions. Japan does maintain restrictions which seriously hurt U.S. businesses. Trade restrictions however do not in the long run improve the Japanese trade balance ; as discussed more fully below they lead to offsetting increases in other imports or declines in exports. The main explanation of Japan 's surplus in manufactures trade and in trade with the United States is that Japan with few natural resources incurs huge deficits in its trade in primary products especially oil and with primary producers especially the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) The surpluses in the rest of Japan 's trade offset these deficits Table and Chart show the differences in the structure of the Japanese European and U.S. trade accounts. They show clearly how the huge Japanese surplus in manufactures offsets large deficits in primary products Corresponding to the Japanese sectoral deficit in primary products especially oil is a regional deficit with OPEC. Japan makes up for its deficit with OPEC by running surpluses in its trade with other regions. The extent of this regional imbalance and its contrast with the U.S. position is shown in Table The point here is similar to that already made with respect to the overall U.S. trade balance : looking at Japanese-U.S. trade in isolation is misleading. The Japanese surplus in trade with the United States is largely a response to the rise of OPEC Although Japanese trade policy does not play a central role in causing the bilateral trade imbalance with the United States Japanese import restrictions remain a major source of friction. Japan maintains a variety of nontariff barriers against imports. These include import quotas for a number of agricultural products and " red tape " barriers against manufactured goods such as stringent inspection requirements applied against imported goods but not against Japanese products. These trade restrictions probably do not lead to a larger overall Japanese trade surplus. If they were removed the yen would depreciate and increased Japanese imports in the currently protected sectors would be offset by reduced deficits or increased surpluses elsewhere Japanese trade restrictions do however distort the composition of U.S. trade with Japan imposing serious costs on some U.S. produc- TABLE Trade balances by commodity group as percent of GDP United States Japan and the European Economic Community [ Percent of GDP ] United States Commodity group Total. Japan European Economic Community Food beverages and tobacco Crude materials excluding petroleum. Primary products Mineral fuels Manufactures Machinery and transport equipment... Other manufactured goods Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Chart Composition of Trade PERCENT OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT | | TOTAL PRIMARY GOODS MANUFACTURES V.' ' ' v> " : i IH UNITED S T A T E S EUROPEAN ECONOMIC C O M M U N I T Y SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT JAPAN ers. As the fastest growing and second largest market economy Japan has a responsibility to help sustain the open trading system. A major trade liberalization by Japan would do much to relieve the political strains on that system while the failure of Japan to make more than token concessions would intensify them TABLE Trade balances by region as percent of GDP United States and Japan [ Percent of GDP ] United States Japan = Industrial countries Oil-exporting countries. Non-oil developing countries.. Source : International Monetary Fund THE PROBLEM OF UNCOMPETITIVE SECTORS Analysis of the overall U.S. trade deficit and the bilateral deficit with Japan suggests that worries about U.S. competitiveness are based in part on a misunderstanding of the situation. There is no question however that increased foreign competition has forced some sectors of the U.S. economy to contract This is partly a consequence of the fact that trade has become more important to the U.S. economy. Specialization by nations is the reason for international trade. If the United States is to expand its trade the U.S. economy must become more specialized. This means that some sectors will grow and others will shrink. During the 1970s the United States developed increasing surpluses in areas in which it already enjoyed a comparative advantage and developed increasing deficits in sectors in which it was at a disadvantage. Some illustrative numbers are given in Table TABLE U.S. trade balances by sector as percent of GDP [ Percent of GDP ] Item U.S. comparative advantage : Research-intensive manufactures. Resource-intensive products other than fuels. Invisibles ( services and investment income ) = U.S. comparative disadvantage : Nonresearch-intensive manufactures. Fuels Sources : International Monetary Fund National Science Board and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Specialization of this kind is desirable both for the United States and for its trading partners. Specialization and trade raise the efficiency of the world economy as a whole by allowing each country to concentrate on doing what it does relatively well and by allowing increased economies of scale. But greater specialization can leave those involved in the contracting sectors worse off at least temporarily. Attempts to prevent adjustment through trade barriers or subsidies however impose severe costs on unprotected sectors Some sectoral reallocation of resources then is a normal consequence of the increasing U.S. integration into the world economy This is not the whole story however. Some sectors of the U.S. economy are confronted by a problem that is not simply the result of market forces. Broadly speaking these sectors fall into two groups In one group are sectors where firms or their workers accustomed to having substantial market power now find that they have priced themselves out of the world market. In the other group are sectors which are hurt by foreign protectionism or export subsidies Market Power and Competitiveness The " problem " of diminished market power in some sectors actually derives from a desirable aspect of trade : the fact that trade increases competition. One of the major benefits of an increasingly open U.S. economy is that it reduces the problems of monopoly and market power thus increasing efficiency and helping consumers. But the transition to more competitive markets can prove painful. When an industry accustomed to having domestic market power encounters international competition it must accept a reduction in the premium in prices and wages it previously commanded over other sectors of the economy. Both firms and workers may be reluctant to accept this implication of increased competition and idle capacity and unemployment may result. Prices and wages in some U.S. heavy industries are probably too high to be sustainable in an integrated world economy Policies of Foreign Governments A different problem is posed when foreign governments engage in protective or export promotion measures that harm U.S. producers U.S. trade negotiators have emphasized four particular areas of concern : Agriculture : Japan and the European Economic Community have high protective barriers against U.S. agricultural products. Further the European Economic Community now engages in massive subsidized export of agricultural products to dispose of the surpluses created by its price-support program. These measures depress world prices of agricultural products imposing substantial costs on U.S producers in a sector where the United States holds a clear comparative advantage High technology : In recent years many countries have come to view the high-technology industries as vehicles for economic growth and have sought to promote them through a complex mix of policies outright subsidies export credit subsidies research subsidies preferential procurement by State-owned enterprises and so on. The United States holds a comparative advantage in high-technology products and the U.S. export market share has remained roughly constant since Nevertheless there is concern that in some specific areas especially aircraft foreign subsidies are threatening the position of U.S. producers Services : The United States has developed an increasingly strong net export position in services. Services however have never been recognized as being under the rules of the international trading system and trade in services is limited by a maze of foreign government regulations Investment : Many countries impose " investment performance requirements ' * on foreign investors in exchange for the right to invest or to receive investment incentives. Many of those performance requirements are trade-related requiring foreign companies to export more reach a specified level of local content or reduce imports CHALLENGES TO U.S. TRADE POLICY The next few years are critical for the international trading system Accumulating structural problems have combined with short-run macroeconomic stresses to produce a resurgence of protectionist pressures. The Administration 's aim nonetheless is to preserve and extend the benefits of freer trade. To do this will require resisting protectionist pressures at home while continuing to urge foreign governments to eliminate their more objectionable trade-distorting policies Responding to Foreign Actions The practices of foreign governments pose extremely difficult issues for U.S. trade policy. The United States customarily seeks to induce other nations to move in the direction of freer trade. The dilemma is how to do this without imposing costs on ourselves that exceed the benefits from changes in other countries * policies Trade-distorting measures whether they take the form of protection against imports or the promotion of exports hurt the country which adopts them as well as other countries even when they are a response to foreign trade-distorting practices. If foreign governments limit imports from the United States and we respond in kind the initial results will be further reductions in economic efficiency at home and higher domestic prices. If foreign governments subsidize exports depressing world prices for U.S. products a countersubsidy by the United States will depress prices still further. The belief that departures from free trade are automatically called for if other countries do not play by the rules is a fallacy Intervention in international trade by the U.S. Government even though costly to the U.S. economy in the short run may however be justified if it serves the strategic purpose of increasing the cost of interventionist policies by foreign governments. Thus there is a potential role for carefully targeted measures explicitly temporary aimed at convincing other countries to reduce their trade distortions There are obvious risks in such a course of action. Instead of inducing other countries to move toward freer trade U.S. pressure might set off a cycle of retaliation which would leave everyone worse off. There are also domestic political risks. Trade measures intended to be temporary may end up permanent and institutionalized. The need to balance the strategic objective of reducing foreign trade barriers against the harm which might be caused by U.S. retaliatory measures explains the U.S policy of negotiating for freer trade while holding open the possibility of more direct action as a last resort Responding to Problem Industries The problems of industries which have recently lost their traditional market power also pose a serious policy dilemma. There is strong pressure to give these industries at least temporary relief from imports in the hope that lower wage and price increases and improved productivity will eventually make them competitive again. On the other hand protection reduces the incentives for both firms and workers to make these changes. Furthermore protectionist measures however temporary they are supposed to be tend to become permanent. The limitation of protection for these problem industries is a central goal of U.S. economic policy EXCHANGE RATES AND THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS During the dollar rose against other major currencies to its highest level since the beginning of floating exchange rates in The strength of the dollar provided some benefits to the U.S. economy by reducing import prices and thus accelerating progress against inflation. On the other hand the strong dollar caused severe problems by decreasing the cost competitiveness of exported U.S. goods CAUSES OF THE DOLLAR 'S STRENGTH Exchange-rate movements are not well understood. Econometric models of exchange-rate determination proposed in the past decade have not shown any consistent ability to track past exchange-rate movements let alone predict future changes. Nevertheless careful analysis can narrow the range of plausible explanations of the dollar 's rise The recent appreciation of the dollar unlike many earlier exchange-rate movements did not simply reflect contemporaneous changes in relative price levels. The well-known theory of purchasing power parity suggests that the rate of change in the exchange rate should equal the difference between the foreign and domestic inflation rates. Over the very long run or in situations of very large differences in inflation rates the purchasing power parity theory has proved to be a useful guide. But the theory has little or no power to explain the recent rise of the dollar. Price increases over the past years in Germany and Japan for instance were lower than in the United States. Yet the dollar appreciated dramatically during that period against both the mark and the yen. Stated differently the rise of the dollar was not simply a nominal but also a real appreciation as illustrated in Chart Large exchange-rate movements may also occur because of shifts in world demand for a country 's exports or changes in a country 's demand for imports. An example of such an event was Great Britain 's discovery of oil in the North Sea which has played at least some role in the high level of Great Britain 's real exchange rate relative to other European currencies No comparable event accounts for the appreciation of the dollar although U.S. oil imports have declined sharply. The rise of the dollar was not initially accompanied by a deterioration of the trade balance a fact which might seem to suggest that there was an increase in demand for U.S. goods. The initial lack of deterioration however stemmed from lags in the effect of the exchange rate on the trade balance rather than from a shift in either export or import demand and the U.S. trade deficit grew rapidly in the second half of What the rise of the dollar seems clearly to reflect is a rise not in the demand for U.S. goods but in the demand for U.S. assets. The reasons for the increased attractiveness of investment in the United States are somewhat controversial but the effects are not. In order to buy U.S. assets foreigners must first acquire dollars. The increased demand for dollars drives up the exchange rate One important factor in the increased demand for U.S. assets was that real interest rates in the United States were high relative to real interest rates elsewhere. Real interest rates are not directly measurable since they equal the nominal rate minus expected inflation. But some rough measure is attainable by computing the nominal rate minus actual inflation. Chart shows the differential in real interest rates computed in this way between the United States and other Chart Real Exchange Rates Of Major Currencies Against The Dollar = % t \ / \ r \ * / " J v \ Y N E \ \ V * * \ S \ \ \ * FRANC l \ \ \ MARK * * i I I I1 i ...A * i i i i i / ^ ^ / * / * * i i i i NOTE. CONSUMER PRICES USED AS DEFLATOR SOURCE : INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND industrial countries. The chart suggests that the real interest rate in the United States was substantially higher than foreign rates in recent years But events in the fall of cast some doubt on whether real interest rates alone can explain the dollar 's strength. As U.S. shortterm interest rates fell sharply the differential between short-term interest rates in the United States and other countries was greatly reduced. Yet the dollar continued to rise. The explanation for this may lie in the difference between short- and long-term rates. Most exchange-rate models suggest that long-term real rates and not shortterm ones are what affect the real exchange rate. A notable feature of the U.S. financial scene in the fall of was that long-term rates Chart International Real Short-Term Interest Rate Differentials PERCENTAGE POINTS NOTE. DATA ARE U.S. RATE MINUS AVERAGE OF RATES FOR MAJOR INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES WEIGHTED BY GNP ADJUSTED FOR DIFFERENCES IN CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION SOURCE : INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND did not fall nearly as much as short-term rates. At the same time long-run inflation expectations may have declined so that it is unclear how much long-term real interest rates actually fell Many observers believe that other factors besides real interest rates help explain the dollar 's strength. In particular the unsettled state of the world economy particularly the problems in Europe and Latin America described later in this chapter may have created a desire on the part of investors for a safe haven for their funds. The United States according to this argument is still regarded as the most politically and economically stable of the market economies and has become a financial refuge in troubled times. While the importance of this factor is hard to assess the worldwide search for financial security may partially explain this country 's rising capital account surplus and its growing current account deficit AN UNDERVALUED YEN ? The explanations of the strong dollar discussed so far leave out a view which has received considerable attention that the strength of the dollar reflects deliberate undervaluation of their currencies by our competitors especially Japan. This view is important enough in its implications for U.S. international economic policy to deserve separate treatment Arguments that the yen is undervalued are of two types which are basically independent of one another. One argument is that the Japanese government has persistently kept the yen undervalued. The other is that the Japanese have only recently engineered a decline in the yen to gain competitive advantage. Neither of these views appears correct in light of the actual behavior of Japan 's balance of payments and exchange rate If the first allegation that the yen has been persistently undervalued was correct Japan would run persistent current account surpluses in excess of what seems justified. We would also expect Japan to have experienced exceptionally rapid growth in its foreign exchange reserves. Neither of these was the case : From the beginning of floating exchange rates in through Japan had an average surplus in its current account of only percent of GNP. This was not much more than the U.S figure for the same period ( percent ) considerably less than that of Germany ( percent ) and much less than the U.S. surplus of the early 1960s ( percent ) From the beginning of floating exchange rates in to the third quarter of Japan 's reserves minus gold grew at an annual rate of percent far less than the percent rate of reserve growth for all non-OPEC countries These facts contradict the view that the yen was persistently undervalued. There remains the possibility that the yen 's weakness during much of was excessive in some sense. A natural question is whether after adjustment for purchasing power parity the yen fell more against the dollar than other currencies. The answer to this question depends on the base period used for comparison. For most base periods however the real depreciation of the yen against the dollar appears smaller than that of the French franc and the German mark. Table shows an illustrative set of numbers. As the table shows only for a few base periods does the yen appear more " undervalued " than the other two currencies The actual behavior of the Japanese balance of payments and exchange rate thus do not support the view that there is any special undervaluation of the yen that is they suggest that exchange-rate TABLE S-5. Real appreciation of the dollar against major currencies to August [ Percent change from base year to August ' ] French franc German mark Base year Japanese yen = = a Percent change in the price of the dollar In each currency adjusted for differences in consumer price inflation 'Indicates a base year relative to which the August exchange rate of the yen looks lower than that of the other currencies Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System movements over the last several years stemmed from a strong dollar rather than a weak yen. An examination of Japanese policy by the U.S. Treasury supports this conclusion. This study found that Japan has attempted to isolate its domestic capital market from world capital markets but that this has tended to limit capital outflow rather than inflow supporting rather than weakening the yen. Japanese capital controls have been relaxed in recent years a move which the United States supports even though the result will be a weaker yen and an increase in Japan 's current account surplus. In the 1980s Japan may well become more of a capital exporter than it was in the 1970s and thus have larger current account surpluses. These surpluses if they materialize will result from Japan 's high domestic saving rate which gives Japan a natural role as an exporter of capital to the rest of the world To show that there is no special yen issue is not to deny that a substantial deterioration has occurred in the relative cost position of U.S. firms. This deterioration was actually larger relative to other industrial countries but since Japan is the United States ' most important competitor the depreciation of the yen worries U.S. firms more There is no special yen issue but the strong dollar does pose genuine problems EFFECTS OF A STRONG DOLLAR ON U.S. TRADE The rise of the dollar was associated with a large rise in the production costs of U.S. firms relative to those of foreign competitors To take one measure unit labor costs in U.S. manufacturing rose percent relative to those of a weighted average of other industrial countries from their low point in the third quarter of to the second quarter of This rise in relative costs has at least tempo- rarily reduced the international competitiveness of U.S. industry dramatically. Other U.S. exporting and import-competing sectors especially agriculture have also been squeezed Despite this deterioration in competitive position it was only in the third quarter of that the U.S. trade deficit began to show a significant increase. This delay was in line with previous experience of the effect of exchange rates on trade. The full effect of changes in exchange rates on the volume of exports and imports is felt only after some time has passed because some trade takes place under contracts signed in advance and because customers do not always change suppliers immediately when relative prices change. The shortterm effect of a rise in the dollar is to reduce import prices which actually tends to improve the trade balance. Although the negative effects eventually dominate some econometric estimates suggest that the full negative effect is not felt for more than years As the effects of the strong dollar are increasingly reflected in U.S trade the trade deficit will widen. Economic developments elsewhere in the world will also contribute to a widening trade deficit. The recession in other industrial countries will depress the demand for U.S exports and financial constraints in developing countries will lead them to import less. Both developments will have negative consequences for U.S. exports. Record trade and current account deficits in will almost surely result Whether the trade and current account deficits persist will largely depend on U.S. macroeconomic policies particularly on the fiscal side. If large budget deficits are allowed to continue to depress the U.S. national saving rate real interest rates may rise again sustaining or even increasing the high real exchange rate of the dollar. In this case the trade deficit could remain high for several years A large and sustained trade deficit would result in an economic recovery which would be " lopsided " in the sense that exporting and import-competing sectors would not share in the gains. Should this occur government business and labor officials must bear in mind that even though protectionist foreign trade practices distort the composition of world trade and reduce economic efficiency both in the United States and abroad large trade deficits are not the result of unfair foreign competition. Large projected U.S. trade deficits are a result of macroeconomic forces particularly large budget deficits The main sources of the U.S. trade deficit are to be found not in Paris or in Tokyo but in Washington RESPONSES TO THE STRONG DOLLAR The temporary adverse effects of a strong dollar create pressure to do something for the exporting and import-competing sectors. Three kinds of policies might be used : microeconomic intervention in the form of protection or export subsidies direct intervention in the foreign exchange market and changes in monetary and fiscal policy Protection and Export Promotion The negative effect of the strong dollar on the competitiveness of many U.S. firms has fueled pressures for an interventionist trade policy. These pressures must be resisted. Protecting import-competing industries or subsidizing exports is not just a harmful long-run policy. With a floating exchange rate such policies would fail to improve the trade balance or create employment even in the short run The exchange rate always moves to clear the market. An increase in exports or a reduction in imports would lead to an increased demand for or reduced supply of dollars on the world market raising the exchange rate. This would lead to a further loss of competitiveness in the sectors not protected or promoted. An export subsidy for agricultural products would worsen the situation of the auto industry an import quota on steel would hurt the competitiveness of the aircraft industry and so on. Although these indirect effects may seem of doubtful importance in the real world they are not. That governments can not simultaneously protect everyone is a basic principle of international trade Instead of creating additional employment and output the distortion of trade through protectionist policies or export promotion would probably reduce them. Market-distorting policies reduce the efficiency of the economy. Thus a turn to protectionism could create a " supply-side " shock that might have the same kind of stagflationary effects as an oil price increase. The effects would prove still worse if as is likely U.S. actions were to provoke foreign retaliation Although protectionism and export subsidies provide no answer to the problems caused by a strong dollar the pressure to use them is increasing. Many of the exporting sectors which make up the traditional constituency for freer trade appear to have become convinced by the strength of the dollar and the resulting loss of U.S. competitiveness that a more interventionist policy is needed Exchange-Market Intervention Since March the United States has abstained as much as possible from direct intervention in the foreign exchange market. This unwillingness to intervene is based on doubts about whether exchange-market intervention is effective or desirable. As long as the Federal Reserve continues to pursue a policy of targeting monetary aggregates any U.S. intervention on the foreign exchange market must be sterilized that is offset by other transactions on domestic fi- nancial markets. These transactions are likely to wipe out most of the effect of the initial exchange-market intervention The process of sterilization is straightforward. If the U.S. Government attempted to drive up the price of foreign exchange and weaken the dollar by buying foreign securities the Federal Reserve would issue dollars to pay for the foreign assets. In order to prevent these dollars from increasing the U.S. money stock however the Federal Reserve would then have to withdraw an equal number of dollars from the market by selling Treasury bills. The only net result would be that the world 's supply of dollar-denominated assets would increase while its supply of assets denominated in other currencies would fall The increase in the level of dollar-denominated assets would probably have little effect on the exchange rate because of the sheer size of world financial markets. The world market in dollar-denominated securities includes not only the dollar assets actually owned abroad foreign deposits in U.S. banks foreign holdings of Treasury bills Eurodollar deposits and the like but also all those dollar assets which are potentially tradeable. Thus the total pool of internationally mobile dollar assets is probably in the trillions of dollars. This makes it questionable whether even very large interventions in the exchange market can have much effect on the exchange rate Macroeconomic Policies Although the government can not significantly affect exchange rates through direct intervention monetary and fiscal policies do indirectly affect the exchange rate. A feasible strategy for bringing the dollar down would involve looser monetary policies and tighter fiscal policies. Both of these changes would tend to lower real interest rates ( at least in the short run ) making capital movement into the United States less attractive and thus driving down the value of the dollar Despite its unfortunate effects on the U.S. balance of trade however monetary restraint is the prime weapon in the fight against inflation. Disinflation as we have learned unfortunately involves substantial costs. Under fixed exchange rates the heaviest costs of monetary contraction and disinflation fell on the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy such as construction and consumer durables. With floating exchange rates however much of the burden also falls on exporting and import-competing sectors which are injured by the rise in the value of the dollar A tighter fiscal policy would also lower real interest rates and lead to a lower dollar. Under fixed exchange rates budget deficits crowded out domestic investment. With a floating exchange rate they crowd out exporting and import-competing products as well. A re- duction in deficits would lead with some lag to an improvement in the trade balance as well as higher investment The strength of the dollar has put considerable strain on the resolve of the United States to remain committed to free trade. This strain is not unique to the international sector. The recession and high interest rates have also put a strain on the resolve to let other types of markets from housing to labor markets operate freely. If there is special reason for concern about the international side it is because of the danger that mistakes in U.S. policy could set off a spiral of retaliation among all the major trading nations The competitiveness of U.S. business as a whole as opposed to that of particular sectors and the balance of payments are macroeconomic phenomena. Microeconomic interventions can not cure macroeconomic problems ; they can only make one sector better off by hurting other sectors even more. The most effective strategy the United States can pursue for its exporting and import-competing sectors is to get its overall economic house in order above all by bringing budget deficits and real interest rates under control MACROECONOMIC PROBLEMS IN EUROPE More than percent of the output of the industrial countries and more than percent of the output of the world 's market economies is produced by the United States Japan and the European Economic Community. Table shows some comparative figures for the three. The most striking feature of the table is the favorable performance of Japan by all measures. The United States and the European Economic Community look rather similar in their less favorable performances. They experienced nearly the same growth rates before have suffered nearly equal decelerations of growth since then and had roughly the same unemployment rate in The U.S. inflation rate was lower than that in Europe but the United States also showed lower productivity growth Behind the similarity of U.S. and European experience however lies a major difference. The U.S. economy whatever its other difficulties has provided employment opportunities for a rapidly growing labor force. The current high unemployment rate is a cyclical problem not the result of a persistent failure of employment to expand In Europe by contrast employment was virtually stationary over the last decade and unemployment has risen in every year since This is a worrisome aspect of the European situation For a given rate of unemployment the strains on society are probably greater if employment is stagnant than if it is growing. Growing employment means that more new jobs are always opening up offer- TABLE Economic performance by major industrial countries [ Percent ] ed es Item Four large European countries ' Japan Growth rate in : Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) Consumer price inflation year ending : Unemployment rate Real GOP per employed person Real GDP : l-1981 : IV Level : 'France Germany Italy and United Kingdom Sources : International Monetary Fund and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ing job losers a chance for reemployment and new entrants to the labor market a chance to get their first job. If employment is stationary workers who have lost their jobs may stay unemployed for a long time and young people may never find jobs. The results of near-zero employment growth are painfully visible in Europe where long-term unemployment ( more than months ) is several times higher than in the United States and where the share of youth unemployment in the total pool of unemployed has risen steadily since How did the problem arise ? The causes of structural unemployment are always controversial but a key element in the European employment problem was probably rapid increases in real labor costs in the first half of the 1970s in the face of declining productivity growth and rising oil prices. These increases in labor costs which stemmed at least in part from increases in social insurance payments squeezed profitability. Firms closed their marginal plants and invested in increasingly capital-intensive techniques which helped to sustain the rate of productivity growth but also led to employment stagnation The unemployment problem in Europe is not caused solely by excessive labor costs. The periods of rapid increase in European unemployment in and since came during business cycle contractions ( Table ) The most recent rise in unemployment is probably mostly due to restrictive monetary and fiscal policies adopted by the European countries following the oil price shock of These policies were adopted out of concern that the rise in import prices resulting from that shock and later the further rise in import prices resulting from the appreciation of the dollar would lead to an uncontrollable inflationary spiral. Thus recent developments in the European economy are to some extent similar in character to those in the United States which have also resulted largely from disinflationary policies. The European situation is more serious however because the current recession comes on top of a steadily growing structural unemployment problem TABLE Employment and unemployment in the European Economic Community [ Percent ] Unemployment rate Increase in employment Year Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development The United States has a major stake in the success of the European countries in dealing with their macroeconomic problems. The stake is not simply due to the fact that the major European countries are also allies of the United States nor is it simply due to the fact that roughly one-quarter of U.S. exports go to Western Europe. More than this Europe is a key part of the world economy with an aggregate GNP as large as that of the United States itself. If European countries remain mired in economic stagnation and turn toward increased protectionism as a consequence little chance will remain of saving the open trading system THE INTERNATIONAL DEBT PROBLEM Different problems from those facing the United States and Europe afflict the economies of the developing nations. The problems of these economies have accumulated over the last several years and are products of both domestic policy mistakes and external developments such as oil price increases the recession in industrial countries and high real interest rates. In the summer and fall of the problems came to a head in the form of a sharp reduction in international lending to the developing countries DEBT-FINANCED GROWTH IN THE 1970s Until recently the growth of such middle income developing countries as Brazil South Korea and Taiwan was widely viewed as one of the great success stories of the 1970s. Particularly notable was their success in expanding exports of manufactured goods. While the growth of these exports did give rise to some adjustment problems in industrial countries the successes of some middle income countries were undoubtedly a highly favorable development for the United States. Such success provided a dramatic demonstration to other countries of the potential of market-oriented economic policies An important aspect of growth in the developing world however was heavy borrowing from foreign sources. There is nothing inherently wrong in external borrowing to finance growth. Some of the developed countries including the United States relied heavily on foreign capital during earlier periods of industrialization. But some developing nations borrowed too much investing in projects of doubtful productivity. When overly optimistic expectations about export earnings and interest rates turned out to have been wrong these countries found themselves in serious financial difficulty From to the medium- and long-term external debt of non-oil developing countries rose at an annual rate of more than percent. Lenders might have viewed this rate of increase as more alarming than they did were it not for several factors which appeared to indicate that the eventual repayment of the debt would not impose a severe burden on borrowing countries. These factors included : A rapid growth in the ability of these countries to service their debt Exports of the non-oil developing countries grew at an annual rate of percent Very low real interest rates. From to Eurodollar rates in London which set the basis for most international lending averaged percent while U.S. wholesale prices rose at an annual rate of percent. Even allowing for the fact that third-world borrowers paid small spreads over the Euromarket rate the real interest rates they paid were still negative Special factors which appeared to ensure rising export earnings in the future. The most important of these was oil reserves which were essentially treated as an asset against which countries could safely borrow CAUSES OF THE LIQUIDITY PROBLEM Excessive borrowing by some developing countries made an eventual financial problem inevitable. The proximate factor which brought the era of debt-financed growth to a halt was however a sharp deterioration in the world economy. The rise in oil prices in was a blow to many debtor countries and further strains resulted from disinflation in the United States and other industrial countries. The factors which led to a loss of lender confidence in the developing countries included : The effects of the world recession on export demand. T h e rapid export growth of the 1970s came to an abrupt end in the early 1980s Exports of the non-oil developing countries actually fell by percent from the first half of to the first half of Exporters of primary products were hit particularly hard : real commodity prices fell by percent from the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of High real interest rates. In and the first half of Euromarket interest rates averaged percent while wholesale prices in the United States rose at an annual rate of only percent The appreciation of the dollar. Since most international debt is denominated in dollars while commodity prices tend to follow a weighted average of industrial country currencies the effect of the rise in the value of the dollar was a sudden increase in the size of developing country debt relative to prospective export earnings The result of these developments was that banks which had been willing to lend large amounts to developing countries throughout the 1970s lost confidence that the loans would be promptly repaid. The debtor countries were highly vulnerable to such a loss of confidence Much of their debt was of short maturity so that a large fraction of their debt required refinancing each year. Argentina Brazil and Mexico for example must make annual payments of principal and interest which exceed their total exports of goods and services During the 1970s these large financing needs did not pose a problem since countries were able to roll over their debt as it came due In the summer and fall of however banks became reluctant to make new loans and roll over old ones first to Mexico and then to other countries. The result was a quick exhaustion of the foreign exchange reserves of the major debtors IMPLICATIONS OF THE DEBT PROBLEM The debt situation of the developing countries poses two problems for the world economy. Although quite unlikely failure to resolve the debt situation in an orderly way could lead to major financial market disruptions. More likely indeed it has already happened to a considerable extent is a situation of forced austerity in debtor countries with adverse effects on world trade and output Risks to Financial Markets The threat of a financial disruption arises from the possibility that debtor countries will be unable to live within their new financial constraints. The unwillingness of banks to lend as much as in the recent past means that debtor countries will need to cut their imports or expand their exports. In the case of the most heavily indebted countries this will almost certainly mean achieving substantial trade surpluses in spite of depressed demand for their exports. The concern of lenders that some debtors will not be able to achieve the required adjustment is precisely what makes them reluctant to lend Fortunately a serious financial disruption is unlikely. The debtor countries and the banks which are their major creditors share a strong interest in an orderly resolution of the debt problem. For the debtor countries maintaining good financial standing is essential if they are to maintain access both to world capital markets and to their export markets. At the same time banks realize that demanding too rapid a repayment from debtor countries could prove counterproductive and they are probably willing to provide enough financing so that debtor countries can more easily handle the financial squeeze. Although banks find themselves in somewhat of a " prisoner 's dilemma " situation in which no one bank will want to lend if it believes that the loans will only go to repay other banks this problem should not prove insoluble. The banking community should be able to work with the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in negotiating agreements which balance an adequate degree of new lending to the debtor countries with realistic economic adjustment plans. To aid in this process the Administration and representatives of other industrial nations recently agreed in principle to an enlargement of the IMF 's resources Perhaps the most important safeguard against a financial crisis is the ability of the governments and central banks of the major industrial countries to provide a safety net for the international financial system. Central banks act as lenders of last resort for commercial banks providing effective protection against banking panics. At the same time industrial country governments have demonstrated their willingness to help provide temporary financing for developing countries in order to bridge the interval until agreements can be reached with the IMF. ( The IMF recently concluded agreements with Mexico Argentina and Brazil. ) Effects on World Trade Although a serious disruption of the international financial system is unlikely for all of the reasons cited serious problems still exist Even under optimistic assumptions those developing countries with high ratios of debt to exports will be forced to improve their trade balances substantially in order to pay the interest on their debt Much of this trade balance improvement will probably come through reductions in imports involving painful reductions in output and real wages in the debtor countries. This will also depress demand for the products of industrial countries particularly the United States which has especially close trading relations with some of the major Latin American debtors. The debt problem of the developing countries may worsen the U.S. trade balance by $ to $ billion and reduce U.S. GNP by one-half percentage point or more from the level it would otherwise reach The Outlook for Debtor Nations The problems of the developing countries are not insoluble. If growth in the world economy resumes and real interest rates fall to historical levels the debt burden of even the most heavily indebted countries will become much more manageable. Mexico and Brazil among the most heavily indebted countries both have debts well below half their GNPs. At a historically typical real interest rate of percent the real burden of debt service would fall to less than percent of GNP a fully manageable level in a growing economy The key to recovery from the debt problem however lies in increased exports from the debtor countries. Import restrictions by the developing countries can only accomplish so much in improving their trade balances. Imports have already fallen considerably in high debt countries in the last year leaving limited room for further cuts. As growth resumes among the debtor countries they will tend to import more and will need to export more to pay for the imports. They will not be able to do this if the industrial countries including the United States institute new protectionist measures. Yet as developing countries attempt to increase their exports strong political pressures will develop in the industrial countries to stop them. Leaders in the industrial countries must realize that shutting out imports from the developing world will not only incur the usual costs of protection higher prices to consumers and jobs lost in unprotected sectors but also will threaten the basic stability of the world financial system CHAPTER Increasing Capital Formation ATTAINING AN ADEQUATE RATE OF CAPITAL FORMATION in the United States is a crucial challenge for economic policy during the 1980s. Devoting a larger share of national output to investment would help restore rapid productivity growth and rising living standards. During the past two decades fiscal monetary and regulatory policies contributed to the low rate of net investment in plant and equipment ; the share of gross national product ( GNP ) devoted to capital formation was below the levels achieved by most other industrialized nations The Administration and the Congress have instituted a set of tax and regulatory policies designed to increase the share of output devoted to capital formation. The noninflationary monetary policies followed by the Federal Reserve with the Administration 's support should also contribute in the long run to increased capital formation and improved efficiency in the allocation of the capital stock. This chapter examines the linkages between economic policy and capital formation and discusses the rationale for the Administration 's initiatives in this area Many forms of investment contribute to productivity growth. Research and development expenditures provide the basis for the technological change that is a wellspring of productivity growth. Another major source of productivity growth is investment in education and training that promotes the accumulation of valuable human capital Public sector infrastructure investments may also have an important role to play. This chapter however focuses on nonresidential plant and equipment investment. Past public policies probably discriminated most heavily against this form of investment. Plant and equipment investment is also more amenable to quantitative analysis than other forms of capital investment because of the difficulties involved in measuring intangible capital By late investment and capacity utilization rates in the United States had fallen to very low levels. Even after the recovery from the recession begins capacity utilization will increase only gradually and it will take time for new policies to increase the share of national output devoted to saving and investment. Hence levels of investment may prove disappointing over the next several years despite the beneficial long-run impact of policies recently put in place This should not cause us to lose sight of the importance of sound long-run policy and the need to increase net capital formation in the years and decades ahead THE HISTORICAL RECORD Although gross private domestic investment which includes residential and inventory investment accounted for percent of GNP between and gross investment in structures and equipment averaged only percent of GNP during this period. Of this gross structure and equipment investment more than two-thirds was devoted to replacing depreciated capital leaving only percent of GNP for new structures and equipment It is useful to place the patterns of investment in the United States during the last decade in historical and geographic perspective. Table displays the behavior of alternative measures of capital accumulation. The data show that the rate of net nonresidential fixed investment as a fraction of GNP declined by percent between the late 1960s and the late 1970s. The share of output devoted to net nonresidential fixed investment in the late 1970s was slightly lower than the average rate during the entire period Some analysts examining only the data on gross investment have concluded that investment performance was satisfactory during the 1970s. This procedure ignores the fact that depreciation as a share of GNP was greater during this period than in the 1960s because of a general shift in net investment from long-lived assets such as structures toward assets with shorter lives and because of a higher ratio of capital to GNP. The appropriate focus in examining data on investment is the total stock of capital. Therefore net investment which measures the change in the total capital stock is the most appropriate indicator of the adequacy of capital formation An alternative way to evaluate changes in the level of capital formation is to examine trends in the capital-labor ratio. Measures of capital per hour and capital per worker displayed in Table and Chart both show a large decline in the growth rate of the capital stock relative to the growth in the supply of labor. Capital per hour increased at only a percent annual rate between and compared to a percent rate during the interval. Although this dramatic decline was in part due to the low rate of net investment during the late 1970s it was primarily a consequence of the rapid growth of the labor force. To maintain the pre-1975 growth in the capital-labor ratio a sharp increase in the post-1975 rate of net investment was required instead of the decline which actually occurred TABLE Alternative measures of capital formation [ Percent ] Net private domestic investment as percent of GNP Period Total investment Nonresidential fixed investment Growth rate of net capital stock ' Per worker Per hour ( * ) 'Real net private nonresidential fixed capital stock at year-end All persons in private business sector. Year-end obtained by averaging fourth quarter value with value for first quarter of subsequent year Preliminary 'Not available Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Properly measured the decline in the growth rate of the capital stock is understated by the net investment figures in Table The energy price shocks of and hastened the obsolescence of a variety of past investments which implies that actual depreciation was greater than the official statistics suggest. One estimate placed the premature obsolescence of capital during the late 1970s at an average of percent of GNP per year. Other studies have obtained much larger estimates using data on the market valuation of capital In addition it is important to recall that much of the investment of the 1970s took place in the energy-producing sector. The share of GNP devoted to net fixed nonresidential investment outside the energy sector averaged only percent between and Unfortunately the combined effects of the recent economic recession and large Federal budget deficits will hold down the rate of capital formation as currently forecasted over the next several years Between and net investment in plant and equipment may prove disappointing even by the standard of the late 1970s. The capital-labor ratio will grow only slowly and may even decline. While the low forecasted rate of net investment over the next several years is due primarily to cyclical conditions it does not negate the importance of developing permanent policies to encourage capital formation. In light of the depth of the recent recession it is reasonable to expect that investment performance probably would have proven Chart Measures of Capital Formation PERCENT INVESTMENT AS ' PERCENT OF GNP1 ' I I I I I I I I I I I * * I NET PRIVATE NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF GNP ; FIVE-YEAR CENTERED MOVING AVERAGES PERCENT CHANGE IN REAL NET PRIVATE NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED CAPITAL STOCK PER WORKER IN THE BUSINESS SECTOR ; FIVE-YEAR CENTERED MOVING AVERAGES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS worse if the Congress and the Administration had not enacted tax measures to spur capital formation. These laws and the proposals incorporated in the President 's fiscal budget are designed to raise the share of net investment to a high level by historical standards in the late 1980s or before AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE Table shows that the United States falls behind other major industrial nations in several key measures of net capital formation The share of U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) devoted to net fixed investment during the last decade was only percent of the compa- rable share in Japan and percent of the comparable share in West Germany. No other major industrial nation devotes as small a fraction of total output to new investment as does the United States TABLE Comparison of capital formation in six OECD countries [ Percent ] Investment as percent of GDP Country Gross investment Gross fixed investment Net fixed investment Growth rate of output per hour in manufacturing France Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom. United States Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development It is instructive to compare the growth rates of productivity for different countries with their shares of output devoted to new investment. Although productivity growth and investment rates are simultaneously determined by a multitude of factors it is striking that a strong positive relationship emerges. As shown in Chart Japan has both the highest investment share and the highest growth rate of productivity while the United States has the worst investment performance and the lowest growth rate of productivity While the reasons for these large international differences in rates of capital formation are not precisely understood some evidence suggests that the roots may lie in different public policies. After World War II rebuilding of the capital stock was a primary goal of economic policy in continental Europe and Japan. Governments in those countries encouraged saving and investment and disregarded the early Keynesian fear that oversaving could reduce aggregate demand and depress real economic activity In contrast officials in the United States feared a postwar relapse into depression and avoided policies which would encourage saving For example some economists advocated sustained budget deficits as a means of absorbing excess private savings It is now clear on the basis of four decades of economic experience since the end of the Great Depression that fears of secular stagnation caused by a high and rising saving rate are unwarranted The much greater risk is that productivity growth in the United States will continue to stagnate at low levels and that American workers will have to accept a lower growth rate in their standard of Chart International Comparison of Investment and Productivity Growth PERCENT OF GDP GROWTH RATE NET FIXED INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF GDP ( LEFT SCALE ) GROWTH RATE OF MANUFACTURING OUTPUT PER HOUR ( RIGHT SCALE ) : : : UNITED STATES UNITED KINGDOM ITALY GERMANY FRANCE JAPAN SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT living than their foreign counterparts. Otherwise American goods could cease to be competitive on world markets THE IMPORTANCE OF CAPITAL FORMATION The case for increasing the rate of capital formation ultimately rests on three justifications. First increased capital formation can reverse part of the productivity slowdown that the United States has suffered during the last decade. Second government policies have discriminated in favor of consumption and against saving and investment. Third as a result of tax policies the pretax return to capital investment exceeds the after-tax return that any individuals are able to capture privately leading to an inappropriately low level of capital formation During the 1970s productivity growth in the United States decelerated rapidly. Between and the growth rate of productivity ( as measured by output per hour in the private business economy ) was percent compared to percent between and and only percent between and L The consequences of reduced productivity growth for our standard of living over the long run are greater than those of any other current economic problem. In the American economy produced approximately $ worth of output per capita. Had productivity growth continued at the rate during the years subsequent to output per capita would have reached $ in percent higher than the actual value. As a standard of comparison the recent recession reduced per capita output by only percent between the third quarter of and the fourth quarter of less than one-fifth the reduction attributable to the productivity shortfall. As time passes the consequences of reduced productivity growth are compounded. Increasing the productivity growth rate by percentage points annually would more than double our material standard of living by compared to the level it would reach otherwise The productivity slowdown is not reliably attributable to any single cause or combination of causes. Various analysts have suggested that higher energy prices regulatory changes reduced research and development spending reduced opportunities for technical innovation the changing composition of the labor force and changing worker attitudes as well as reduced capital formation are responsible for the productivity slowdown. An accurate accounting of the sources of the slowdown is probably impossible in light of the multitude of competing explanations and the statistical difficulties associated with distinguishing between their relative effects precisely Many of the possible causes of the productivity slowdown are probably not reversible through public policy. There is relatively little the Federal Government could have done to offset the negative effect of sharp increases in oil prices or for that matter to influence changing cultural attitudes toward work. Changing the rate of capital formation however is a principal way in which Federal economic policy can affect productivity growth Increasing the rate of capital formation will raise productivity growth in several ways. More rapid capital formation results on average in workers having more equipment at their disposal. In addition increases in investment reduce the average age of the capital stock permitting physical assets to embody more recent technological innovations. Technological development and the level of capital formation are intertwined because the development of more efficient and sophisticated capital goods occurs when the demand for new capital goods increases The legacy of past policies which have artificially depressed saving and investment provides a second reason for increasing the rate of capital formation. As described below this discrimination against capital formation has taken many forms including tax policy monetary policy and recurring Federal budget deficits. Although there exist instances of market failure a market economy can generally be expected to allocate resources in an efficient way. When public policies systematically discriminate against one type of spending however there is a strong presumption that too little of it will take place A related and final justification for increased capital formation comes from a comparison of the total pretax return to investment with the return received by private investors. Estimates suggest that the total pretax return to investment in corporate capital as measured by its pretax marginal product is about percent. This means that $ invested today yields society $ next year or alternatively a permanent yield of cents. While the total pretax return fluctuates from year to year with cyclical conditions studies have tended to find that it has stayed within the range of to percent throughout the postwar period In contrast private investors have earned much smaller rates of return over the last several decades with many investors earning negative real after-tax returns over much of that period. Even leaving aside the effects of personal taxes the real return on short-term debt instruments averaged less than percent during the interval. While equity investments have yielded a higher average return they carry with them a large amount of risk. The average real return on common stock before personal taxes was percent over the period but investors lost money in real terms in of those years and over periods as long as years This large spread between the total and private returns to investment is a consequence of the tax system which extracts a portion of the total return to investment before it reaches private investors Capital market returns are reduced because the corporate income tax reduces the return that corporations can pay out to investors. As a consequence of this tax-induced divergence between the private and total return to investment too little investment takes place. This suggests the desirability of measures both to reduce tax distortions and to increase incentives to save and invest MEASURING NATIONAL SAVING Domestic saving is an important determinant of a nation 's level of investment. Economic output is either invested in capital assets which help produce future output or consumed privately or publicly Only by forgoing consumption does it become possible for a nation to invest in a sustained way. While funds from abroad are available to finance some investment experience suggests that most mature economies have financed investment through domestic saving. Increasing the rate of capital formation in the United States without increasing obligations to foreigners therefore probably requires increased national saving Table provides information on net national saving as reported in the national income and product accounts. On average from to the United States saved percent of total output beyond that necessary to replace depreciated capital. Private saving comprising personal saving and corporate retained earnings totaled percent of GNP. Federal Government dissaving through budget deficits averaged percent of GNP while the sum of State and local government surpluses averaged percent of GNP TABLE Net saving as percent of GNP [ Percent ] Not adjusted for inflation Period Total Federal Adjusted for inflation State and local Private > Federal State and local Private 'Private saving less capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Adjusted by GNP implicit price deflator Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers While the total saving rate can be measured unambiguously there are serious conceptual problems in measuring its various components during an inflationary period. Inflation erodes the real value of the national debt. Interest rates incorporate inflation premiums and these premiums compensate lenders for the fact that they are repaid in cheaper dollars. Thus they do not really represent income to borrowers or costs to lenders. This principle is recognized by the Financial Accounting Standards Board and is often applied in the private sector. Table therefore also presents a breakdown between pri- vate Federal and State and local government saving that is adjusted for the effects of inflation BUDGET DEFICITS AND SAVING Unacceptably large Federal budget deficits are likely in the next several years unless legislative changes are made. These deficits could significantly reduce investment during the economic recovery Increased public consumption with no reduction in private consumption leaves fewer resources available for investment. When the Federal Government must compete with private borrowers for savings real interest rates are bid up discouraging investment Federal dissaving would not represent a serious problem if it automatically called forth more private saving. While increased deficits do not induce an equal increase in private saving they also do not crowd out investment expenditure dollar for dollar. Increases in the real rate of return caused by Federal deficits raise the yield savers receive and may call forth some additional private saving. Higher real interest rates also discourage spending on consumer durables housing and construction by State and local governments. Finally by contributing to increases in real interest rates budget deficits encourage capital inflows from abroad. These factors imply that deficits do not completely crowd out private investment ; rather a reasonable estimate is that funds available for private investment are reduced by perhaps one-half to three-fourths of the budget deficit The possibility that Federal budget deficits crowd out private investment takes on greater importance in light of the large deficits that will occur over the next years unless actions are taken. The fiscal budget deficit of $ billion absorbed percent of GNP. Projections now suggest the deficit will equal $ billion or percent of GNP. Unless significant actions are taken deficits of this magnitude or larger may continue even as the economy recovers from the recent recession. If such deficits materialize the consequences for capital formation could prove very serious unless a dramatic increase in private saving also takes place. A budget deficit of percent of GNP would likely reduce net investment by an amount equal to about one-half its historical level relative to a balanced budget. With large deficits significant improvements in labor productivity and the quality and quantity of housing would be less likely in the years ahead TAX RULES AND PERSONAL SAVING Many economists believe that tax rules in the United States encourage consumer borrowing and discourage private saving. During the 1970s the combination of tax rules and inflation produced a dramatic decline in the private return to saving and a large reduction in the cost of borrowing During the 1960s nominal interest rates on 3-month Treasury bills averaged percent and the consumer price inflation rate averaged percent. On a pretax basis this left savers with an average real return of percent. For a saver in the percent marginal tax bracket the real after-tax return was only percent The return to saving fell significantly below this level during the 1970s. While the average inflation rate rose to percent the average interest rate increased to only percent. This caused a decline in the real interest rate measured on a pretax basis and a larger decline in the average after-tax rate ( for a person in the percent bracket ) from percent to percent The return to saving has fallen because of corporate taxes as well as individual taxes. Corporate income taxes decrease the returns corporations can afford to pay to the holders of their securities. As described below these tax burdens also increased substantially during the 1970s In addition corporate taxes reduce the amount of funds that corporations can retain for reinvestment At the same time that tax rules have reduced the return on savings they have encouraged dissaving through borrowing. Because consumer interest payments are tax deductible taxpayers who itemize their deductions are encouraged to use credit to finance their purchases of consumer durables and other goods. As inflation increased during the 1970s the real after-tax cost of borrowing declined and eventually became negative. Indeed in the first quarter of the real aftertax cost of borrowing for a taxpayer in the percent bracket was percent. The encouragement of borrowing to finance purchases of durable goods probably reduced the aggregate saving rate substantially during the 1970s The tax reforms supported by the President in 1981and enacted by the Congress were designed to increase saving. Reductions in marginal tax rates raise the after-tax return to saving and the aftertax cost of borrowing. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of will reduce the marginal tax rate facing a median income family in from percent which would have occurred under pre-1981 law to percent. The act immediately reduced the marginal tax rate on high income taxpayers who account for a large fraction of personal saving from to percent The Economic Recovery Tax Act of also contained several other provisions directed specifically at encouraging private saving The Individual Retirement Account ( IRA ) provisions in the tax code were extended to cover the entire working population. Working individuals are now permitted to make a yearly tax deductible contribution of $ to finance consumption during retirement. Taxes are only paid when the funds plus accumulated interest are withdrawn from the IRA. Private estimates suggest a substantial response to this legislation with about $ billion placed in IRAs during A crucial issue in evaluating the efficiency of IRAs is their effectiveness in raising saving incentives on the margin. Some critics have argued that IRAs do not provide an incremental incentive for saving because contributors can simply transfer funds from other sources without increasing total savings. While this occurs to some extent it is certainly not universal and will decrease in the future as contributors exhaust their funds available from other sources. The fragmentary evidence available from private sources suggests that more than half of all IRA contributors contribute less than the maximum amount allowable indicating that they do face increased saving incentives on the margin The tax legislation also provided for an interest exclusion starting in allowing individuals to exclude percent of their net interest income up to a limit of $ This will also raise the return to savings and spur capital formation. Extending the exclusion to dividends as well as interest payments would reduce the tax bias favoring debt over equity as a source of corporate finance The tax act also raised the return to saving by reducing the top marginal rate on capital gains from percent to percent This reform partially compensates for the serious distorting effect of inflation on the measurement of capital gains. Because of inflation an owner of an asset that experiences no real appreciation will nevertheless become liable at the time of sale for taxes on the nominal appreciation of the asset. Complete elimination of this distortion would require indexation for inflation in the measurement of capital gains In recent years support has grown among economists and other tax experts for moving the tax system toward taxation of consumption and away from taxation of income. This change might entail expanding the existing exclusions of interest and dividend income and those mechanisms such as IRAs which permit tax-deferred accumulation of savings. It might also involve limiting the deduction of interest expenses for consumer borrowing. Movement toward taxation of consumption is supported by some advocates on the grounds that taxing individuals on what they take from the economy is " more fair " than taxing what they contribute to the economy. A tax system based on consumption taxation might also prove easier to administer than the current system because it would eliminate many of the problems involved in measuring certain types of capital income FINANCIAL REGULATION AND PRIVATE SAVING An additional set of public policies that has probably discouraged private saving over the last several decades is the regulation of financial institutions. As Chart shows small savers holding savings accounts subject to Regulation Q,have received below market rates of interest and holders of checking accounts have received even lower rates of interest. These low returns are largely consequences of regulations limiting the interest rates financial institutions may pay on customer deposits. As late as the spread between Treasury bill rates and the yield on savings deposits subject to Regulation Q was as great as percent The adverse effects of financial regulations on personal saving have probably lessened considerably in recent years due to both private and public actions. In the private sector the development and explosive growth of money market funds has made it possible for most high and middle income savers to receive market rates of interest. Legislation adopted in with Administration support has allowed commercial banks and thrift institutions to offer financial instruments with competitive interest rates to a wide range of depositors The Administration has strongly supported removal of the many unnecessary regulations that have impeded competition in the financial services industry. As discussed in more detail in Chapter the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of and the Depository Institutions Act of have played important roles in beginning this process of deregulation. Banks and thrift institutions can now offer insured accounts that are competitive with money market funds in terms of both the interest rates they pay and the services they provide thereby increasing incentives for saving A related development has occurred in the Federal Government 's policies regarding U.S. Savings Bonds. Savings bonds have historically paid low rates of return. In 10-year Treasury bonds paid percent while Series EE Savings Bonds paid an annual yield of only percent from issue to maturity years later. Because of legislation recently proposed by the President and passed by the Congress the return on savings bonds is now based on market rates. Between November and April for example U.S. Savings Bonds will earn percent if they are held at least years Apart from making saving more attractive to savings bond purchas- Chart Three-Month Treasury Bill Rate and Regulation Q Maximum Rate on Savings Accounts PERCENT PER YEAR MAXIMUM RATE ON SAVINGS ACCOUNTS \ SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ers> the new rates on Series EE bonds are desirable on equity grounds because small savers can now obtain yields close to those received by their higher income counterparts THE ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS It is likely that budget deficits tax policies and ceilings on bank interest rates have contributed to the lower net saving rates which the United States has experienced in recent years. In theory however this low level of saving need not have strictly limited the level of funds available for investment. Funds from abroad can also finance investment in the United States. The link between domestic investment and domestic saving is not absolute Nevertheless a number of economic studies cast doubt on the proposition that the United States could offset low domestic saving rates through sustained borrowing from abroad. These studies have found a consistently high correlation between rates of domestic investment and domestic saving in the major industrialized countries While the reasons for these results are not well understood they may reflect the high information costs and serious monitoring difficulties associated with holding foreign investments. Whatever the exact reason for the historically high correlation between domestic saving and investment it suggests that increasing the rate of investment in the United States significantly will probably require policy measures which increase domestic saving Insofar as savings from abroad are available for investment in the United States it is not clear that they provide a desirable substitute for domestic saving. Throughout most of the postwar period the United States was a net exporter of capital. However the United States has recently experienced a large surplus in its capital account and incurred a large offsetting deficit in its current account. This has entailed large merchandise trade deficits with deleterious impacts on U.S. export industries and those domestic industries which compete with imports THE ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL With only a relatively small fraction of GNP available to finance investment and with large budget deficits looming over the next few years the allocation of capital in the United States among alternative uses takes on added importance. In addition to holding down the rate of national saving previous fiscal and monetary policies have tended to alter the allocation of capital investment favoring housing consumer durables and State and local construction at the expense of business investment. Inflation caused by overly expansionary monetary policies and taxes interact to affect the incentives on different kinds of investments. While a sound economic recovery will boost saving sufficiently to provide for increases in all forms of investment eliminating tax-induced distortions in the allocation of capital would also aid in regaining a rapidly rising standard of living It is useful to examine how the tax structure has very different effects on alternative forms of investment. The income from investments by corporations is taxed at both the individual and the corporate level. Corporate profits are taxed as they are earned. When these profits are received by shareholders in the form of either dividends or capital gains they are taxed again. By contrast the implicit returns from most other forms of investment remain untaxed. The services to investors in owner-occupied housing and consumer durables are largely untaxed The bias in our tax system against corporate capital investment was exacerbated during the 1970s by the effects of inflation. Corporations are permitted to take depreciation allowances based on historic rather than replacement costs for tax purposes. Thus as the rate of inflation increases the real value of depreciation allowances decreases and the tax burden as a share of real profits rises. Another source of inflation-induced corporate tax increases is that inflation causes " phantom " gains in the value of inventories raising taxes for firms using the first-in first-out method of inventory valuation. One study estimated that the tax law 's use of historic costs rather than replacement costs for depreciation purposes raised corporate tax payments by $ billion in and raised tax burdens for corporations using first-in first-out inventory accounting by $ billion. Although these tax increases were partially offset because corporations deduct nominal rather than real interest payments in calculating their taxable income the gains at the corporate level from the deductibility of nominal interest are offset to some extent by losses from taxation of the inflation component of interest rates at the individual level The effects of the interaction of taxes and inflation reached dramatic proportions during the 1970s. Increased taxation led to large market revaluations of corporate and noncorporate capital assets The " q ratio " which measures the market value of capital in the nonfinancial corporate sector relative to its reproduction cost fell from in to in The price of single-family nonfarm dwellings relative to the price of consumption goods rose by percent during the same period. During the last years of falling inflation however the q ratio rose to about in the fourth quarter of and the relative price of single-family nonfarm dwellings fell by percent The supply of different types of capital goods ultimately depends on their relative prices. The observation that reductions in inflation are associated with changes in the relative prices of different capital goods suggests that the reductions in inflation are likely to cause a reallocation of capital toward plant and equipment investment and away from investments in consumer durables and housing. These shifts simply reflect the reduced magnitude of the biases caused by our current tax system in periods of inflation TAX POLICY AND INVESTMENT In the Congress instituted the accelerated cost recovery system as part of the Economic Recovery Tax Act. This tax legisla- tion permitted businesses to depreciate most purchases of equipment according to an accelerated 5-year schedule. It also permitted businesses to depreciate structures over years using a percent declining balance schedule. The Economic Recovery Tax Act preserved the investment tax credit on equipment and called for further accelerations in depreciation schedules in and The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act altered the provisions of the Economic Recovery Tax Act by instituting a half-basis adjustment for investment tax credits in calculating depreciation and by eliminating the. planned further accelerations in depreciation schedules. Table shows the present value of the depreciation deductions and investment tax credits received by a corporation under the old accelerated depreciation system Economic Recovery Tax Act ( ERTA ) rules and Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act ( TEFRA ) rules. The present value is calculated for a variety of hypothetical combinations of discount and inflation rates TABLE Investment incentives under different tax laws [ 5-year property ] Inflation rate ( percent ) Real interest rate Tax law percent Pre-ERTA ERTA TEFRA percent Pre-ERTA ERTA TEFRA percent.... Pre-ERTA ERTA TEFRA percent Pre-ERTA ERTA TEFRA 'Present value of depreciation deductions and investment tax credits per dollar of Investment Assumes depreciation over years using double-declining balance switching to sum of years digits Source : Council of Economic Advisers Three qualitative conclusions emerge from these calculations. First current tax laws provide significantly more stimulus to most categories of investment than did the pre-1981 law. Second the reduction in inflation that has occurred during the past years has also increased substantially the value of the depreciation allowances. Third even with a relatively short 5-year cost recovery period the value of the investment incentives remains quite sensitive to the anticipated rate of inflation In considering the economic effects of tax policies on investment it is crucial to distinguish between measures which apply only to new investment such as accelerated depreciation and the investment tax credit and measures which reduce the tax burden on all kinds of capital income such as corporate rate reductions. These two types of investment incentives produce very different economic effects. Measures which apply only to new investments affect only marginal investment decisions ; no tax benefit is conferred on the owners of existing capital. Therefore in the short term more investment is stimulated per dollar of immediate revenue loss than would prove the case if the tax benefit were conferred on all capital. The tax legislation enacted in relied on tax incentives for new investments Incentives for new investment are viewed by some observers as benefiting primarily large wealthholders but the reality may be different. Since measures like the accelerated cost recovery system reduce the effective cost of purchasing new capital goods they are likely to reduce the value of the old capital goods with which they compete. For example a subsidy for the purchase of new cars will reduce the value of used cars. Likewise reduced taxation of new investment may temporarily reduce the level of stock market prices which in part reflects the market 's valuation of existing capital. Thus investment incentives like those recently enacted while raising the rate of return on new investments may actually hurt holders of existing wealth. Workers should benefit as greater capital accumulation raises their productivity and wages. The effect on the distribution of income is ambiguous * and might even prove progressive Beginning with the enactment of the accelerated depreciation provisions in policy has tended to rely on investment incentives that stimulate new investment and do not benefit existing investments. This continued reliance on measures that benefit new capital at the expense of existing capital carries a subtle but real risk. As investors come to anticipate this pattern of public policy they may take into account expected future changes in tax laws as they make investment decisions. This might have an unintended effect. Investors who expect capital losses are less likely to invest. Stated differently if the effective purchase price of new capital goods is expected to decline because of tax reforms there will be a tendency to defer investments This suggests that in designing future reforms it may be desirable to consider reducing taxes on existing as well as new capital While current tax law provides significantly more stimulus to investment than did earlier law there is room for further reform. The value of depreciation allowances is still dependent on the rate of inflation increasing the uncertainty of investment decisions. The acceleration of depreciation allowances has substantially reduced the burden of the corporate income tax but investment in plant and equipment is still discouraged by taxes on dividends and capital gains A final problem under current tax law is the treatment of corporate losses. Because of low profits due to cyclical conditions or large depreciation write-offs many corporations do not have taxable income in some years reducing the efficacy of investment incentives during those periods CONCLUSIONS The tax programs put in place in the last years should play an important role in increasing capital formation in the United States Yet much more can be done to ensure a rapidly growing standard of living in coming years. It is crucial that we take action to reduce large Federal deficits and to further stimulate private saving and investment In considering the issue of capital formation policymakers should take a long view. The reasons for increasing capital formation primarily involve long-run growth rather than current economic conditions. We should not allow the poor performance of investment during a period of recession and high deficits to blind us to the importance of policies that can help us achieve sustained and rapid economic growth in the years to come CHAPTER The Burden of Economic Regulation FOR MANY DECADES the Federal Government has regulated the prices and the conditions for entry in certain sectors of the U.S economy. This type of regulation often called " economic regulation * ' was broadly applied to the transportation communications and financial sectors of the economy. Whatever historical purposes were served by economic regulation there is an increasing consensus that much of this Federal regulation no longer serves the interests of the contemporary economy. Indeed over the last several years a substantial part of this economic regulation has been relaxed or eliminated A second form of regulation " social regulation " is addressed to situations where unregulated activity may pose significant threats to public health safety or the environment. Although there is an increasing consensus that economic regulation should be substantially reduced no such consensus exists concerning social regulation. Also unlike economic regulation the magnitude of social regulation has grown rapidly since the mid-1960s with the passage of extensive environmental and safety legislation Economic regulation has diminished in recent years due to a variety of deregulation measures. Substantial evidence is now available concerning the performance of industries that have experienced full or partial deregulation. This chapter summarizes the history of Federal economic regulation its rationale its impacts and the effects of recent laws designed to ease economic regulation. The chapter also identifies some opportunities for further deregulation. Special attention is given to the economic regulation of energy transportation communications and financial markets A BRIEF HISTORY OF ECONOMIC REGULATION The first broad body of Federal economic regulation was established in when the Congress created the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) to resolve the increasing controversies between the railroads and shippers. Most of the regulation of other sectors except for energy was established by the end of the 1930s and re- fleeted efforts to deal with problems similar to those that led to the creation of the ICC. The agencies created in the 1930s tended to operate in much the same way as the ICC and the outcome was much the same Economic regulation often evolved from a dispute among several groups. For example the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) was created to resolve disputes among users of the broadcast spectrum. The Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) was created to resolve a dispute among several Federal agencies concerning the administration of airmail contracts Congress delegated direct resolution of these disputes to an independent agency with very general authority. The typical " public convenience and necessity " standard cited in the enabling legislation provides no direct guidance about how the regulatory agencies should resolve disputes. The independent commissions are essentially quasi-judicial institutions that have developed their own bodies of administrative law The initial regulations of the independent agencies often served the interests of the regulated industry. For example some scholars contend that the ICC by initially reinforcing the railroad cartels caused higher average prices and reduced the variance of prices. For a long time both the CAB and the FCC restricted entry to the number of firms operating at the time these commissions were created The initial regulation led to more regulation that served to protect the interests of the initially regulated firms. F o r e x a m p l e ICC regulation was ex- tended to trucks buses freight-forwarders and barges thus restraining the developing competition to the railroads. FCC regulation was extended to cable television protecting broadcasters using the frequency spectrum Over the long run many economic regulations have not served the interests of either producers or consumers. The development of excess capacity relatively high wages restraints on technological improvements and operating practices and competition outside the regulated environment led to the lower-than-average rates of return in many of the regulated industries. Consumers have often been adversely affected by higher prices and restrictions on service One other pattern of economic regulation was introduced in the 1930s. A belief that the depression was caused by excessive competition provided a rationale for many laws and regulations that directly restricted entry output and competition. The broadest such law the National Industrial Recovery Act was declared unconstitutional ; other similar legislation such as the Agricultural Adjustment Act of is still in force. One might argue that the several regulatory commissions and laws approved in the 1930s achieved their intended effect of raising prices. A later generation questioned whether this effect was desirable THE TRADITIONAL RATIONALE FOR ECONOMIC REGULATION The two traditional justifications for economic regulation have been to preserve the potential economic efficiencies associated with natural monopoly in some industries and to eliminate the inefficiencies thought to be associated with excessive competition in others Natural Monopoly A natural monopoly exists when the entire relevant demand for a good or service can be satisfied at the least total cost by a single firm At the local level it is probably wasteful to have duplicate distribution systems to provide telephone electric gas and water services Among industries regulated at the Federal level major gas pipelines and high-voltage electric lines are often considered natural monopolies. Long-distance telephone transmission may also be a natural monopoly in areas of low density. Railroads are a potential natural monopoly only for that declining share of rail traffic for which the shipper does not have an effective choice of carrier or mode of transport Such industries present a dilemma. Competition may result in unnecessarily high production costs through duplication of facilities but an unregulated monopoly may not act in the public interest. Without regulation a monopoly would probably set prices too high and produce too little with consumers willing to pay more for additional output than the cost of supplying that output. A typical solution to this dilemma is maximum price regulation. The primary objective of price regulation is to set the monopoly 's price as close as possible to incremental cost while still assuring the monopoly a market rate of return on its investment The growth of demand or the introduction of substitutes for a product can often transform a natural monopoly into what in the absence of regulation could become an effectively competitive industry. Oil pipelines for example are often assumed to be natural monopolies. However these pipelines now face competition from other pipelines and other modes of transportation. Regrettably price regulation often continues long after it is efficient restricting the emergence of a competitive market. The history of the railroads provides a compelling illustration. In many parts of the country rail lines were few and far between in the 19th century. But as the market for transportation services grew and as technology developed automobiles buses and airplanes provided increasing competition for passenger traffic and trucks barges and pipelines provided increasing competition for freight. The natural monopoly justification for regulation was probably not applicable in most rail markets by the middle of the 20th century Even in markets where elements of natural monopoly still exist government intervention will not necessarily produce a more efficient use of resources. Increasingly analysts are coming to recognize that just as there are market imperfections there are also government imperfections that must be considered in making public policy choices The relevant tradeoffs are not between imperfect markets and flawless government regulation but rather between markets with imperfections and regulation which is imprecise and sometimes counterproductive Excessive Competition The second traditional justification for economic regulation is that unfettered markets result in excessive competition. This justification was used for regulating railroads in the late 19th century and other industries in the 1930s. A common element in early discussions of excessive competition was that without regulation unrestrained rivalry among firms would result in losses for some or all of them and that adequate production of an otherwise viable product would prove unsustainable. This argument which was often rather vague failed to note that business losses are not a sufficient basis for government intervention. Losses and business failures are a normal part of the operation of competitive markets ; they act to eliminate inefficient firms and to shift production to meet changes in consumer demands While the concept of excessive competition was not generally well defined it has now come to refer to at least four possible sources of market imperfection : natural monopoly cyclical demand with imperfect capital markets predatory pricing and suboptimal product quality As explained earlier where natural monopoly conditions exist competition among several firms can lead to higher costs because of wasteful duplication A second interpretation of excessive competition is based on the argument that certain industries particularly those with cyclical demand and heavy fixed investment are prone to excessive price fluctuations. According to this argument firms are forced to close down during recessions and then unnecessarily incur large start-up costs during recovery because of alleged imperfections in capital markets. These wasteful shutdown and start-up costs are avoidable it is argued if government regulation sets minimum prices or allows firms to do so A third definition of excessive competition focuses on the concept of predatory pricing. Unregulated competition in some markets is alleged to result in monopolization by a firm that engages in predatory pricing setting prices below cost in order to drive out competitors To succeed a predator must outlast its rivals and barriers must exist to prevent the entry of new competitors once the predator raises prices. Regulation to prevent firms from charging excessively low prices is intended to prevent such predatory practices and hence the higher monopolistic prices that would prevail once the predator has eliminated its competitors. No consensus exists among economists that such predatory tactics are effective. Indeed many economists believe that apparently " predatory " behavior if ever successful is a manifestation of cost advantages or an enhanced ability to bear risk A fourth interpretation concerns the alleged tendency of certain competitive markets to produce goods or services of inadequate quality safety or reliability if consumers are imperfectly informed about those characteristics. For example it has been argued that under competitive pressure banks might choose excessively risky investments in order to offer their customers high rates of interest on deposits. Similarly some have claimed that airlines may skimp on safety in a highly competitive market. Even if such claims were true it does not follow that restricting competition will necessarily improve quality or safety. Moreover there are more direct ways of addressing these potential market defects such as Federal Aviation Administration airplane safety inspections and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation guarantees PROBLEMS OF ECONOMIC REGULATION Most economists agree that the regulation of price and entry in markets that would otherwise be competitive is inefficient. Regulation of transportation for example has generally resulted in higher prices higher production costs and slower technological growth Regulation of oil and gas prices has occasionally kept prices too low causing shortages and inefficient choices among competing fuels Deregulation usually leads to a reduction in cost to the marginal user whether the discarded regulations established maximum or minimum prices. A price kept below the market price by regulation has the effect of creating a system of nonprice rationing in which excluded consumers are forced to pay higher prices for substitutes. The elimination of maximum price ceilings may lead to higher average prices but lower prices to the marginal consumer. Exceptions to this conclusion are where natural monopoly conditions exist or where regulations lead to some cross-subsidy among consumers In some cases price regulation leads to an excessively high level of some service characteristic because firms are prevented from competing on price. Because of price regulation of airlines by the Civil Aeronautics Board for example the airlines competed primarily through frequency of flights which led to low load factors and considerable excess capacity Direct economic inefficiencies are not the only costs of rate and entry regulation in inherently competitive industries. Some additional resources are used to lobby politicians and regulators for favorable regulatory actions. The greater the benefits to groups created by regulation the more such groups have an incentive to spend to block deregulation. The magnitude of the benefits defended are often substantial. Trucking firms have sold operating rights initially granted them by the ICC for over $ million and the broadcast rights of individual television stations have sold for substantially more The argument that full deregulation is the appropriate policy for industries with competitive market structures applies strictly only in the long run. To minimize the risk of adverse short-run consequences from deregulation most deregulatory initiatives have called for either partial deregulation or a gradual transition to full deregulation. The Civil Aeronautics Board was not immediately abolished by the Congress and it retained some temporary domestic authority through The Staggers Rail Act provided railroads with greater price flexibility but did not provide for eventual elimination of all price and entry controls. The Natural Gas Policy Act provides for only partial deregulation of natural gas prices It is not clear how much information about the long-run benefits of deregulation can be obtained by observing the process of gradual or partial deregulation. For example minimum price regulation may cause excess capacity in an industry. When deregulation occurs some firms in the industry may go bankrupt. This may lead some to consider deregulation a failure and to propose re-regulation. Once the excess capacity is eliminated however the industry may operate profitably without any regulation Economists can offer one important piece of advice on partial deregulation : relaxing price restrictions without also relaxing entry restrictions may cause problems such as developed in the air freight market. Eliminating minimum price constraints while barring entry may result in predation. Eliminating maxium price restrictions without allowing free entry may result in monopoly pricing Competitive economic forces while powerful are not the only means available to consumers of products from deregulated industries to defend themselves. Antitrust policies may also be used to protect consumers against the abuses regulation is sometimes claimed to prevent. The antitrust laws prohibit anticompetitive behavior. Since regulated industries have often enjoyed broad exemptions from the antitrust laws a review of the antitrust policies per- taining to these industries should accompany the deregulation process. At the same time however it is important to avoid misusing the antitrust laws to maintain inappropriate types of regulation ENERGY POLICY The pricing and allocation of energy resources was a frequent focus of public policies over the last decade. Many of these policies reduced the long-run supply of these important resources. In the last few years several measures have been taken to remove the inefficiencies and uncertainty caused by these policies STEPS TOWARD A MARKET-ORIENTED OIL POLICY In January President Reagan ended the petroleum price and allocation controls that were previously scheduled to expire in September Oil prices were first directly controlled as part of the general system of wage and price guidelines imposed in The data on subsequent production drilling consumption imports and the energy/gross national product ( GNP ) ratio suggest that oil price deregulation has had many beneficial effects Despite the disincentives provided by the " windfall profits " ( excise ) tax on crude oil the data suggest that decontrol has reversed the steady decline in production ( exclusive of Alaska ) observed during the period of price controls. As of October there were seven consecutive monthly production increases over year-earlier levels a series of increases not observed in the United States for years. Reported oil well completions in were percent higher than in despite the recent decline in real oil prices Since full decontrol U.S. consumption has decreased by almost percent. While part of this decline is due to the recession a major cause is the continuing adjustment to the price increases of the 1970s. Since decontrol the energy/GNP ratio has declined by over percent and imports ( net of additions to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve ) have declined by about percent. The elimination of the regulatory framework for petroleum prices removed the artificial incentives to import crude oil and residual fuel oil. The weakening of oil prices has contributed to a stronger dollar and thus to lower prices on all imported products NATURAL GAS PRICING AND ALLOCATION Following the Supreme Court decision in Phillips Petroleum Co v. Wisconsin the wellhead prices of natural gas sold in interstate commerce were regulated by the Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) Since intrastate gas prices were not subject to regulation a two-market system resulted. Price controls when effective led to shortages in the interstate market both because the interstate pipelines could not compete effectively against intrastate pipelines for gas supplies and because artificially low prices encouraged consumers to demand more natural gas than they would have otherwise Rising oil prices in the 1970s triggered occasional gas shortages in interstate markets. Industrial use of gas was curtailed during periods of shortages and many potential users of gas both at the industrial and residential level were proscribed from using gas. The abnormally cold winter of produced a severe interstate gas shortage resulting in numerous factory shutdowns thousands of layoffs and other serious problems. It was evident by the mid-1970s that the existing system of wellhead price controls produced serious inefficiencies causing the underproduction of gas for the interstate market and the misallocation of gas between the interstate and intrastate markets and among different users within the interstate markets The Natural Gas Policy Act of The natural gas regulatory environment was changed substantially by passage of the Natural Gas Policy Act ( NGPA ) in This act was intended to encourage production by deregulating the prices of newly discovered gas while restraining the growth of average gas prices through permanent controls on the price of older gas. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission replaced the Federal Power Commission and price controls were extended to gas sold in intrastate markets. Over twenty regulated categories of gas were created each with its own initial ceiling price and rules for price escalation over time The NGPA provides for the phased deregulation of the wellhead price of most gas discovered after which should account for to percent of all gas in January while a smaller volume of gas is scheduled for deregulation in July A small amount of high-cost new gas was deregulated under the NGPA in Most gas to be deregulated in or is fixed until those dates at a price in inflation-adjusted dollars leading to the oil equivalent price level existing in The NGPA also includes " incremental pricing " provisions intended to allocate high-priced gas to industrial users thus preserving lower prices for other users. Along with the NGPA the Congress passed the Powerplant and Industrial Fuel Use Act ; this law authorizes nonprice rationing of gas to counter the problems inherent in continued price controls As with many efforts to regulate prices the NGPA has created numerous problems. Instead of producing the lowest cost gas supplies first and moving successively to higher cost sources producers are induced by the different price categories to produce high-cost gas first in many cases and generally to shift production efforts away from cost-minimizing alternatives. The initial boom in the production of deep gas illustrated this effect Further problems arise from the control of the prices of new gas until those prices are decontrolled in and Since oil prices have risen substantially since partial decontrol will generate a continued increase in delivered gas prices in as consumers bid up gas prices to levels equivalent with those of close substitutes such as oil. Although real gas prices have risen and real oil prices have fallen in the last year average real domestic wellhead prices of gas will rise by about percent between and if there is no change in the NGPA according to a preliminary Department of Energy estimate The price of decontrolled gas is averaged with the price of controlled gas in determining the price to gas users and the demand for gas is affected by prices for fuel substitutes. This is reflected in preliminary Department of Energy estimates which indicate that the average prices of gas under the NGPA are not likely to differ greatly from those that would evolve under full decontrol. Under the partial decontrol authorized by NGPA the prices of decontrolled gas are bid up somewhat above the levels that would be observed in a fully decontrolled market. Indeed even now decontrolled deep gas is being sold at the wellhead for over $ per million cubic feet. The preliminary Department of Energy estimates suggest that the average price under full decontrol will be $ per million cubic feet ( both in dollars ) The higher prices to be paid for decontrolled gas in and thereafter suggest that the average gas consumer will not benefit from the remaining controls and that the primary beneficiaries will be the producers of decontrolled gas. Under the NGPA however different groups of consumers will fare differently. Pipelines with access to substantial quantities of price-controlled gas will be able to bid deregulated gas away from other pipelines. This is because the higher prices on decontrolled gas can be averaged with the lower prices paid for gas still subject to controls This means for some period that consumers in different regions may face different average prices and that some gas will be reallocated artifically because of differential access to controlled gas. In particular the intrastate pipelines will have relatively little access to controlled gas and so some amount of gas will shift out of the intrastate market into the interstate market. Interstate pipelines also will vary in their ability to bid for decontrolled gas depending on their access to controlled gas and the actions of local regulatory authorities. In summary in addition to the waste in gas production caused by the NGPA both controlled and decontrolled gas will be allocated inefficiently among pipelines. The preliminary Department of Energy estimate of the present value of the efficiency gain that would accrue to the economy from full gas decontrol in relative to the partial deregulation authorized by the NGPA is about $ billion ( in dollars ) The prospect of a price increase in may provide an impetus toward extension of the NGPA price controls beyond Such an extension would sustain the inefficiencies experienced as a result of the NGPA. The preliminary Department of Energy estimate of the present value of the efficiency gain of full decontrol in relative to extension to of price controls now imposed by the NGPA is about $ billion ( in dollars ) Because gas production would be reduced by extension of controls oil consumption would probably increase. The preliminary Department of Energy estimate is that extension of gas price controls would increase oil import levels by about barrels per day between and Reported gas well completions in increased percent over while under full decontrol reported oil well completions increased by percent in the same period. Total proved gas reserves ( excluding Prudhoe Bay ) declined over one-third during the 1970s The extension of controls thus would have very serious implications for future domestic gas reserves Recent Natural Gas Price Developments Natural gas prices have risen sharply in recent months because gas controlled at relatively low prices is gradually becoming a smaller component of total production and because some contracts fixing very low prices have expired. Moreover the NGPA allows price increases for some gas beyond a simple inflation adjustment. While it appears that gas prices in some regions have reached short-term market clearing levels that is not true for other regions. On average gas prices are still apparently below market clearing levels hence the expected price increase in under the path outlined by the NGPA Some observers have noted that pipelines are buying expensive gas while gas subject to lower price ceilings remains unsold. They have concluded from this that gas markets are " irrational " and that full price decontrol would not work effectively. This analysis is questionable. Under " take-or-pay " contracts pipelines agree to pay for a given volume of gas whether or not they resell ( " take " ) it. Since price controls have prevented pipelines from competing for gas on the basis of price they compete on the basis of contract terms. Increased " take-or-pay " contractual requirements are one form of such nonprice competition. This behavior is a rational response to the ar- tificial constraints imposed by price controls and the general expectation of future shortages. In essence increased " take-or-pay * ' requirements are a way for pipelines ( and implicitly their customers ) to buy insurance against future shortages. Pipelines with high levels of " take-or-pay " commitments must now take and pay for relatively expensive gas even though " cheaper * * gas is available. This is " irrational " only in hindsight since surpluses of gas exist. If shortages had developed instead the use of " take-or-pay * ' commitments would look quite rational and " farsighted. " EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS Conditions in the world oil market and preceptions about the effects of supply disruptions have both changed substantially in the last several years. Trends in world oil production and consumption are similar to those of the United States. World ( non-Communist ) consumption fell from million barrels per day ( mmbd ) in to mmbd in Production outside of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( including Communist nations ) increased from mmbd in to mmbd in ( for the first months ) Furthermore excess production capacity in OPEC has increased to at least mmbd. It is likely that a future oil supply disruption should one occur would have smaller proportionate price effects than those caused by disruptions during the 's. Both the increasing geographic diversification of production and the presence of substantial excess production capacity would mitigate the effect of future disruptions The threat to use oil production as a political weapon may be less effective then was previously perceived. It is very difficult to " target * ' individual nations with such a weapon because the international oil transport industry has substantial capacity to transfer oil among nations. This is why the United States and the Netherlands despite their status as the intended targets of the embargo faced the same prices for imported oil as other oil-importing nations. Gasoline lines in the United States were caused by the U.S. regulations. Equally important oil producers can not impose large penalties upon others without imposing substantial revenue losses upon themselves The policies of this Administration reflect the view that preparation for disruptions in energy supplies can best take place through the operation of market forces and that price adjustments present the most effective mechanism for dealing with such disruptions when they occur. Minimizing the aggregate adverse effects of energy supply disruptions is most efficiently accomplished by allowing prices to allocate available supplies to their most productive uses and by encouraging market forces to increase production of substitute fuels Price and allocation controls only redistribute some of the adverse effects of the disruption away from politically favored groups therefore making matters worse for other groups. In the aggregate price and allocation controls would exacerbate the adverse effects of the disruption Standby controls even if never implemented are harmful because they increase the perceived likelihood that controls will be imposed and thereby deter private preparedness. This is why the President vetoed the standby controls legislation in March Present policies also reflect a recognition that firms may have insufficient incentives to prepare for energy supply disruptions in substantial part because of past government policy. Previous price and allocation controls had the effect of penalizing those who had prepared for disruptions and subsidizing those who had not. Because of governmental responses to energy supply disruptions in the past and the recent congressional proposal to establish standby price and allocation controls firms must regard as substantial the likelihood that controls would be imposed once again despite this Administration 's firm commitment to avoid such policies. This expectation discourages both those who expect to benefit from controls and those who expect to have their supplies appropriated from preparing sufficiently for a disruption beforehand In recognition of this perverse effect of past policy the Administration is striving to build up crude oil stocks in the Strategic Petroleum Reserve ( SPR ) at an efficient rate. Built up to only slightly more than million barrels from until early the SPR now contains over million barrels and is growing steadily toward.the planned level of million barrels. The SPR is intended to supplement not substitute for private sector stocks ; accordingly it would be used only in the event of a severe disruption. Once a decision was made to use SPR crude oil it would be sold at market-clearing prices to whomever wished to purchase it. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve Plan submitted to the Congress in December contains a provision allowing the Secretary of Energy to reserve for special groups faced with extraordinary circumstances up to percent of a given period 's drawdown ; oil allocated under this provision would be priced at the level established in the most recent competitive auction of SPR crude oil. This provision is not intended as a subsidy for particular groups. The policy of this Administration to fill the SPR at a steady rate will move energy security preparedness in the United States toward a more optimal level. To the extent that the availability of SPR crude oil combined with other energy policies and programs enables future Administrations to resist pressures for price and allo- cation controls during a disruption the SPR may enhance private sector preparation as well Except to the extent that use of foreign energy supplies is increased artificially by price controls and other adverse policies it is not the policy of this Administration to reduce dependence on foreign energy suppliers beyond the level determined by market forces In a world with relatively free trade and substantial capacity for reallocation of supplies the allocative effects of a change in oil prices ( other than those operating through the exchange rate ) are independent of whether a given nation 's use of foreign supplies is great or small. A disruption would raise prices and thus reallocate all available supplies whether foreign or domestic. Thus a nation totally selfsufficient in energy supplies still would face the same oil prices as a nation totally dependent on foreign sources. It is the policy of this Administration to facilitate free trade while preparing for future contingencies through primary reliance on market adjustments and judicious use of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS The transportation and communications industries serve vital linkage functions in our Nation 's economy. Until recently these industries were broadly subject to traditional rate and entry regulation Regulation of most transportation sectors is probably not efficient under contemporary market conditions. Most transportation markets due to the mobility of most of the capital assets of the firms in those markets are highly contestable. That is with nearly costless entry and exit new firms can enter markets which have excessive prices and can take advantage of the profitable opportunities that they provide. Thus even with significant economies of scale in a transportation market the threat of entry by new rivals should result in nearcompetitive pricing of transportation services. Additionally most transportation firms face significant intermodal competition. They are also disciplined indirectly in some cases by competitive conditions in the national or international markets in which the commodities they transport are sold. The only segments of the interstate transportation system for which regulation on a natural monopoly basis may be justifiable are the major gas pipelines long-distance electric transmission lines and those sections of the rail system where shippers do not have an effective choice of carrier or mode of transport Telecommunications due to a high rate of technological development is one of the most rapidly changing sectors of the U.S. economy. The Federal Government plays an active role in the telecommu- nications industries through the regulation of common carriers and broadcasters. Several important steps toward deregulation of these industries were initiated in The government can enhance the development of these industries through continued deregulation EFFECTS OF AVIATION DEREGULATION Until the late 1970s the Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) regulated the airline industry extensively. It allocated interstate routes among the airlines and controlled airline fares on those routes. Through its control of air routes the CAB restrained entry into the airline industry. From its inception in until the late 1970s the CAB did not allow any new airline to enter the interstate trunk market. Largely as a consequence air fares were higher on most interstate routes than if price competition and freedom of entry were permitted. This was reflected by the differences in fares between intrastate city-pairs that were not subject to CAB regulation such as Los Angeles-San Francisco and comparable interstate city-pairs that were. The latter often had fares that were as much as percent higher than the former In the CAB began to ease restrictions on fares and entry. In the Congress affirmed and extended the CAB 's measures by passing the Airline Deregulation Act. This act provided for the gradual deregulation of the airlines with the termination of CAB domestic route authority in the termination of CAB domestic pricing authority in and the elimination of the CAB itself in Subsequent steps were taken to increase potential competition in international aviation. In July the U.S. Government entered a multilateral agreement with several European governments that permits greater flexibility in airline fares for trans-Atlantic flights than was previously allowed While rising aviation fuel costs the weak economy and the air traffic controllers strike complicate assessment of the effects of gradual deregulation route and fare competition have increased substantially since From to the number of U.S. certificated airlines more than doubled ( from to ) The market share of the major trunk airlines declined from to percent in the past years while during this same period the market share of the local intrastate and new airlines increased from to percent. Aircraft departures from large medium small and nonhub airports increased substantially over the years immediately following airline deregulation. The percentage of domestic markets with four or more carriers grew from in May to in May In April percent of the domestic coach traffic of the major airlines moved on discount fares compared to percent in April And while operating expenses per available seat mile rose by percent from to airline revenue per available seat mile rose by only percent in this same period Deregulation has also led to increases in operating efficiency. Airline labor cost increases have slowed and have actually declined relative to inflation. The established airlines have been forced to control their labor costs in order to compete effectively with the new entrants many of which pay substantially lower wages. Load factors ( the ratio of revenue passenger miles to available seat miles ) rose from an average of less than percent between and to more than percent between and Airlines are now using a wider variety of airplanes to serve their diverse markets Small markets are more likely to be served by smaller airplanes There is little need to fear monopoly in airline markets when the CAB expires. Several studies have demonstrated that no system-wide economies of scale exist. Since airplanes are easily transferable from one market to another airline markets are readily con testable. The prospect of potential entry by rival carriers creates pressures for close-to-competitive fares even in markets served by only one airline Deregulation of airlines has established a competitive and more efficient airline industry. As air travel in the United States increases over this decade and as the busiest airports become even more congested the new competitive structure may be challenged. Allowing competition and the full transferability of the right to land and take off at these airports may be necessary to sustain this competitive structure. Additionally the maintenance and future development of a safe and effective national airway system is important to ensure that consumers are well served EFFECTS OF PARTIAL DEREGULATION IN SURFACE TRANSPORTATION The traditional rate and entry regulation of the trucking freightforwarder intercity bus barge and maritime industries is now largely out of date. Many studies have demonstrated the absence of significant economies of scale in these industries weakening the " natural monopoly " rationale for entry restrictions. The high degree of capital mobility in these industries implies that individual city-pair and port-pair markets are highly contestable. The existence of intermodal sources of competition and competitive international output markets for transported commodities further reduces any misallocations resulting from monoply behavior. Additionally the high rate of technological development in the transportation sector renders many regulations inapplicable. The experience since the recent deregulation of airlines and the partial deregulation of surface transportation indicates that a competitive industry structure would not reduce the financial viability of firms in these industries Several major pieces of legislation were enacted in the last few years to reduce the degree of regulation in the surface transportation industries including the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of the Motor Carrier Act of the Staggers Rail Act of and the Bus Regulatory Reform Act of The effects of the partial deregulation of trucking initiated by the Interstate Commerce Commission and affirmed by the Motor Carrier Act of have proven very encouraging. Published trucking rates are now subject to large and widely available discounts. Shippers appear to be overwhelmingly satisfied with the rates service options and competition for their business. Service to small communities has not deteriorated as was originally predicted by the opponents of deregulation and most shippers in small communities also appear to support deregulation. Both the number of new firms and failing firms have increased substantially the latter due in part to the recession Concerns have been expressed over the last year that the Interstate Commerce Commission may be slowing the deregulatory process For example the percentage of applications for grants of operating authority approved by the ICC declined slightly in both fiscal years since the passage of the Motor Carrier Act. On net however the ICC has facilitated increased competition in the trucking industry The chaos predicted by the opponents of deregulation has not materialized even during a sustained recession. The experience to date clearly supports the case for more general deregulation of surface transport The experience since the partial deregulation of railroads is similar. Although direct evidence on rail rates is not available the number of contracts negotiated between rail carriers and shippers ( a measure of the operating flexibility granted by the Staggers Rail Act ) increased from in fiscal to in fiscal Railroads have increased their share of total freight traffic and have substantially increased their shipments of some commodities such as fruits and vegetables that were previously carried almost exclusively by trucks Railroad profits remained essentially steady despite the sustained recession While recent partial deregulation of the surface transportation industries has increased the competitiveness of these industries the opportunity remains for significant gains from further deregulation There seems to be little danger that further deregulation would enhance the monopoly power of carriers. The high degree of capital mobility in the trucking bus barge and maritime industries should prevent monopoly pricing over a sustained period even where there is only one carrier on a route Ill FURTHER DEREGULATION OF SURFACE TRANSPORTATION For many decades both carriers and shippers have made decisions based on expectations that the general regulatory system would continue. As a consequence the transition to deregulation can be disruptive. The major conceptual problems of further deregulation involve the following four issues : ( ) the antitrust status of the rate bureaus ( ) the vulnerability of shippers who do not have an effective choice of carrier or mode ( ) the restrictions on multimodal ownership and ( ) the restrictions on route abandonment As suggested below these problems especially affect the prospects for further deregulation of the railroads Antitrust Status of Rate Bureaus For many years the regional rate bureaus ( composed of transportation firms ) have performed the normal functions of a trade association and have provided the forum for multilateral agreements on both single-line and interline rates. These rate bureaus were exempted from the antitrust laws and their proposed rates were generally endorsed by the ICC. The Motor Carrier Act of removed the antitrust immunity of the truck rate bureaus for single-line rates beginning in mid-1984 and established the Motor Carrier Ratemaking Study Commission to study whether the antitrust immunity for multilateral agreements on interline rates should be maintained. In testimony to this commission the Administration supported elimination of the antitrust immunity of the truck rate bureaus. Members of the commission which was scheduled to complete its study by the end of were equally divided on this issue at that time. Additionally following the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of the ICC restricted the authority of the rail rate bureaus to address single-line rates and restricted the carriers that could participate in an agreement on interline rates There remains a legitimate dispute about whether the rail rate bureaus should retain antitrust immunity when setting interline rates The general view of economists is that further deregulation should be accompanied by the elimination of antitrust immunity. This approach would prevent the adverse effects of a carrier cartel and permit interline agreements to be treated as a joint venture. Some clarification of the application of the Sherman Act would also be appropriate to provide a stable legal environment for these interline agreements. The contrary view is that the antitrust immunity should be maintained as long as no carrier is bound by any bureau rates to which it did not agree. A multilateral agreement on interline rates may have substantially lower transactions costs on small shipments than the alternative pattern of bilateral joint ventures and any at- tempt to set cartel rates would be disciplined by the freedom of any carrier to set other rates. ( This issue is less important for trucks because interline traffic is now less than percent of total truck traffic and complete freedom of routes would further reduce such interline traffic. Interline rail traffic however is percent of total rail traffic and it is more important to maintain a process that economizes on the contracting costs for small interline shipments. ) The alternative may be an undesirable situation in which rail carriers refuse small interline shipments use trucks for shipments to points beyond their routes or face an artificial incentive for mergers The " Captive Shipper Problem " The " captive shipper problem ' * is what initially led to rail rate regulation. This problem was substantially reduced by the development of alternative carriers and modes but has not been eliminated. Two dimensions of this problem however have sometimes been misunderstood. This relation is a bilateral monopoly. Both the rail carrier and the shipper have substantial bargaining power and it is not clear that this relation leads to rates that are generally " too high. " Second this relation does not lead to any long-term misallocation of resources as long as the price of the shipped commodity is determined in a competitive market. In any case the sum of the rents on rail and shipper property is constant. This inherent tension suggests that it is important to avoid any effective restraint on the common ownership of rail carriers and major shippers. One alternative may be to require joint track use by competing carriers. Another alternative would be to index the rate bands now authorized for say another decade and to terminate these bands at that time. Unless this problem is resolved however some form of maximum rate regulation is likely to be maintained in the rail industry Restrictions on Multimodal Ownership There no longer appears to be any case for restrictions on multimodal ownership. It is especially important to allow rail carriers to own trucking operations to facilitate container and piggyback traffic A change in the law would be required to allow rail carriers to own barge lines. A change in the law would also be required to allow freight-forwarders to own trucks even though trucking companies are now allowed to own freight-forwarders. The Bus Regulatory Reform Act of provides a substantially streamlined process for approving intermodal mergers not prohibited by law Restrictions on Route Abandonment The primary problem of the railroads is excess route capacity a problem that reflects a combination of increased truck competition and ICC restrictions on route abandonment. Some studies have indi- cated that less than half of the existing rail mileage generates enough traffic to cover total costs. The Staggers Rail Act provides for more flexible procedures to resolve disputes on route abandonment Recent highway legislation by increasing allowable truck size is expected to make trucks more competitive with railroads in moving low density freight. A better resolution of the route abandonment issue is probably necessary for a healthy railroad industry and an efficient distribution of freight traffic across modes In summary pending a resolution of these four issues as they affect railroads it is probably appropriate to focus any near-term legislative proposals on the other modes of surface transport and for the ICC to pursue selective rail deregulation within its existing authority Additionally the government should continue through the appropriate application of user fees to ensure that each mode of transport bears the entire costs of its operations when utilizing public facilities COMMON CARRIER TELECOMMUNICATIONS Economies of scale provided the original rationale for making long-distance telecommunications a regulated monopoly. But rapid technological change has reduced the industry 's natural monopoly characteristics and has paved the way for a more competitive industry structure. The growth of the market for telecommunications due largely to the convergence of data processing and telecommunications technology has further reduced the natural monopoly characteristics of the industry. These rapid developments in both demand and supply conditions have probably made the inherited regulatory framework inappropriate Major legal changes were made recently to allow increased competition. In a U.S. district judge gave final approval to a settlement between the American Telephone and Telegraph Company ( AT&T ) and the Department of Justice transforming long-distance telecommunications services into a competitive market with a greater number of companies and less regulation In conjunction with other deregulatory steps by the Federal Communications Commission the settlement is expected to have major benefits for both the telecommunications industry and its customers Equal access to local facilities which is the cornerstone of the settlement should allow competition to act as an adequate substitute for regulation of interstate services. While the transition to equal access will take a few years individual telephone customers will have progressively increased opportunities to make their own arrangements with AT&T 's competitors in long-distance services. Meanwhile AT&T will be allowed to develop its data processing subsidiary American Bell Inc. While AT&T is prohibited from offering home computer information and advertising services via its long-distance lines for years it is likely to become a vigorous competitor in other fields such as cellular mobile radio technology. It is also likely to face increasing competition in these areas In an appeals court affirmed the Federal Communication Commission 's power to deregulate where technological change makes regulation outmoded. Developments in data processing and transmission have tended to make many Federal and State regulations unnecessary inappropriate or unworkable BROADCASTING The FCC regulates the radio and television industries through issuance and renewal of broadcast licenses. It promulgates guidelines on the amount of news and public affairs programming that stations must broadcast the maximum number of commercials permissible in any time period the recording of broadcast materials and the ascertainment and fulfillment of community needs. As a result broadcasters are prevented in some cases from carrying programming that listeners and viewers would prefer The original purpose of FCC regulation was to allocate broadcast spectrum space. The FCC allocated these valuable spectrum rights in exchange for commitments on program content. Whatever the merits of this argument years ago it may be appropriate to review this form of regulation to reflect the rapidly developing competition from cable television pay television and direct satellite transmission Recently the FCC has made several moves toward deregulation. In the Commission deregulated most commercial radio broadcasting and attempted subject to legal challenge to simplify the application renewal process. The FCC is in the process of repeating this deregulatory initiative for the television industry. It will soon attempt to amend the renewal process by eliminating the following criteria for renewal : nonentertainment content ascertainment of community needs advertising concentration and recording. The last Congress also considered bills to repeal many requirements such as the " reasonable access/ ' " equal time " and " fairness " doctrines that are costly to broadcasters and unevenly applied to the mass media These steps would partially remove the government from the determination of broadcast content DEREGULATION OF FINANCIAL MARKETS The financial service sector has been among the most heavily regulated areas of the economy. Price regulation entry restrictions and portfolio regulation were pervasive in both the banking and securities industries. Substantial and numerous innovations in the financial sectors in the last decade largely preceded and were later facilitated by recent partial deregulation DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS The present structure of regulatory restraints on commercial banks and other depository institutions was imposed primarily in response to the collapse of the banking system in the 1930s. A common interpretation of the events at that time is that the banking collapse was the result of an unsound banking structure which caused too much competition. Competition among banks was thought to force them into paying high interest rates for deposits which in turn led them to seek out high-yielding but risky and ultimately unsound investments in the stock bond and real estate markets Legislative remedies in the Banking Acts of and and various revisions of the Federal Reserve Act focused on limiting price competition between banks separating banking from securities market activity supervising banking and financial markets more closely and restoring public confidence in the financial system Reflecting a general concern about excessive competition the payment of interest on demand deposits was prohibited by law. In addition the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation were given the power to place interest rate ceilings on the passbook and time deposits of commercial banks. Interest rate ceilings were extended to the deposits of mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations in The type and quality of assets held by banks were closely monitored. Commercial banks were not permitted to hold securities of a speculative nature in their portfolios and thrift institutions were subject to even greater limits on their asset acquisition powers. In addition most securities activities were divorced from commercial banking by the Glass-Steagall sections of the Banking Act of and entry into banking became more closely controlled. To maintain the confidence of the public in the banking system deposits were insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. With the introduction of deposit insurance the other regulations served mainly to limit the exposure of the insurance funds rather than to protect depositors. Nevertheless recent studies suggest that the web of regulatory restraints was generally greater than required for this purpose Moreover this extensive regulatory framework for financial institutions has adapted slowly to the economic changes of the last two decades. High inflation rates and consequent high nominal interest rates combined with reduced transactions costs from the application of computer technology to the payments system have created serious distortions in financial markets. As market interest rates rose above Regulation Q ceilings inflows of funds to depository institutions were curtailed and new nonregulated instruments ( especially money market mutual funds ) were created. The allocation of savings to various sectors of the capital market particularly housing vis-a-vis other sectors was altered and small and less informed savers suffered declines in the real rate of return on their savings. In addition Regulation Q generated a considerable amount of nonprice competition between financial institutions such as an excessive number of branch offices with resulting adverse effects on efficiency. Interest rate ceilings on selected deposits were removed progressively beginning in The Administration continues to support the removal of unnecessary and excessive regulatory constraints on depository institutions It is now widely asserted that the length and severity of the banking collapse of the 1930s was not the result of overly risky bank portfolios. Rather many economists argue that these failures became widespread initially because of the reluctance of the Federal Reserve System to engage in aggressive open market operations to counter the conversion of deposits to currency and later because of the Federal Reserve 's failure to assure adequate liquidity to banks experiencing runs on their deposits. As banks scrambled to liquidate their assets to meet the demands of their depositors for currency their asset values fell thus creating insolvencies. The provision of adequate liquidity by a lender of last resort has long been recognized as a primary responsibility of the Federal Reserve System Partial deregulation of depository institutions is now proceeding under provisions of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of and the Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of Under the act interest rate ceilings on time and savings deposits are to be phased out over a period of years. The same law permits depository institutions to offer negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts and preempted certain State usury ceilings. This act also created the Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee ( DIDC ) to administer the phaseout of interest rate ceilings at banks and thrifts In March the DIDC adopted a deregulation schedule that phases out interest rate ceilings beginning with longer term time deposits. With the deregulation schedule in place the focus of the DIDC turned to short-term deposit instruments. Prevailing high interest rates had caused a continued erosion of low-cost deposits at banks and thrifts as depositors sought market rates elsewhere particularly through money market mutual funds. The DIDC addressed this problem by authorizing effective May a 91-day time deposit with a $ minimum denomination indexed to the 91-day Treasury bill rate and establishing effective September a 7to 31-day deposit account with a $ minimum denomination also indexed to the 91-day Treasury bill rate Following the directions given by the Garn-St Germain Act the DIDC authorized effective December a new money market deposit account that can be offered by commercial banks savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks. In addition the DIDG authorized a new super NOW account effective January Neither account is subject to interest rate ceilings when account balances exceed $ The DIDC also reduced to $ the minimum denomination required on the 6-montfi money market deposits the 91day time deposits and the to 31-day time deposits The introduction of NOW accounts nationwide in the authorization of the new money market accounts at banks and thrifts and the general phasing out of interest rate restrictions substantially increase the ability of depository institutions to compete for funds Simultaneously various actions have been taken to allow thrift institutions greater flexibility in the investment of funds. The Deregulation and Monetary Control Act expands the asset powers of saving and loan associations and mutual savings banks to include consumer corporate and business loans. This will lead to more diversified portfolios for these institutions. In addition new regulations issued by the Comptroller of the Currency in and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in permit depository institutions to offer variable rate mortgages. Finally the Garn-St Germain Act provides for Federal preemption of State laws and judicial decisions that restrict the enforcement of due-on-sale clauses in real property loans The Garn-St Germain Act also deals with the problems of the savings and loan institutions discussed above. It provides capital assistance to depository institutions that have suffered earnings and capital losses resulting from regulatory restraints on their assets and liabilities. The assisted institutions issue capital investments called " net worth certificates " which the insuring agencies purchase with promissory notes. This increase in net worth reduces the likelihood of insolvencies arising from losses created by holdings of old fixed-rate mortgages. As market rates of interest fall and the earnings of these depository institutions improve the net worth certificates will be retired Legislation following the banking collapse of the 1930s tended to prevent competition among financial institutions and created a complex and often counterproductive labyrinth of financial regulations Recent legislation and regulatory changes have begun to reverse this trend by widening the sources and uses of funds available to depository institutions and by allowing for a far larger measure of price competition in the financial services industry. These actions should contribute to a stronger and more responsive financial system STOCK EXCHANGES Much of the regulation of the Nation 's stock exchanges began in the 1930s largely in response to the crisis in the financial markets created by the Great Depression. This regulation was broad and diverse and included mandatory and systematic disclosure of corporate records as well as rule-setting authority over stock exchanges. Over the last several years much of this regulation has been relaxed Commission Rates Prior to commissions paid to members of stock exchanges were fixed by those stock exchanges and approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) After however the fixed commission schedule was slowly dismantled in favor of negotiated commissions. Beginning in May commission rates on all security transactions were negotiated Negotiated commission rates were the product of a market-induced breakdown of the fixed-rate commission structure. From to the dollar volume and market share of the regional stock exchanges increased dramatically because of the fixed-rate system. Regional stock exchanges allowed customers dealing on those exchanges to " give up " or have transferred a portion of their fixed commission to a third party who supplied other services. The New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) stipulated that customers of that exchange could only give up commissions to other members of the NYSE. This constraint that the NYSE imposed on its customers encouraged many of those customers to turn to the regional exchanges where competition had effectively driven down the cost of exchange services Faced with a declining share of stock transactions the NYSE asked the SEC to force regional exchanges to eliminate the rules that were affording them a competitive advantage. Commenting on the NYSE proposal the Department of Justice suggested that the broader issue of possible elimination of the fixed-rate commission structure should be examined. In defense of the fixed-rate commission structure a NYSE study suggested that " destructive competition " reflected in a decline in the quality of broker services could result from the absence of fixed commission rates Despite the objections of the NYSE the Congress passed the Securities Acts Amendments of These reconfirmed that nonmember commission rates were fully negotiable and made exchange floor rates fully negotiable by May The deregulation of fixed commission rates illustrates the efficiency gains that follow deregulation Since the total deregulation of commission rates average commissions charged to customers have decreased. Services which were previously provided jointly whether customers used them or not are now substantially unbundled Financial Disclosure The Securities Exchange Act of required financial disclosure for corporations seeking to raise capital through the issuance of new securities. The Securities Exchange Act of required periodic financial disclosure for corporations with publicly traded securities One of the motivations for this original legislation was a belief that corporations must be forced to disclose financial information in order to protect the interests of investors. In recent years there has been concern that these requirements have precluded new security issues thus inhibiting the efficiency of the capital market. Additionally a growing body of scholarship has questioned whether these requirements have served the interests of investors. Recently some of these stringent disclosure requirements were ended for certain types of corporations. Specifically corporations with less than $ million in assets and stockholders are now exempt from the filing requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of The SEC has also recently allowed on an experimental basis some firms issuing new securities to use " shelf registration ' * forms thus eliminating the requirement to file for each new security issue. The initiation of shelf registration is expected to reduce the costs of raising equity capital allowing firms to manage their risk more efficiently by entering the capital markets more often Industry Structure Before stocks listed on stock exchanges could not be traded by members of those stock exchanges in any other markets. This barrier to entry was partially lifted in June when the SEC approved Rule 19c-3. This rule allows members of stock exchanges to trade securities in other markets that were listed on those stock exchanges after May Stock exchange members are now also allowed to execute trades in the " 19c-3 securities " in markets other than the stock exchanges The market share of non-19c-3 stocks on the Over-the-Counter ( OTG ) markets is considerably less than the OTC market share for 19c-3 securities. This larger market share for the OTC in 19c-3 securities suggests that for some exchange members it is more efficient to execute orders on the OTC rather than on the stock ex- changes. That is members can arbitrage price differentials that may exist between the OTC market and the exchanges Futures Markets The Commodity Futures Trading Commission ( CFTC ) has also been very active in deregulation. In January the CFTC eliminated the report which had obligated large traders in future contracts to report their market positions daily to the CFTC. This action reduced the filing costs of these large traders by around percent In an effort to lessen the burden of Federal regulation on the futures industry the CFTC 's new legislation eases the disclosure registration and rule approval process OPPORTUNITIES FOR FURTHER DEREGULATION IN THE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY While the financial and securities markets of today operate relatively unencumbered by unnecessary regulations owing to the deregulatory advances discussed above several opportunities for further deregulation remain Geographic Restrictions in Banking Federal laws such as the McFadden Act of and the Douglas Amendment to the Bank Holding Company Act of continue to impose geographic restrictions on commercial banking activities. The former law subjects the branching activities of national banks to the limits imposed by the States ; the latter law prohibits bank holding companies from engaging in interstate banking unless given specific State authorization to do so. Although these prohibitions may reduce the concentration of financial resources on a national scale they may also increase market concentration and lessen competition in local banking markets Moreover these restrictions are effective only insofar as they affect the taking of retail deposits. Loan production offices Edge Act corporations personal finance companies mortgage lending companies and bank holding companies have long been the means used by banks to conduct wholesale and retail business on an interstate basis With the emergence of automatic teller machine networks the electronic revolution is incorporating even retail deposit-taking into large-scale operations. This process would be enhanced by exempting automatic teller machines from the existing restrictions on the establishment of branch offices. It is time to reconsider these geographic restrictions because they are probably not in the best interests of consumers or the more efficient financial institutions Portfolio Restrictions in Banking The prohibitions of the Glass-Steagall Act have been eroded in recent years as both banking organizations and securities firms have attempted either directly or indirectly to enter each others ' traditional lines of business. Moreover Glass-Steagall now makes no important contribution to the protection of the public against bank failure or undue concentrations of economic power. Other government measures such as Federal deposit insurance and broadened and strengthened Federal supervision appear to have been more effective in that role. The Administration has proposed an amendment to the Glass-Steagall Act that would authorize bank holding company subsidiaries to conduct two new activities immediately : ( ) to underwrite and deal in municipal revenue bonds and ( ) to sponsor and underwrite shares of mutual funds. The Garn-St Germain Act authorizes a new account at banks and thrifts that is directly competitive with money market mutual funds. However the act does not provide for the operation and sale of shares in mutual funds or the underwriting of municipal revenue bonds. Moreover the act also extends the longstanding protection of insurance companies against bank competition Margin Requirements Margin requirements presently exist in the stock options and futures markets. In futures trading the margin is a performance bond intended to protect other participants from the consequences of a failure to make good on a contractual obligation. Each futures exchange determines the margin without Federal regulation or oversight. In stock and options exchanges the Federal Reserve Board sets initial margin requirements and the exchanges set maintenance margins subject to SEC oversight. Margin practices in the stock and options markets may be less efficient than in futures markets since regulation constrains decisionmaking by participants. It is now appropriate to review these regulations CONCLUSIONS Federal regulation of price and entry are products of an earlier era when both economic conditions and perceptions of economic problems were very different than they are today. Federal regulation of railroads began nearly a century ago when there was no significant competition from other transport modes and political debate reflected strong populist sentiment. Most other Federal economic regulations date from the 1930s when the severe economic problems now believed to be due to a collapse in aggregate demand were per- ceived to be a consequence of excessive competition. The present structure of Federal regulation of the energy markets dates from the 1970s and primarily reflects an attempt to protect consumers from the effects of the large increase in oil prices originating abroad These policies may or may not have been appropriate to the period in which they were initiated. But both conditions and perceptions are now very different. Increasing demand and changing technology have substantially reduced the initial monopoly power of many regulated firms. Our perceptions have also changed largely in response to developing conditions during the long history of regulation and the encouraging developments during the more recent period of partial deregulation. There is now a more general perception that the developments in regulated markets have largely outrun the present structure of economic regulation As we approach the 100th anniversary of the first broad body of Federal economic regulation it is time for a comprehensive review of whether this form of regulation serves the interests of the contemporary economy. A resolution of this issue would then permit greater attention to the different and more complex issues affecting the recent Federal regulation of health safety and environmental conditions CHAPTER Review of and the Economic Outlook FOR THE U.S. ECONOMY was a year of painful transition toward price stability. The momentum of high inflation built up over the last years was broken and inflation was reduced to its lowest rate in a decade. Success in reducing inflation however was accompanied by a recession that began in mid-1981 and lingered through A drop in real exports along with inventory adjustments accounted for the decline in U.S. production. Despite the recession final sales to domestic purchasers increased. Expenditures for some interest-sensitive goods such as housing and consumer durable goods registered their first rise in recent years Economic developments in clearly set the stage for a recovery in The sizable slowdown in inflation contributed to the sharp drop in interest rates in the summer of The inventory cycle that held down production in is expected to turn around sometime in This development combined with recovery in housing and durable consumer goods and continuing gains in defense spending is expected to bring a moderate sustainable economic recovery Prospects are good that this recovery can be maintained through the 1980s without reigniting inflationary pressures OVERVIEW OF Real gross national product ( GNP ) in was no higher than in After a surge of economic growth in the economy stalled in Cyclically volatile types of spending such as auto sales and housing starts had peaked in Since the output of goods and services in the United States has followed a saw-tooth pattern of alternating periods of growth and decline. The recessions of and bracketed the shortest economic expansion in years Employment in was below its level Production and employment remained sluggish for years while supplies of labor and capital continued to grow so that by the end of the unemployment rate rose to nearly percent its highest level since the early 1940s and the capacity utilization rate fell to its lowest point in the post-World War II period. With this high level of unused economic capacity inflationary pressures subsided The inflation rate fell dramatically in to its lowest level in a decade. The upward trend in inflation from through strengthened the Federal Reserve 's determination to slow the growth in the monetary aggregates and contributed to high interest rates for an extended period. By mid-1982 when evidence of progress against inflation and continued weakness in economic activity became clear interest rates began to fall sharply. The ensuing decline reduced interest rates to their lowest levels in more than years as illustrated in Chart Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER YEAR PRIME RATE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM The decline in interest rates brought much-needed relief to the interest-sensitive cyclical sectors of the economy. By the end of clear progress toward recovery had been made as reflected in continuing gains in the composite index of leading indicators of economic activity as shown in Chart Chart Index of Leading Indicators and Real GNP BILLIONS OF DOLLARS REALGNP ( RIGHT SCALE } INDEX OF LEADING INDICATORS ( LEFT SCALE ) t mm I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I In SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE MAJOR SECTORS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND Real output declined percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of This was the fourth consecutive year of little change in economic activity ( Table ) Businesses liquidated inventories in in contrast to the previous year when inventory levels increased. Another important factor in the decline was a sharp drop in U.S. exports that reflected both the strong dollar and the worldwide recession. Real final sales to domestic purchasers increased percent in the largest increase in years. Gains in personal consumption expenditures residential investment and Federal purchases dominated a large decline in business capital spend- ing. Partly in response to the drop in interest rates residential investment increased for the first time in years and consumer purchases of durable goods increased for the first time since State and local government purchases of goods and services were virtually unchanged over the year T A B L E 6-L Growth in major sectors of real GNP [ Change ^ fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Component * 5-year average ' Percent change : Real gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Consumer durables Business fixed investment Residential fixed investment Government purchases of goods and services Federal Defense State and local Real final sales Real final sales to domestic purchasers Change in billions of dollars : Change in business .inventories Net exports of goods and services 'Preliminary Based on annual data Final sales less exports plus imports Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES Despite declines in production employment and real wage and salary income real disposable ( after-tax ) personal income increased in due in part to the reduction in personal income tax rates and an increase in transfer payments. The average effective Federal personal income tax rate fell from percent to percent between the third quarters of and Real personal consumption expenditures increased percent in to reach their highest share of real GNP since Although real personal saving declined from its high level at the end of the personal saving rate in was higher than in any year since as shown in Table Consumer purchases of durable goods increased percent in real terms in the first increase since The turnaround occurred early in the year when auto sales rebounded from the depressed level of late Sales then languished until late in the year when they again climbed due in part to the decline in interest rates that produced lower financing costs. Nevertheless domestic TABLE Real household income consumption saving and residential investment [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item 5-year average * Income by type : Labor Income Other income * Net transfer payments'.. Less.- Federal tax payments Other tax and nontax payments * Disposable personal income Personal Income 1U = Personal saving rate T Personal saving Personal consumption expenditures.. Single family Housing starts = Muftifamily Mobile home shipments ' = Residential investment... 'Preliminary 'Based on annual data Wage and salary disbursements and other labor income Proprietors ' income rental income personal dividend income and personal interest income " Transfer payments less personal contributions for social insurance 'State and local tax and nontax payments plus Federal nontax payments Annual average Units Note. Income items consumption and saving deflated by the personal consumption deflator ; residential investment deflated by the residential deflator Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers auto sales in for the entire year were lower than in any year since the early 1960s The extended period of weakness in durable goods sales accompanied a reduction in the burden of consumer debt. Consumer installment debt repayments relative to disposable personal income fell steadily from their peak to reach by the third quarter of their lowest level since as illustrated in Chart Total household debt has also fallen sharply relative to households ' net worth RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT As indicated in Table showed the first rise in housing activity in years. By the fourth quarter of housing starts rose to million at an annual rate up nearly percent from their trough of units in the fourth quarter of Starts averaged less than one million units until mid-1982 as interest rates on mortgage commitments stayed around percent. In August mortgage interest rates began to fall dropping below percent by year-end. This drop encour- Chart Ratio of Consumer Installment Credit to Personal Income RATIO ( PERCENT ) " SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS aged the sale of houses reduced the inventory of unsold new houses relative to current sales and spurred new construction For the first time in recent years house prices increased at a slower rate than general inflation. Moreover the conventional measures of house price increases which rose less than percent may well have overstated the rise because increased builder and seller financing at below market rates is not fully captured in the price data. Lower interest costs and more moderate house price increases helped to hold down mortgage payments and thus may favor a recovery in housing investment BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Real business fixed investment peaked in the last quarter of having grown at a percent annual rate from to From its peak to the last quarter of real business fixed investment dropped percent The decline in capital spending was broadly based affecting even sectors that had fared well in previous years. Industrial and commercial construction declined about percent in real terms from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of having grown at an annual rate of more than percent from to Computer communications and instrumentation equipment investment fell about percent in a sharp contrast to over percent annual rate of real growth from to In the energy area real investment in coal mine development continued to rise strongly in Real investment in oil field exploration and development dropped percent between the fourth quarters of and as weak oil prices impaired cash flow in the petroleum industry. Reflecting the weakness in overall economic growth investment in transportation equipment autos trucks aircraft ships boats and railroad equipment continued to decline in Business capital spending is likely to lag behind the recovery in the economy. Contracts and orders for new plant and equipment declined about percent in real terms between the last quarters of and In addition a Department of Commerce survey of business spending plans indicated that real nonfarm investment will decline about percent in INVENTORY INVESTMENT Sluggish sales and high carrying costs encouraged business to pare inventories in A sharp drop in final sales in late triggered a swing to inventory liquidation in the first half of Even the more moderate sales forecasts for the second half of proved overly optimistic and inventory-sales ratios climbed prompting further cutbacks in production employment and inventories ( Chart ) Toward the end of the year inventories were brought more in line with sales. Auto inventories which accounted for about one-third of inventory liquidation in the final quarter of were especially lean as the industry 's aggressive pricing and marketing efforts helped to increase sales THE FARM ECONOMY Total income per farm family in fell about percent in real terms. Over two-thirds of farm family earnings came from off-farm sources as income from farm sources declined Net farm nominal income from farm operations declined from $ billion in to about $ billion in Relatively tight meat Chart Real Inventory/Sales Ratio and Industrial Production RATIO = INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION MANUFACTURING A # * # f L # A Wl \ \ I m mm A ATv \ / ,A A/ \ A \ A / TVrVy \ A V t * fa II \ \ 1/ If ' ' \ / / < ' // / * ' Vr \ ( LEFT SCALE ) II I ' ' ' * < \ REAL INVENTORY/SALES RATIO MANUFACTURING AND TRADE U * // / I / / // \ l1 V \ t f -MA / if v \ / I I * t / ^ ! * * ' ' A # A ( RIGHT SCALE ) * / I I I ! ll ill II i l l SOURCES. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM supplies and low feed prices in contributed to larger profit margins for most livestock producers. Many crop farmers on the other hand were hard hit by lower prices and increased production costs Large domestic crops were only one of several factors contributing to lower prices. Livestock production declined and domestic use of feedgrains and meals increased slowly. The value of agricultural exports in fiscal fell about percent primarily because of lower prices and reduced shipments of corn and grain sorghum. The weak export market reflected the world recession a strong dollar and an increase in world grain stocks. The U.S. share of world grain stocks is expected to continue its rapid growth of recent years and to reach over percent in the crop year Lower crop prices high mortgage rates and lower inflation were the major factors leading to a decline in land values. Farm liabilities continued to increase and farmers ' debt-to-asset ratio is estimated to have increased to about percent a significant rise from the to percent range typical of the late 1960s and 1970s U.S. agricultural policies have once again become a major factor in determining farm prices and incomes. Federal budget outlays for commodity price support and related programs soared to $ billion in fiscal from $ billion in the previous fiscal year. A program of voluntary acreage controls including payments to those who restrict production in the crop year was adopted in and supplemented by the addition of the " payment-in-kind " option in early Food prices rose about percent in with marketing costs rising at more than twice the rate of the farm value component of food prices FOREIGN TRADE A reduction in U.S. trade was a key factor in the decline in aggregate demand in The main causes of the decline in net exports were the strength of the dollar and the worldwide recession. In December the trade-weighted value of the dollar was about percent above its low point in Because exchange-rate appreciation lowers import prices and affects trade volume with a substantial lag it initially tends to improve the trade balance. By the second half of however the reduced cost competitiveness of U.S. firms began to overwhelm the short-term positive factors A secondary cause of the deteriorating trade balance was the international debt problem. Some heavily indebted developing countries especially in Latin America experienced difficulty in attracting capital inflows and were forced to cut imports sharply in Because several of the major high-debt developing countries have close trading ties with the United States a large proportion of the import cuts came out of U.S. exports Cyclical factors had conflicting effects on the trade balance in On one side the recession in the United States tended to reduce import demand so that import volume fell more than percent. On the other side the recession in other industrial countries contributed to the percent decline in real U.S. exports GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES Real Federal State and local government purchases of goods and services increased percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Much of the increase was attributable to a percent increase in real defense purchases. Federal nondefense purchases rose in real terms due to a large increase in real purchases of agricultural commodities by the Commodity Credit Corporation State and local government purchases were virtually flat LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS Along with output employment declined percent in as shown in Table At the end of the year employment was million persons below the peak level reached in the second quarter of The reduction in employment predominantly occurred among production workers and other blue-collar employees. Sales clerical and service workers ' employment did not peak until September TABLE Labor market developments [ Fourth quarter of indicated year ] Component | | | | Percent change from year earlier1 Males years and over Females years and over. Both sexes years White Black and other.. Change in civilian employment... Percent Unemployment rate Males years and over Females years and over. Both sexes years White Black and other.. Participation rate4.... Males years and over Females years and over. Both sexes years White Black and other. data adjusted to reflect changes in sample and estimation procedures which increased employment and labor force by in January Seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force * Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Note. Data relate to persons years and over Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Generally speaking the older the age cohort the lower the unemployment rate. For example the unemployment rate for the and over age group was percent in the final quarter of Young workers experienced the highest unemployment rate. Employment of the to year age group has dropped in every year since This decline was far faster than the decline in the number of persons in this age group. Women workers now have somewhat lower unemployment rates than men a reversal of the historical relation The labor force participation rate the ratio of the labor force to the population over years of age has experienced a modest upward drift as women workers continue to join the labor force. The growth in adult women 's labor force participation has been strong in the past. Declining participation has occurred among workers less than years of age and among workers especially males over who are likely to have an income cushion provided by social security private pension plans and savings WAGES PRODUCTIVITY AND PRICES In response to slack labor markets and lower rates of price inflation wage increases slowed substantially in As shown in Table the rate of increase in several measures of wages and compensation declined about percentage points from The percent increase in the hourly earnings index for private nonfarm workers was the smallest since As measured by the employment cost index wages and salaries of private industry workers increased percent between the third quarters of and The deceleration was about the same for union and nonunion workers. A survey of major collective bargaining settlements reached in private industry showed that in the first months of the agreements provided wage adjustments that averaged percent in the first contract year exclusive of cost-of-living adjustments compared with percent when the same parties last bargained. Total labor compensation in the nonfarm business sector increased percent compared with TABLE Changes in wages and compensation [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Measure * 5-year average1 * Adjusted hourly earnings index3 Employment cost index * Union workers Nonunion workers Nonfarm business sector : * 9.C Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour. 'Preliminary * Based on annual data 'Private nonfarm employees Wages and salaries private nonfarm industry workers Third quarter to third quarter 'All persons Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers percent in These declines in wage inflation provide a basis for expecting that recent reductions in price inflation may be sustained Real compensation per hour rose percent in as pay increased more rapidly than consumer prices. This was the first rise in this series since early and suggests that the historic trend of rising real wages and family incomes may resume Even though output declined for the third straight year as shown in Table labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector experienced its first substantial improvement since Lower rates of increase in hourly compensation and higher productivity growth together resulted in labor costs per unit of output increasing only percent. This was less than half the rate of increase recorded in when labor productivity was weaker and hourly compensation rose at double-digit rates. The percent increase in unit labor costs was associated with a rise of percent in the nonfarm business sector price deflator TABLE Productivity costs and prices in the nonfarm business sector [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item Output Output per hour Compensation per hour. Unit tabor cost Implicit price deflator > 5-year average Preliminary Based on annual data Note. Data relate to alt persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics By all other measures as well the rate of inflation declined significantly in as shown in Table After increasing at doubledigit rates in and by nearly percent in the broadest measures of inflation the GNP fixed-weight price index and the GNP implicit price deflator increased nearly percent in The all-urban consumer price index increased percent the slowest rate since Even when food and energy prices which were especially weak are excluded consumer prices increased about percent Beginning in the homeownership component of the consumer price index for all-urban consumers will be computed on a rental equivalence basis. On this conceptual basis consumer prices increased about percent in Producer prices of finished goods increased only percent in about the same as in and Price increases for both consumer finished goods and capital equipment showed a marked deceleration T A B L E / V i r e changes [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item ' 5-year average l GNP price measures : Fixed-weighted index. Implicit deflator Consumer prices : ' All items All items less food and energy.. Producer prices finished goods : Total. Consumer goods Capital equipment. Preliminary Based on annual data All urban consumers Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) CREDIT MARKETS During the first three quarters of the total amount of funds raised in U.S. credit markets averaged slightly more at an annual rate than the volume raised in As shown in Table over the last years the volume of funds raised by the nonfinancial sector has dropped from percent to percent of nominal GNP a return to the cyclical lows recorded in and TABLE Funds raised by the nonfinancial sector of the economy [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Sector Households Business....... Total funds raised Federal Government State and local government.. Foreign Funds raised as percent of GNP... 'Average of first three quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate Note. Detail may not add to total due to rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Different sectors of the credit market experienced widely different trends in High interest rates1 in the first half of the year and sluggish disposable income contributed to reduced borrowing for housing. Borrowing by the nonfinancial business sector also declined during the first three quarters of However the easing of credit conditions in late summer encouraged an expansion in net corporate bond issues ; the funds raised were used in part to pay off short-term debt Combined borrowing of State and local governments and the Federal Government rose approximately percent in the first three quarters of from levels as the growth of tax receipts slowed sharply relative to expenditures. For fiscal U.S. Treasury borrowing totaled $ billion of which $ billion was used for making direct loans. Federally guaranteed loans declined sharply from levels but borrowing by federally sponsored enterprises surged. Total Federal and federally assisted borrowing climbed to percent of the funds raised in U.S. credit markets surpassing the previous peacetime peak of percent reached in INTEREST RATES As shown in Chart interest rates rose in the first part of but began to decline sharply in the summer. The decline in interest rates partly reflected diminishing inflationary expectations that tend to be built into nominal interest rates The yield on 3-month Treasury bills which had averaged just under percent late in held in the to percent range until mid-1982 and then fell to less than percent in the closing months of the year. The prime rate charged by commercial banks began the year at % percent climbed to percent in February and then in July began a steady fall to ^ percent by December The corporate Aaa bond rate which peaked at percent in February fell below percent by November The expected real after-tax interest rate is the correct measure of the cost of credit to borrowers and lenders. It is approximately equal to the after-tax nominal interest rate less the anticipated rate of inflation. For example with a percent nominal interest rate the aftertax cost of credit to a borrower in the percent marginal tax bracket is percent. If a percent inflation rate is anticipated the expected real after-tax cost of credit is percent Because the tax brackets of borrowers differ widely and the expected rate of inflation can not be observed directly the realized real pretax interest rate -approximated by the nominal interest rate less the actual rate of inflation is a more convenient measure of the cost of credit. The nominal 3-month Treasury bill rate and the corresponding realized real pretax rate are shown in Chart for the period since The real pretax Treasury bill rate was abnormally low in and tending to increase aggregate demand It then moved to relatively high levels from through the first half of tending to reduce aggregate demand. By the end of however the real pretax Treasury bill rate had fallen to about the same level as its highs in the 1950s and 1960s Chart Nominal and Real 3-Month Treasury Bill Yield PERCENT ~ 'CONVERTED TO EFFECTIVE ANNUAL YIELD FROM DISCOUNT BASIS ^ EQUALS NOMINAL YIELD LESS ACTUAL RATE OF INFLATION DEFINED BY PERSONAL CONSUMPTION DEFLATOR OVER THE PERIOD TO MATURITY. DEFLATOR FOR FIRST QUARTER FORECAST BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The sharp run-up and subsequent decline in real pretax rates during the period probably reflect in part the adjustment of credit markets to the decontrol of interest rates. During the late 1970s variable interest rate time and savings accounts were introduced by depository institutions and the process of financial innovation speeded up the movement of funds out of regulated fixed-rate accounts. In addition the consumer has recently become a more vig- orous competitor for credit as usury laws have been eliminated. As a result the financial system now relies less on nonprice rationing of credit and may exhibit higher interest rates when credit is tight Even though real short-term rates have returned more nearly to the levels of the 1950s and 1960s the equilibrium level of both longand short-term rates may now be somewhat higher than before. To the extent that the accelerated cost recovery system in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of reduced the tax on earnings of depreciable property it raised the real interest rate that business borrowers are willing to pay. In addition large budget deficits in many countries have lowered national saving rates tending to lead to higher real interest rates worldwide At the end of-1982 long-term interest rates were considerably higher than short-term interest rates perhaps reflecting the concern that-the inflation rate may be higher in the future than at present. To the extent that these inflationary expectations decline further declines in nominal long-term interest rates can be anticipated MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS The Administration 's economic program includes support for a policy of gradual reduction in the rate of monetary growth in order to bring down inflation. Consistent with this policy the Federal Reserve reduced the Ml target growth rate range from to percent in to to percent in The target range for M2 growth was kept at to percent In its February review of the tentative target ranges for established in July the Federal Open Market Committee recognized that the rapid increase of Ml in December and January had already placed it well above the top of its target range Judging that the rapid money growth was temporary and that no basic change in the relation between the monetary aggregates and nominal GNP had occurred the committee reaffirmed the tentative targets for Consequently the Federal Reserve slowed the growth of nonborrowed reserves during the first half of the year with a view to gradually bringing Ml and M2 back into their target ranges. By June Ml was within its target range while M2 remained somewhat above the top of its range. Because Ml had shown virtually no growth since January resumption of growth implied a step-up in the provision of bank reserves. After midyear continued weakness in the economy and a more ample supply of reserves and money contributed to a sharp drop in short-term interest rates. The 3-month Treasury bill rate fell from about percent in July to percent in August. A series of reductions in the Federal Reserve 's discount rate followed maintaining its alignment with short-term market rates and preventing sharp changes in the incentive for banks to borrow from the Federal Reserve Starting in August Ml growth began to speed up. By the fourth quarter of Ml had risen percent above its level in the fourth quarter of well above the upper end of the target range. Over the same period M2 increased percent slightly more than the top of its target range. These increases in the monetary aggregates occurred against the background of an economy that was still in recession Part of the strength in Ml may be attributable to the effects of a large volume of All-Savers Certificates maturing in the fourth quarter of as the maturing funds moved through checking accounts or were temporarily " parked " there. Federal Reserve analysis suggested that an additional factor was an unusual demand for liquidity. Much of the increase in Ml was in interest-bearing negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts which provide elements of both savings and transactions accounts. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of checkable deposits other than demand deposits grew about percent. With market interest rates falling these interest-bearing deposits such as NOW accounts provided a safe and convenient store of liquidity at a time of economic and financial uncertainty. Increased liquidity demand may also account for the above-target growth of M2 As discussed in Chapter the behavior of the " income velocity " measures the ratios of GNP to the various monetary aggregates was unusual in The velocity of Ml rose percent a year on average over the years ending in but in it declined percent. While a tendency toward slower velocity is not unusual in the midst of a recession when interest rates generally are falling the only other fourth quarter to fourth quarter decline in Ml velocity since the beginning of the current series in was a percent fall in The velocity of M2 which historically has been relatively trendless declined percent in ; the largest previous decline was percent in Without some accommodation of monetary growth particularly for M1 to this drop in velocity monetary policy would have been more restrictive than had been " intended when the targets were established The number size and rapidity of recent changes in the financial sector may well have affected the behavior of velocity. As indicated in Table checkable deposits other than ordinary demand deposits accounted for only percent of Ml in December In December just before NOW accounts were authorized nationally other checkable deposits were percent of Ml but by December their share had risen to over percent. Because these interestbearing deposits may be regarded by their holders in part as savings rather than solely as transactions balances the reported growth of Ml in and probably overstates the growth in transactions balances TABLE Components of Ml and M2 [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] December Item % Currency Plus * Demand deposits Equals- Ml Plus * Savings deposits3 Other checkable deposits Small time deposits Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) and overnight Eurodollars * Money market mutual fund balances ( excluding institution accounts ) * Equals- M2 Preliminary includes travelers checks 'Includes Money Market Deposit Account introduced December Not seasonally adjusted B M2 will differ from the sum of components by a consolidation adjustment that represents the estimated amount of demand deposits and vault cash held by thrift institutions to service time and savings deposits Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System In general the demand for any particular monetary aggregate and hence its income velocity depends in part on the difference between market rates of interest and the rates earned on the deposits in that aggregate. Consequently the increased portion of Ml deposits that pay interest and the decline in market interest rates have combined to lower Ml velocity The rapid growth of general purpose and broker/dealer money market mutual fund balances which are included in M2 but not in Ml has tended to raise Ml velocity and to lower M2 velocity. From December to December these money market mutual fund balances grew from $ billion to $ billion which exceeded the growth in other checkable deposits by $ billion. Although most money market mutual fund balances are subject to transfer by check the average turnover of these accounts has been relatively low Interpretation of the macroeconomic significance of changes in the monetary aggregates became more difficult in late when the Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee authorized two new accounts. In mid-December banks and thrift institutions introduced a Money Market Deposit Account with limited transactions capabilities and no interest rate ceiling. Within about weeks these accounts had attracted an astonishing $ billion. The Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee also authorized a new super NOW account effective January with no transactions limitations and no interest rate ceilings having the same $ minimum balance as the Money Market Deposit Account Financial deregulation and innovation favorably affect the efficiency of the U.S. financial system but also complicate the implementation of monetary policy. Large asset reallocations caused by changes in the financial and regulatory system can have large and unpredictable effects on Ml and M2 and on their relations to nominal GNP. In light of the particular difficulties with regard to Ml the Federal Open Market Committee has voted to place greater emphasis on M2 and M3 for an indefinite period. However the broad framework of targeting the monetary aggregates has been retained as have the reserve operating procedures for implementing it PROSPECTS FOR Assuming that the Administration 's budget proposals are enacted and that the monetary aggregates grow within the Federal Reserve 's target ranges the prospects for a moderate sustainable economic recovery beginning early in are good ( Table ) As was true in the early stages of previous recoveries the unemployment rate is likely to stabilize for several months before a downward trend becomes evident. A pattern of reduced inflation in is expected to continue in The sharp rise in the Federal budget deficit reflects reduced receipts because of lower inflation as well as the effects of the recession The expectation of economic recovery is based on the view that continuing strength in household and defense spending will bring a turnaround in the inventory cycle. Cuts in production and increases in sales brought business inventories more in line with sales by the end of Future sales gains are thus likely to be met by increases in production income and employment enhancing sales further Once even a moderate but sustained increase in sales is underway this sequence of events may lead to a temporary surge of above-average economic growth Increases in sales will come primarily from households whose income will be bolstered by the third stage of the personal income tax cut whose debt burden has declined sharply relative to income and assets and whose financial assets in many cases appreciated in rallies in the stock and bond markets. With continued moderate increases in food and oil prices more income will become available for other consumer purchases. Because outlays on durable consumer TABLE Economic outlook for Item * forecast Percent change ( fourth quarter to fourth quarter ) : Real gross national product 2.S Personal consumption expenditures. Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases State and local purchases * i Level in fourth quarter : n Output per hour Compensation per hour 6NP implicit price deflator Unemployment rate ( percent ) * Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons Seasonally adjusted Actual rate for is percent of civilian labor force ; forecast rate for is percent of total labor force including persons in the Armed Forces stationed in the United States Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers goods and houses have been depressed for the last years consumers are expected to devote increases in their income and perhaps some of the recent gains in their financial wealth to replenishing their holdings of durable goods. The sharp easing of credit terms and lower house price increases have already encouraged more households to consider buying houses. This uptrend is expected to intensify in New house purchases are invariably followed by a pickup in expenditures for furniture appliances and other housingrelated goods The pace of the recovery in will probably be moderate by historical standards. Low capacity utilization rates and the need to rebuild corporate liquidity will restrain capital spending. The worldwide recession and the lagged effect of the appreciation of the dollar will curtail the growth of exports. Continued reductions in the nondefense public sector will limit it as a source of increased aggregate demand PROSPECTS AND POLICIES BEYOND Economic prospects for the rest of the 1980s depend greatly on the economic policies that are followed. The Administration believes that the four-point program it has pursued reducing the growth of Federal outlays taxes regulation and the money supply constitutes the best approach for attaining and maintaining the economic goals set forth in the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act calls for annual numerical goals for several key economic indicators over a 5-year period. The projections provided in Table show gradual steady progress toward our economic goals. These figures illustrate the Administration 's belief explained in Chapter that policies based on consistent long-term objectives can simultaneously achieve full employment price stability and sustained growth in real income. A major cause of our present economic ills was the inclination in the past to pursue one economic goal single-mindedly without adequate attention to the longer run consequences for other economic objectives. This Administration remains determined to avoid the errors of past policies TABLE Projections of economic goals [ Calendar years except as noted ] Item Consumer prices Real GNP Level Employment ( millions ) " Jnemployment rate ( percent ) a : ederal budget outlays as percent of GNP ( fiscal year basis ) Percent change Real compensation per hour * Output per hour * Labor force series includes persons in the Armed Forces stationed Unemployed as percent of total labor force. See footnote in the United States Wage earners and clerical workers Nonfarm business all persons Source : Council of Economic Advisers A major prerequisite for achieving our economic goals is control of inflation. Marked progress toward this end has been made in the last years. With continued moderate growth in the monetary aggregates increased reliance on the private sector and increased domestic and international economic competition the prospects for sustaining and extending the progress against inflation are now quite favorable An important factor in achieving and sustaining high real economic growth is a high level of capital formation. Chapter of this volume which fulfills the legislative requirement for an annual Investment Policy Report explains that lower inflation and the recently enacted tax incentives for saving and investment are the important first steps in fostering capital accumulation. Controlling the Federal deficit is now the single most important method of encouraging more capital formation A critical element in achieving healthy economic growth is maintaining a liberal worldwide trading system. As explained in detail in Chapter the world 's economies are now more integrated than ever before. This system has recently experienced severe strains. It is of utmost importance that these challenges be met in a manner consistent with an open growing balanced network of international trade Just as an open worldwide trading system is crucial for the free world economies a competitive free market system unfettered by unnecessary government regulation is essential for a strong domestic economy. As Chapter points out substantial progress toward reduction of traditional price and entry regulation has been made in recent years but further opportunities for deregulation exist The year is expected to be the first of many years of sustained economic growth. Continued economic growth is the only way to sustain progress in reducing unemployment. But macroeconomic policies alone can not reduce structural unemployment and achieve an acceptable level of employment. Chapter describes some of the macroeconomic policies that along with a sustained recovery are necessary to achieve noninflationary full employment. These policies are designed " to foster and promote free competitive enterprise " as mandated in the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act One major remaining threat to a sustainable balanced recovery is the danger that large Federal budget deficits would preclude the continuing declines in real interest rates that are necessary for healthy growth in all sectors of the economy. The Administration 's budget provides a plan which can lead to a steady decline in budget deficits and thus ultimately to a balanced Federal budget Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely MARTIN FELDSTEIN Chairman WILLIAM A. NISKANEN WILLIAM POOLE Council Members and their dates of service are listed below : Name Edwin Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C Turner Arthur F. Burns NeilH. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Paul W. McCracken HendrikS. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum Jerry L. Jordan William A. Niskanen Martin Feldstein William Poole Position Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member August August November May August May June September8 March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February July June October December Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August July Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during The Employment Act of ( P.L. 304-79th Congress ) as amended provides the statutory base for the activities of the Council of Economic Advisers. The Council through the Chairman provides advice to the President on a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues Martin Feldstein became Chairman on October succeeding Murray L. Weidenbaum who returned to Washington University ( St. Louis ) The Chairman is on leave from Harvard University where he is a Professor of Economics. On July Jerry L Jordan resigned to return to the University of New Mexico where he is a Professor of Economics at the Anderson Schools of Management On December William Poole became a Member of the Council. Mr. Poole is on leave from Brown University where he is a Professor of Economics. William A. Niskanen continued to serve as a Member MACROECONOMIC POLICIES As is its tradition during the Council devoted much of its time to assisting the President in the formulation of broad economic policy objectives and the programs to carry them out. The development of economic assumptions and monitoring of current developments under Council Member Jordan and subsequently Council Member Poole were an area of major interest. Monetary policy developments received especially close attention Council Member Jordan and later Council Member Poole chaired the interagency subcabinet " Troika " forecasting group consisting of representatives from the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget with participation by the Department of Commerce. The Chairman of the Council continued his responsibility for presenting to the President the economic assumptions developed with the Office of Management and Budget and the Department of the Treasury Council Members chaired or participated in numerous Cabinet Council working groups dealing with such issues as economic statistics Federal credit programs alternatives to Federal regulation and Federal housing programs The Chairman actively participated during the early months of the year and then during the late fall budget cycle in Cabinet level reviews of agency budget requests and appeals MICROECONOMIC POLICIES A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during the year. Council Member Niskanen chaired Cabinet Council working groups dealing with employee pension legislation and alternatives to Federal regulation. Trade issues were an area of continuing attention The Council assisted in the preparation of agency guidelines for implementing Executive Order dealing with Executive Office review of agency regulatory proposals and worked closely with the Office of Management and Budget on selected regulatory issues PUBLIC INFORMATION The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators a publication prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the supervision of Catherine H. Furlong. The Joint Economic Committee issues the Indicators which has a distribution of approximately copies. Information is also provided to members of the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Chairman Members and staff economists of the Council ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This function is carried out through direct consultation with the President and through written memoranda and reports on economic developments and on particular programs and proposals. The Chairman exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff. He represents the Council at meetings of the full Cabinet and the various Cabinet Councils and the Trade Policy Committee COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council including direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide vari- ety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention In practice the small size of the Council permits the Chairman and Council Members to work as a team in most circumstances. There was however an informal division of subject matter among them in Mr. Jordan and subsequently Mr. Poole assumed primary responsibility for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis economic projections and monetary and financial issues. Mr. Niskanen is primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis international trade questions and regulatory issues PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of the Special Assistant to the Chairman who also acts as staff director the Senior Statistician a domestic policy economist an international policy economist senior staff economists staff economists and junior staff economists The professional staff and their special fields at the end of were : Eric I. Hemel Special Assistant to the Chairman Lawrence H. Summers Domestic Policy Economist Paul R. Krugman International Policy Economist Senior Staff Economists Lincoln F. Anderson Geoffrey O. Carliner Daniel J. Frisch David R. Henderson Thomas J. Kniesner Evan R. Kwerel Thomas S. McCaleb Stephen K. McNees Glenn L. Nelson Adrian W. Throop Robert S- Villanueva Benjamin Zycher Economic Forecasting International Trade Taxation and Social Insurance Programs Health Policy and Social Insurance Programs Labor and Employment Policy Regulatory Policies and Natural Resources Taxation and Public Finance Macroeconomic Policy Agricultural Policy Monetary Policy and Financial Regulation Current Economic Conditions Housing and Economic Forecasting Energy Policy and Regulation Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Staff Economists Lawrence B. Lindsey N. Gregory Mankiw Robert H. Meyer Taxation and Public Finance Macroeconomic Policy and Public Finance Labor and Employment Policy Junior Staff Economists Christopher B. Ballinger John H. Cochrane John S. Earle Thomas W. Gilligan David S. Reitman Dan C. Roberts World Trade and International Finance Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting Public Finance and Labor Policy Transportation and Regulatory Policy Social Insurance Programs and General Budget Policy Financial Institutions and Macroeconomic Policy Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician continued to be in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary responsibility for managing the Council 's statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of all statistical matter in the Economic Report. She also oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Barbara L. Sibel assist Mrs. Furlong Serving as consultants during the year were Stephen H. Brooks ( consultant ) Jose A. Gomez-Ibanez ( Harvard University ) and Robert A. Leone ( Harvard University ) In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial services of John Phillip Sawicki SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers provides general support for the Council 's activities. Serving in the Administrative Office were Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Patricia A. Lee Susan A. Lindsey Georgia A. O'Connor and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were Carolyn L. Bazarnick Bessie M. Lafakis Rosemary M. Rogers Margaret L. Snyder and Lillie M. Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff are in most cases on leave of absence from universities other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year and their subsequent affiliations were James B. Burnham ( The World Bank ) William D. Dobson ( Purdue University ) Michele U. Fratianni ( Indiana University ) Steven H. Hanke ( Johns Hopkins University ) Laur- ence J. Kotlikoff ( Yale University ) Michael J. McKee ( Department of the Treasury ) David C. Munro ( General Motors ) Susan C. Nelson ( Department of the Treasury ) Allen M. Parkman ( University of New Mexico ) Paul H. Rubin ( Baruch College ) and Elinor Y. Sachse ( consultant ) Junior economists who resigned in were Robert G. Murphy ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Chris P. Varvares ( Washington University St. Louis ) and F. Katharine Warne ( Yale University ) Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION C O N T E N T S NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : Page B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-l B-12 B-l3 B-14 B-15 B-I6 B-17 B-18 B-l9 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights Changes in gross national product and GNP price measures Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross national product by industry Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Relation of gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-28 B-29 B-30 B-31 B-32 Population by age groups Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Selected employment and unemployment data Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic B-S3 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration Unemployment by reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishment Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups B-55. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services B-56. Changes in special consumer price indexes B-57. Producer price indexes by stage of processing B-58. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups B-59. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups B-60. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-61. Money stock measures and liquid assets B-62. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets B-63. Commercial bank loans and investments B-64. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-65. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-66. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base B-67. Bond yields and interest rates B-68. Consumer credit outstanding and net change B-69. Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated B-49 B-50 B-51 PRICES : B-52 B-53 B-54 B-70 B-71 Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-72 B-73 B-74 B-75 B-76 B-77 B-78 B-79 B-80 B-81 Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Federal budget receipts and outlays off-budget outlays and debt fiscal years Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget fiscal years Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation Estimated ownership of public debt securities Maturity distribution average length and of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-82 B-83 B-84 B-85 B-86 B-87 B-88 B-89 B-90 B-91 B-92 B-93 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Determinants of business fixed investment Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations State and municipal and corporate securities offered Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-94 B-95 B-96 B-97 B-98 B-99 Farm income Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-100. Exchange rates B-101. U.S. international transactions B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-105. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years B-106. World trade : Exports and imports and B-107. World trade balance and current account balances and B-108. International reserves selected years B-109. Growth rates in real gross national product B-110. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B Unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Personal Gross connational sumpproduct tion expenditures Government purchases of goods and Net exports of goods services and services Gross private Federal domestic Net State Non- and invest- exports Exports Imports Total Nament local Total tional de- defense fense Percent change from preceding period l Final sales Gross nation- Final al prod- sales uct L ~ * I960... 95J " : I II Ill IV : III " IV : I II Ill IV.. 455J 'Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Total NonDurable lurabl durable Services goods goods Total Total Total " : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV " See next page for continuation of table Total Producers ' Strucdurable tures equipment 6/1.6 Change in busiProducness ers ' Farm invenstruc- durable tories tures equipment Residential Nonresidential Nonfarm structures = ~ ! ~ 3.fi = = = TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Percent change from preceding period1 Government purchases of goods and services Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total Nation- Nonal dedefense fense State and local Final sales Gross national product Final sales U.l p : I II III IV : II III IV : | III IV * = Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment l Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter I960 P : II Ill IV : | | | III IV : | | HI IV P Gross national product f'ixed investment Residential Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable Services Total goods goods Total Producers ' durStructures able equipment Total Nonfarm structures ProFarm ducers ' durstrucable tures equipment 1U.5 See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services1 Year or quarter Exports Imports Government purchases of goods and services Percent change from preceding period2 Federal Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales GNP implicit price deflator Final sales implicit price deflator p : I II III IV ioo.o : II III IV : II Ill IV P Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here. Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Year or quarter Personal conGross national sumption product expenditures Fixed investment Total Exports and imports of goods and services1 Nonresi- Residen- Exports Imports tial dential Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Percent change from ing period gross national product fixedweighted price index * 15L8 " : II III I V : I Ill IV : | Ill IV * * Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services * Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in GNP and GNP price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditure s Gross national product Period Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Chain price index Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Chain price index Fixed * weighted price index ( weights ) I960 * | | _ III IV III IV : | | III IV P : II : | Note. Changes are based on unrounded data and may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown elsewhere in these tables Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inven- Final tory change sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales lnven tory change Services Structures Auto output = = = = = = = = = ^ = = = U26.4 2/17.8 ; = = = " = 3iO78.9 = = = = = = = = = = ; | | Ill I V : | | Ill IV : | | ' Ill IV " = 2J39.4 = = = U l>05.1 = * 3ilO1.3 = 3'083 [ l39.8 = l | = l'29O7 1J313.0 = Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis " TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output U ~ 2A > IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV P : \ \ " " " ZZ III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Total Total Nonfarm1 Percent Governmen Business * Farm HouseStatis- holds and tical instidiscrep- tutions Total ancy Federal State and local Rest of the world from precedperiod gross national3 product 2.S = = = II III IV : II Ill IV... = p : : I Ill IV P Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Businessl Year or quarter Urn tea Prrxee UfOSS national product Total Total l Nonfarm1 Farm nouseStatisti- holds and rai C3I instidiscrep- tutions ancy Government2 Total Federal State and local Rest of the world Percent change from preceding period gross national product3 24J : I II Ill IV : if.'.'. " ' Ill IV : if.'. " '. ! Ill IV. Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year Manufacturing Gross FiGovernAnrirnl Ulhnlo Daet nation- AgriculTrans * ment Statisti- of the nest al ture portation wnoie- nance sale insurand fVin Cdl conand ance Services governprod- forestry Mining Dura- Nonand world struction Total retail uct and ble durable public and ment discrepfisheries goods goods utilities trade real enterancy estate prises = = = ! l = = = Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basts and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year AgriGross national culture Minforestproduct ry and ing fisheries TransFiGovern- Stapor- Whole- nance ment Rest tistation sale insur- Servand of the and ance ices govern- tical Resid- world Dura- Nonand dis- ual ' ble durable public retail and ment goods util- trade reat enter- crepancy estate ities prises Manufacturing Construction Total -lis Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry Note. -The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net domestic product Gross Hnmac domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital " Year or quarter : ll " Z ! Z ! I V : Ill nZZZ III IV : II Ill IV " consumption adjustment Domestic income Total Indirect business tax etc. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total CompenProfits Inven- Capital Net sation tory interof Profits after tax Profvalua- consump- est employ- Total Profits tion its tion ees before tax adjustUndistax liabili- Total Divi- tributed adjust- ment ment dends profits ty B.B = -'.Z = = = = = = = = ' = = = = = = = = = = = = " = = = 56J Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis = = = = = = = = TABLE B-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Gross domestic Year or quarter nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total cost and profit2 Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc. Compensation of employees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Net interest Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax Output per hour of all employees ( dollars ) Compensation per hour of all employees ( dollars ) 23L6 Oil * l>15.0 : II Ill IV : II III IV : \ \ ZZZZ Ill Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Furniture and Motor vehicles household and parts equipment Nondurable goods Other Food Clothing and shoes L L I960 L ? p : I til I V : II III I V : II III IV P See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goods-cont 'd Year or quarter Gasoline and oil Fuel oil and coal Services Household operation Other Housing Total Electricity and gas Other Transportation Other Total Medical care I960 p : | II M l IV : II III IV : II Ill IV Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in Fixed investment Gross private domestic investment Year or quarter Nonresidential Total Total Residential Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm structures inventories Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm ~ = = = = = " = = = = = = = = = = : ( | | II I IV ! = = : | | II I IV : I II III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] fIquals : Net private domestic investment Less : conGross sumption private allowdomesances tic with invest- capital ment consumption adjustment Year fYet fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total Structures Total Change Residential Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment business inventories _9 _ l _ p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -.0o \ '.2 A A '.6 A TABLE B-17. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Honfarm Year and quarter Fourth quarter : Total Farm Total Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Final sales Retail trade Inventory final sales ratio Total Other Nonfarm I960 p 127J III IV : | | | IV P : II Ill IV : I End of quarter Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories ' Year and quarter Fourth quarter : ftonfarm Total Farm Total Manu- Wholesate facturing trade Retail trade Final sales Other Inventory final sales ratio Total Nonfarm3 p : I M IV : N HI IV : It Ill IV End of quarter Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms NOte. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification { SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy PIUS : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Equals : National income = * 2J39.4 IV : I II Ill IV " 3J01.3 195S p Ill IV = = = = = = = = = = = = : It III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis : II = [ TABLE B-20. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter National income Plus : Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Net interest Contributions for social insurance P GovernWage ment accruals transfer less disburse- payments to ments persons Equals : Personal Personal Business interest dividend transfer income income payments Personal income : \ \ ZZ III IV : III IV : I II Ill IV " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Year or quarter National income1 Total Wages and salaries Supplements to wages and salaries Nonfarm Farm Total Total Proprietors ' income3 Capital consumption adjustment Total Proprietors ' Income4 Inven- Capital tory consumpvaluation tion adjustadjustment ment = = = = = = = I960 = = = P = = = = n'i n.i = = = = = = = = l ! = .'5 = .'6 = = = = = o o = = : | | Ill IV : II Ill IV : Ill IV -A National income is the total net income earned in production ft differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workmen 's compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-21. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Capital Rental conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Total Profits after tax Total Profits Profits tax before taxes liability Total Divi- Undisdends tributed profits Inventory valuation adjustment Capital Net consumption interest adjustment U I960 * .'.'. " ~ \ ..v " II Ill ( V 244.C : I | | Ill IV * : | | III IV : With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. ~ $ ourees of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements1 Personal income Year or quarter Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Government and Service indus- government tries enterprises Other labor income1 Proprietors ' income with in valuati sn and cap tal consurnption adjust mpntc Farm Nonfarm 2,'5 " : I II H I IV ] lO9.6 : | | III IV : | | III IV P * ^ 101J The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Tabfe in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-22. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental Transfer payments of persons Personal Personal with Year or quarter capital dividend interest income income consumption adjustment Total Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployVeterans and ployment ee health insur- benefits retireinsurance ment ance benefits benefits benefits Aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) Other Less : Personal contribu- Nonfarm tions for personal income2 social insurance I960 ' : I | | HI IV 2.216.C : II Ill IV : | | | Ill IV P 'A A Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and farm net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-23. Disposition ofpersonal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable personal incor Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Equals : Less : Personal Dispostax and able nontax personal payments income Total Personal Personal Interest transfer Equals : paid by Personal conpaysaving sumption consum- ments expendi- ers to to busitures forness eigners ( net ) Personal outlays Total Personal Consump- Personal saving tion expenditures = J ....'.'.....'. * * I960 U.I p : I It HI IV : | | | HI IV : | | III \ M P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ij TABLE B-24. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) l I960... " : I II III IV : I II Ill... IV : I i ! Z Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are average for the period. Data beginning reflect results of the census of population Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-25. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross investment Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter p : | | | III IV : ( I Ill IV : I | | Ill IV P Total Total Gross Personal business saving saving ' Governrnent surplus or and Total Capita ) ) national income grants received pr 3duct accounts by the united State States and Federal ( net ) tocal = = = = = = = Total = StatisGross Net tical private foreign discrepdomestic investancy investment * ment = = = = = = = \ A = = = = = = = = -l ! = = = " ? = = = = = = = = = = = = g = = = = = ZZZ l.'l = = = = Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-26. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net investment7 Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Checkable deposTotal its and currency Time and savings deposits Securities Money market fund shares Government securities _ _ = ^ V \ Ill I V : II. Ill I V II. Ill Consumer durables : Owneroccupied homes : I Insur- Other ance Cor- Other and finanporate securi- pension cial as- equireties ties * serves5 sets Less : tJet increase in debt Non- Mortcor- gage porate debt Conbusi- on sumer Other8 ness non- credit debt8 as- farm sets homes R9 VO ? fi ? ? ? ? ? 9fi ? ? n n ? 9fi fi.6 SIR Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Corporate and foreign bonds and open market paper s Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-27. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years Persons below poverty level Families > Below poverty level Year Number ( millions ) Total Median income hpr Del ALL RACES * WHITE * BLACK * M ales Ferr ales Female householder Num ( millions ) Median income of persons years old and over with income * Rate Number ( millions ) Number Rate /mil Rate lions ) All persons Yearround full-time workers YearAll round fullper- time sons workers $ $ $ ( The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Beginning data are for persons years and over 'Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years * Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P No. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-28. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July l Total Under and over ; Not available Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-29- Noninstitutional population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force participation rate Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Armed Forces l Unemployment ment rate ( percent of civilian labor Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural force ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Total Males Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over I960 2t449 See next page for continuation of table Females TABLE B-29. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Armed Forcesl Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Unemployment rate ( percent of civilian labor force ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian labor force participation rate Total Males Females Percent : Jan Feb Mar Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Jan Feb Mar Apr May June My Aug Sept Oct May " .'. " .'. ' " " " .' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Nov Dec : Nov Dec Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population ana about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-29 through B-35 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th Of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historic comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-30. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total years 1953K. I960 >.. : Jan Feb Mar... May... June.. July... Aug... fSz Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb Mar... fc Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years and over 2>14 ^ : ! $ June.. July... Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec. See footnote Table B-29 Note. See Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics L086 TABLE B-31. Selected employment and unemployment data [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment as percent of population1 Unemployment rate2 By sex and age Year or month Both Males sexes Total years and years over " " Females years and over White Black and other All workers By selected groups Males years and over Females years and over ! Married men spouse present ^ : Jan.... Feb.... Mar... June.. : Jan.... Feb.... Mar... May ! " June.. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Women who maintain families Both sexes years Experienced wage and salary workers 5'.4 Fulltime workers * Bluecollar workers Civilian employment as percent of total noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March * Data for are for May Includes craft and kindred workers operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October Note Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other White All civilian work- Total Total ers Year or month years Males Females Males years Total and over years years Total Total and over years Females years and Total over years years and over S 4ft fi I960 % \ : Jan Feb Mar Apr ! & : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar ft June : * : " Auc Sept <3 : Nov Dec S1fi Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total Total ers Black and other years years Total and over years Females Males Females Males years Total Total and over years years Total and over I960 years and over = years fi9 : Jan Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept o5 : Nov Dec ? ? ? fi ? ? 11S * ) Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics 1fi8 lfi ? Ififi ? ? ? ? ? TABLE B-34. Unemployment by duration [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total unemployment Duration of unemployment Less than weeks weeks = weeks weeks and over Thousands of persons years of age and over 1>56 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Ocl Nov Dec : : Jan Feb Mar fc June July Aug It. : : : Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. = See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Unemployment by reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Year or month Total unemployment Job losers Job leavers Reentrants New entrants Thousands of persons : Jan. Feb. Mar. May " June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Percent of civilian tabor force Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLB B-36. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered employment State programs Insured Total unemploy- benefits Insured paid ment unem ( millions ployment ( weekly of average ) dollars ) * flfay " June. July.. Aug.. Nov Dec : Jan, Feb. Mar. fc June. July Aug Sept Ocf Nov Dec Exhaustions Weekly average ; thousands Thousands >.. : Jan Feb Mar... Initial claims Benefits paid Insured unemployment as percent Average Total of ( millions weekly covered check of employ- dollars ) * ( dollars ) s ment * * " * * " Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) 'Includes State. UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SLlA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal supplemental compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts * Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July H Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-37. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing I Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade finance insurance and real estate Services Construction * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fc : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Dec " Government Federal State and locaf Note. Data in Tables B-37 through B-39 are baser ! on reports from employing establishments and relate to full * and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data { Tables B-29 through B-35 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagrieultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultura ! Wholesale and retail trade Index ^ Percent change Year or month Total private nonagricultural > Manufacturing Construction Wholesale and retail trade Total private nonagricultural x " : Jan Feb Mar $ $ $ $ tz June... July Aug Nov. " ! .'. ' Dec : Jan Feb Mar May'. " " June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov.. Dec " ManufacConturing struction Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-37 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry from a year earlier4 Current Current dollars dollars dollars employment shifts Current-dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places and are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-39. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average gross weekly earnings Total private nonagricultural * Manufacturing ( current dollars ) Construction ( current dollars ) $ $ $ $ Year or month Current dollars p : $ Jan Fb e Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ; '. Z II. July Aug Sept oct Nov Dec Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural3 Wholesale and retail trade ( current dollars ) : dollars2 Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-37 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index on a = base Based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Current dollars dollars __ U = = = TABLE B-40. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Hours of 2all persons Output1 Compensation per Real compensation per hour hour Unit labor cost Implicit price deflator * Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector ness sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector ness sector Nonfarm business sector : I I I Il l IV 9C.2 Business sector Nonfarm business sector ness sector ness sector Nonfarm business sector : II.'. " " Ill IV : I Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries ana supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-41. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour o1 all persons Year sector Konfarm business sector Hours of all Output sector Nonfarm lusirtess sector sector Compensation per Nonfarm business sector sector Nofifarm business sector Real compensation per hour * sector Unit labor cost Nonfarm business Implicit price deflator ^ Nonfarm Nonfarm business Business business sector sector sector = P : I in " '. " '.'. " ; ; ; ; iV : i ti nt iv : II Ill IV Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed * Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Data relate to all persons engaged in the sector. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-40 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-42. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Total industrial production Total Durable Nondurable * : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June... July Am ; Sept " Year or month proportion mZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug sept Oct Nov " Dec " : : : : : : : : : : : : Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System N Min ing iitili ties TABLE B-43- Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods Total Total Total Business Total Durable goods Nondurable goods P : Jan Fb e Ar p My a Mar June ' " : Jan Fb e Mar Apr : : : July Aug Sept oc ? : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Deep Home goods Intermediate products STay Equipment June Materials3 proportion July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Automotive products 149J Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes defense and space equipment not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Z'.'Z TABLE B-44. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ ; ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total proportion I960 p : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Auc Sept Oct.. ; ; : : : : : Nov " Dec * Iron and steel Fabricated metal products NonElectrieleccal trical machinmachinery ery Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Motor Total Ve arfd eS parts Chemicals and products Foods Source. * Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Lumber Apparel Printing and and prod- publishproducts ing ucts TABLE B-45. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Commerce series FRB series > Year or quarter Total manufacturing Primary processing Advanced processing I960 " : j II III IV : | | III I V : HI IV : I HI IV : II III IV p Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Primary- Advancedprocessed processed goods goods For description of the series see " Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization " February Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B-46. Neiv construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction1 Residential buildings ' Total Total Total2 housing units Total Commercial Industrial Federal State and local5 Other * 2S New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-46. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings1 Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction > New Total housing units Total Commercial Industrial Total Other * Federal State and local : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr.. May.. June.. July... Aug.. Sept.. Oct Nov Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-47. New bousing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized2 New housing units started Private and public Year or month Total ( farm and Nonfarm nonfarm ) Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Type of structure Type of structure Total unit to units Total unit units or more to units units or more " Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P.... Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for = ; in places for ; and in places prior to < Not available separately beginning January Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-48. Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Plant and equipment Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Plant Nonmanufacturing Pnuin tquipment Total DuraNonble durable goods goods I960 19S2 I I I IV Mining Transpor- Public utilitation ties Trade and services1 Communication and other2 : | | Total : I I III : Is3 II Wholesale and retail trade ; finance insurance and real estate ; and personal business and professional services " Other " consists of construction ; social services and membership organizations ; and forestry fisheries and agricultural services Planned capital expenditures reported by business in late October-December corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-49. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Year or month Sales1 Inventories * Ratio3 Manufacturing Sales1 Inventories Merchant wholesalers Ratio3 Sales1 Inven3 tories Ratio Retail trade Sales1 Inventories : Jan. Feb. Mar. ftay.. June... July Aug Sept Ocf Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... June.. July. Aug. Sfc Nov.. Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio * of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-50. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Year or month Total Durable goods industries Inventories2 Nondurable industries Durable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies Work in proc- Nondurable goods industries Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods : Jan Feb Mar May ! ! " ! June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov.. May ! ' " ! June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-51. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders1 Unfitted orders shipments ratio Unfilled orders ' Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries tries nondefense May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. fc June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov : Jan... Feb... Mar.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total Total Durable goods industries Monthly average for Seasonally adjusted year and total for month end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-52. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ ^ ] Year or month I960 ! : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv 1Z AugilZZ Sept Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Nov Dec All items Housing Food and beverages Total * Food Total Other Apparel TransEnterRent Home Fuel and and portation Medical tainment goods care and resi- owner- other upkeep services dential ship utilities3 Energy4 Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately * Includes other items not shown separately. Series beginning not comparable with series for earlier years Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and other utilities and public services Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel motor oil coolant etc Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ ] Fuel and other utilities Homeownersliip Food and beverage > Household fuels Food Year or month Total1 Total ; Jan Feb Mar At home Away from home Total Home purchase Financing taxes and insurance Maintenance and repair Fuel Total Total coal and bottled gas Other utilities Gas ( piped ) and public and servelecices tricity Dc e : Jan Feb Mar Apr &. : : Jn ue July Auc Sept Oct Nov.... Dec t : : : June July Aug S5v : : : : N o lll.G See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = ] Transportation Medical car Private transportation Year or month Total Total : Jan Feb Mr a Ar o mr July As u Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Fb e Mar Apr NBW June July Auo Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e : Motor fuel ^ Automobile maintenance and repair * ( ) Used cars jur&iir : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : New cars Other Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-54. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ ] Services Commodities Special indexes All items less energy All items less food and energy Energy Commodities less food Year or month All items All commodities Food All All Nonservices Durable durable Rent Services less rent All items less food I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov D C fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel motor oil coolant etc Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-55. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] Commodities Alt items Year or month Dec to Dec.1 I960. Total Year to year Dec to Dec.1 _.4 o Food Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year = Services Commodities less food Dec to Dec ~ Year to year _ Dec to Dec.1 \ A2 Energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally justed ad- justed adjusted adjusted ad- justed adjusted adjusted justed justed justed justed Justed : Jan Feb Mr a Ar D IvTay June July Aus Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Ar p My a June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ ! o ~ \ o A A -is '.3 ~ X A \ \ .e = ! o ! Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel motor oil coolant etc Note Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items Year or month Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy All items less food Year to Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to Year Year to Year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food and energy Dec to Dec.1 Year to Year All iterns less food,<Jnergy and home purcha seand fina ice Dec to Dec.1 Year to Year All items Dec to Dec.1 Year to Year Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Change from preceding month ; Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug... : : : : : : : : : : : : Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr ( Jay.. : June July Aug Sept Oct Dec s .'3 = = * = Unadjusted Seasonally justed = Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted .'9 = Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes All items less food energy and home purchase and financing taxes and insurance ; estimated series An experimental measure using a rental equivalence approach for homeownership costs. Effective with data for January the consumer price index for all urban consumers will incorporate a rental equivalence measure Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Sect Oct Nov Dec : > Jan Feb Mar Apr May June I960 * : Jan Feb Mr a Ar o Sri : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : : : : ; : : : June July : : : : : : : : July " Aug..... Ot c Nv o Dec Total Durable Capital Non- equipment durable finished consumer goods See next page for continuation of table Total nil TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds3 Materials and components Other firolc For manufacturing Crude materials for further processing Processed For construction and lubricants tainers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other I960 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ; ; : : : ; : : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : l 73B.4 C83.9 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June : : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : July Sent Oct Nov Dec Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication * Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-58. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Excluding food and energy Year or month Total Food Energy Total Consumer Capi- goods tal equip- excluded ment and energy Crude materials for fur ther processing Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : ? 4fi ? ? % ! ? : Jan Feb : Jan Feb. Mr a Apr h June July Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : : ? m ? 30fi Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source-. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-59. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total I960 : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr May June July Aug Oct Nov Dec : * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products * See next page for continuation of table Industrial commodities TABLE B-59. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment Lumber and wood products Year or month Rubber and plastic products I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr IVfay Jun'e July Aiig Seot Ocit Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Oct Nov Dec : Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Miscellaneous products Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Total finished goods Finished consumer foods Dec to Dec. I960 Consumer goods Total Year or month Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year = = = = = = = = = = Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Oec to Dec. Dec to Dec.1 Year to year = Year to year : i i _ l Cap tal equip ment Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Finished goods excluding food and energy Dec to Dec. Year to year Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Season- Unadjusted A June July Sept Oct o Dec : : : : : : : : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May ' : : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug sept ' : : : : Oct Nov Dec o _ To -ll Unadjusted = = = -Is Season- Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted = = = -lo : .i Season- justed justed justed justed : Jan Feb Mar Season- _ i J llo > = = S.8 = = = = = -ill -'.7 ill .'3 = Is A Is Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Oata7iave been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics z MONEY STOCK CREDIT A N D FINANCE TABLE B-61. Money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M2 Ml Sum of currency demand Year and month deposits travelers ' checks and other checkable deposits <OCD ) * M3 M l plus overnight RPs and Eurodollars MMMF balances ( genera ! purpose and broker/ dealer ) and savings and smalltime deposits2 Percent change from year or months earlier NI2 plus large time deposits term RPs and institution-only MMMF balances M3 plus other liquid assets M2 Ml M3 December : " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept : May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Net of demand deposits due to foreign commercial banks and official institutions M2 will differ from the sum of components shown in Table by a consolidation adjustment that represents the estimated amount of demand deposits and vault cash held by thrift institutions to service time and savings deposits Monthly percent changes are from months earlier at a compound annual rate Note. See Table B-62 for components except travelers checks not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-62 Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Currency Period Demand deposits Other checkable deposits Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) ( net ) NSA December : Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances Small OverSav- denomGennight ings ination eral Eurotime depurdollars pose Insti- posits deposits and tution bro- only ker/ dealer NSA NSA NSA ! c f ) ? ? K SO ? n n o WI Vift " ? ? ? ? o n n n o o i o i ? ? ? o NSA o o o ? n o ? S9 n * tl7 6S8 7S ? % n ? ? ? Apr May June ? Juty Aug I ? * ) ) ? : Jan Feb Mar Apr Mv a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a i Nov Dec " no W ? Wfi ? Commercial paper Shortterm BankTreas- ers ' ury acceptsecu- ances rities NSA Term Euro- Savdollars ings ( net ) bonds W fi ? Term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) I960 Large denomination time deposits n ? W3 VH 'Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic banks the U.S. Government and foreign banks and official institutions less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Travelers checks are a component of money stock but are not shown here See also Table B-61 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Year and month End of month > Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Total loans and investments Loans Total Investments Commercial and industrial US Treasury securities Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusted Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec I960- Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Average for month Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec : Jan Feb Mr a June Julv AUg Sept Oct Nov Dec Data are for December call dates Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of current and previous month-end data for foreign-related institutions. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Note Beginning December levels have been reduced because of shifts from U.S. banking offices to International Banking Facilities <IB ? s ) Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-64 Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors U.S. Government Foreign 3R9 Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Debt instruments = = Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Corporate equities Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinanciai business Equities Total funds supplied to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Corporate equities Foreign funds At banks Credit and equity instruments U.S. Government-related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources. See next page for continuation of table = -4J = TABLE B-64. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item I Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors II III I V I State and local government obligations... Corporate bonds Mortgages Home Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Debt capital instruments Debt instruments Corporate equities Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Foreign U.S. Government Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Equities Total funds supplied to nonfinancial sectors Financed directly or indirectly by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments At banks Credit and equity instruments U.S. Government-related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Foreign funds Corporate equities Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-65. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves1 Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month : Dec : Dec : Dec Total U.S Government and Federal agency securities Member bank borrowings Total Other Total Required Seasonal * : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec... : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec.. I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Jan. Feb.. Mar. fc June. July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec P... Beginning December part of currency and cash held by member banks allowed as reserves ; beginning November all such currency and cash allowed Beginning November includes reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period In connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Transition period ended after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Data are for licensed banks only Includes all reserve balances of depository institutions plus vault cash at institutions with required reserve balances plus vault cash equal to required reserves at other institutions Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks plus vault cash used to satisfy reserve requirements less required reserves. ( This measure of excess reserves is comparable to the old excess reserves concept published historically. ) Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-66. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base J959-82 [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements ' Seasonally adjusted Year and month Reserves of depository institutions Total * Nonborrowed Required Not seasonally adjusted Monetary base Reserves of depository institutions Total2 Nonborrowed Required Monetary base3 I9601961196219631964- Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : ig6719681969- Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * Dec Dec Dec * Dec Dec * Dec Dec " Dec : Jan Feb Mar Mv a June July SeDt Oct Nv o Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Auc SeDt Oct Nov 0ec p Reserve aggregates include required reserves of member banks and Edge Act corporations and other depository institutions Discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act the inclusion of Edge Act corporation reserves and other changes in Regulation D have been removed. Beginning with the week ended December reserves aggregates have been reduced by shifts of resemble liabilities to international banking facilities ( IBFS ) On the basis of reports of liabilities transferred to IBFS by U.S. commercial banks and U.S. agencies and branches OT foreign banks it is estimated that required reserves were lowered on average by $ to $ million in December and $ to $ million in January Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks ( which exclude required clearing balances ) plus vault cash at institutions with required reserve balances plus vault cash equal to required reserves at other institutions Includes reserve balances and required clearing balances at Federal Reserve Banks in the current week plus vault cash held two weeks earlier used to satisfy reserve requirements at all depository institutions plus currency outside the U.S. Treasury Federal Reserve Banks the vaults of depository institutions and surplus vault cash at depository institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-67. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Treasury securities Year or month Constant maturities ( new Aaa 3-month 6-month years Baa years Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Prime commercial Prime rate charged by banks * months Discount rate Federal Bank of New York * Federal funds rate * ZM M.00 See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-67 Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year or month Bills ( new issues ) Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Constant maturities2 Aaa 3-month 6-month years Baa years Highgrade Prime Newmunicicomhome pal mercial bonds mortgage paper views ( Stand3 ard& ( FHLBB ) months Poor 's ) Prime rate charged by banks ( high-low ) Discount rate Federal Federal Reserve funds Bank of rate New York ( high-low ) * : Jan Feb Mar Apr. ; ; ; ; May.... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec June tzz : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... Ape May,.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department 'Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the8 one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Beginning November data are for 6-months paper Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-68. Consumer credit outstanding and net change [ Millions of dollars ] Net change from preceding period Amount outstanding ( end of month ) Year and month Installment credit l Total Total Automobile Revolving Mobile home Other Noninstallment credit Total Total 16,79a I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec.. Dec : Dec : Dec Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar... Noninstallment credit4 Automobile Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Installment credit s % ~ June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Installment credit covers most short * and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded a Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in other. Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series on noninstallment credit is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends o For installment credit computed as the difference between extensions and liquidations ( both seasonally adjusted ) ; see also Table B-69. For noninstallment credit computed as the change from one month to another in the seasonally adjusted amount outstanding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-69. Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total Year or month Extended Automobile Liquidated Extended Revolving * Liquidated Extended Liquidated Mobile home Extended Liquidated Other Extended Liquidated : Jan.. Feb. Mar. fe June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies 2nd commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in ''other/ ' Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Note. Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Liquidated credit includes repayments chargeoffs 2nd other credit See also Table Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-70. Mortgage debt outstanding by type ofproperty and offinancing,1939-82 [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional3 Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family proper- properhouses ties ties to 4-family houses Total Total VA FA H guarinsured anteed Total to 4family houses B2.S : I II Ill IV : | II " I III IV I : in " " ! ! ! ; Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-71- Mortgage debt outstanding by bolder [ Billions of dollars ] Other holders Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banks i Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others f40.3 : I | | Ill IV : I II Ill IV 10O.O : | | HI Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. A ! so includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-72. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual ^ Description Transition quarter BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interf und transactions Total surplus or deficit ( ) = = = = = = = = = = = = = Federal funds Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System AH other BUDGET OUTLAYS Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation.. Community and regional development. Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts = ^ Composition of undistributed offsettine receipts : Employer share employee retirement Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf = = = National defense International affairs General science space and technol ogy Energy See next page for continuation of table MS = TABLE B-72. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Estimates Interf und transactions... Total surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions. Total outlays. Federal funds Trust funds Federal funds.. Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other BUDGET RECEIPTS.. Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System Allother BUDGET OUTLAYS. National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy \ Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The period July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-73. Federal budget receipts and outlays off-budget outlays and debt,fiscalyears [ Billions of dollars ] Budget Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or Off-budget outlays deficit ( -> Budget and offbudget surplus or deficit ( -> Gross Feder.il debt ( end ofpe rlnA \ Total Held by the public U6.9 = * = = = = I960 = 196B = = Transition quarter. = = = = = * * = = Not strictly comparable with later data * Estimates Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-74. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Total budget receipts... Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Geographic exclusions Other EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases. Geographic exclusions Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures. Note.-See Note Table B-73 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-75. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures State and local government Federal Government national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts = = = = = = = = = = = = = = l.C = = = I960 = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = p = = = = = = = : Ill I V : | | III I V : | | Ill IV ' * = = m = = = = = = = = = .C = Note. Federaf grants-fn-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-76. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal year : Calendar year : I960 p : II III I V : I Ill IVP Total Z Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate tax and profits tax and for Total1 nontax tax nontax social receipts accruals accruals insurance Transfer payments Grantsin-aid to PurState chases and of goods To To foreign- local and governservices persons ers ments Net interest paid Subsi- Surplus or dies deficit less current national surplus income of and govern- product ment accounts enterprises ? ? = ? SO in ? Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with -fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-77. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Expenditures Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-innontax social tax aid nontax receipts accruals accruals insurance Total Purchases of goods and services Subsidies Trans- Net less fer interest current paypaid surplus ments less of to diviper- dends governsons received ment enter- prises * : I | | III ; : IV : ii ; " ; * ; * IILZI : ; iv : It IllIncludes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis IV * = = = = = ^ = = = = = not shown separately TABLE B-78. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General expenditures by function General revenues by source2 Fiscal year l Total Sales and Individu- Corpo- Revenue ration from All Property gross net Federal taxes remcome income Govern- other ceipts taxes ment taxes taxes Total Education Highways Public welfare Alt other4 * 1964-65S. * " 1974-75s. s. 1978-79s5. 1980-81s. Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-79. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Fiscal year : ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept... Oti Nov Dec Total interestbearing public debt securities Marketable Total * Treasury Treasury notes Treasury bonds ' Total U.S savings bonds Foreign government and public2 series Government account series Other * Nonmarketable Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-80. Estimated ownership ofpublic debt securities [ Par values ; ' billions of dollars ] 'ublic debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month Total2 Held by Held by Govern- Federal ment Reserve accounts Banks Total3 Mutual savings banks Comand mercial insur- Corporations6 banks ance companies State and local governments6 Individuals Miscellaneous investors Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept July Aug sept Oct Nov Dec : : : : ; ; U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value As of July public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the data in this table For comparability with published data published data for have been adjusted to exclude notes of the International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in each year through These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department of Treasury. The Treasury Survey of Ownership on which private investor group estimates were based was discontinued in July the Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certajn government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-81. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Years Months Fiscal year : May " ! ! " ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-82. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability * II Ill ( V til j | | Year or quarter : : IV : t | | Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments TABLE B-83. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Nonfinancial Financial > Total Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Total " HI IV : | | Ill IV = Other Kesi of the world n ot Wholesafe and retail trade Manufacturing2 Transportation and public utilities : II 2Q.B : | | | Ill Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts ' See Table B-84 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-84. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Primary metal industries Total Nondurable goods Fabri- Machin- Electric Motor and ery cated elec- vehicles and metal except tronic prod- electri- equip- equipment cal ucts ment Other Food Chemi- Petroleum cals and and and kindred allied coal prod- prod- products ucts ucts Total " Other : | | III I V : II H I I V : I tl M l o Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-85. Sates profits and stockholders1 equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter : IV New series : : IV Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes taxes Stockholders ' equity * Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes ' taxes Nondurable goods industries Stockholders ' equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes> taxes Stockholders ' equity " : I I I III... IV... : I I I IV : n'Z ! Ill IV : " Z In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Federal Trade Commission Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-86. Relation ofprofits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent * Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries At ! manufacturing corporations Durable Roods industries Nondurable " goods industries 1U IV New series : : IV I960 : | HI IV : I II HI IV : | | Ill IV : | | III Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-85 Source : Federal Trade Commission TABLE B-87. Relation ofprofits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations by industry group Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percentl Industry All manufacturing corporations... Durable goods industries Stone cfay and glass products Primary metal industries Iron and steel Nonferrous metals Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical Electrical and electronic equipment,.,,...,.... Transportation equipment1 Motor vehicles and equipment Aircraft guided missiles and parts Instruments and related products.. Other durable manufacturing products Nondurable goods industries Food and kindred products. Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products * Industrial chemicals and synthetics Drugs Petroleum and coal products Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products Other nondurable manufacturing products U.6 L8 U.6 U.6 U.3 U.6 Ratios based on equity at end of quarter * Includes other industries not shown separately Source : Federal Trade Commission Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents TABLE B-88. Determinants of businessfixedinvestment [ Percent except as noted ] Nonfmancial corporations Real investment as percent of real GNP manufacturing Cash flow as percent of GNP2 * <fl ) Year ity utilization Rate of r eturn on depreciab e assets Before tax After tax Rate of return on stockholders ' equity * Before tax After tax ( ) Ratio of market value to ment cost of net assets Federal Reserve Board index Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capitaj consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment Profits plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost Profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth ( physical capital component valued at current replacement cost ) Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets Not available Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-89. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses External Year or quarter Discrep- Credit market funds Total Internal ' Total Total Securities and mortgages Loans and shortterm Other Total Capita ) expenditures ancy Increase ( sources in financial less uses ) assets = ^ = 2M 30J ! ) : \ \ 'Z Ill IV : I II Ill IV : H'Z Ill * Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad Consists of tax liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-9Q. ~ Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current liabilities Current assets End of year or quarter Total Cash1 U.S Government securities2 Notes Other and accounts Inven- current receiv- tories assets able Total Net Notes Other Current and current working ratio3 capital accounts liabilpayable ities All corporation s * SEC series : I960 Nonfinancial corporations6 SEC series : FTC-FRB series : : It Ill I V : It Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federat agency issues Total current assets divided by total current liabilities Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Based on data from 'Statistics of Income " Department of the Treasury Excludes banks savings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Based on data from " Quarterly financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " July for details regarding the series Note. SEC series not available after Sources : Board of Governors of the federat Reserve System Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-91. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered Total for cash corporate ( princi- offerings pal amounts ) Corporate securities offered for cash Type of corporate security stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes ; First quarters : II... III.. IV.. : II.. III. Industry of corporate issuer Manufacturing l Electric gas and water Transportation Communication Other Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts ovsr $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company Issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-92. Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( percent ) Common stock prices1 New York Stock Exchange indexes ( De ; = ) Year or month Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Dow Jones industrial average3 Standard & Poor 's composite index ( = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio Apr. May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec < June : : : : : : : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mr a : Jan Feb Mar Aor Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-93. Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) business incorporations ( number ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over L3.499 Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over 10O.7 L5.006 L1.340 1929s " Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rate Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar.. & July.. Aug.. Sept Oct.. Nov.. Dec : < Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. fc June July.. Aug.. Sept Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Not available Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE T A B L E B-94. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from arming Gross farm income Year or quarter Net farm income Cash marketing receipts Total1 Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes " Production expenses Current dollars dollars3 " ~ .s IV II Ill IV : | | Ill : | | | H I IV J Cash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-95. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Productivity indicators Farm output Crops Year Total * Total8 Feed grains Farm output per hour of r .m Food grains Oil crops Livestock and products * rarm output per unit of total Input Crop production per acre * Id ) WVIP Total Crops Livestock and products I960... " Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-96. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April Year Number ( thousands ) Farm employment ( thousands ) As percent of total popu-2 lation Total Family workers Hired workers Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) * Total Farm labor Feed Meseed Farm chanical cultural and power real liveand estate machin- chemistock cals purery chases8 I960. 4f523 '6,194 '2.8 " '6,051 '5,790 '2.9 '2.7 '2.5 'Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-31 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides s Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases 'Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and and respectively Previous basis for farm employment series has been discontinued. Employment after is estimated Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources.- Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-97. Indexes ofprices received and prices paid by farmers [ ] Prices paid by farmers Prices received by farmers Year or month I960 " : Jan Fb e All farm products Apr May...... : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept oct Nov I. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ; Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr | y June : : : : : : : : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Total2 Tractors and selfpropelled machinery Fertilizer Fuels and energy Wage rates Mr a Livestock and products Production items Crops All commodities services interest taxes and wage ratesl Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre3 Includes items used for family living not shown separately * Includes other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through for February for through and for April for Monthly data are for first of month Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-98. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] mports Exports Year Total Feed Food grains grains Oilseeds and products t * ( * ( 'l '.5 ( Cotton Tobacco n Animals and products Crops fruits Total * and vegetabfes3 Coffee ( Animals and products I A ! Cocoa beans and products ! '.3 [ B A J '.2 ^ '.2 '6 '.& Ki '.3 Agricultura trade balance '.B '.B Jan-Nov : I960. _ Total includes items not shown Rice wheat and wheat flour l.Q '.B ( ) separately Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Hess than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-99. Balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Other physical assets Beginning of year Total Household DeposInvestLive- MachinReal U.S its estate stock ery and Cropss equipment and savings ments in motor and cur- bonds cooperatives vehicles furnish- rency ings Financial assets Total Real estate debt Other debt Proprietors ' equities : * Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new .farm definition that is places with sates of $ or more annually Forecast Note. Beginning I960 data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-100. Exchange rates [ Cents per unit of foreign currency except as noted ] Year and month Belgian franc Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen March : I II. Ill IV : II Ill IV Netherlands guilder Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real1 March 23.W9 12O.0 : II Iff IV : fl Ill ( V Adjusted by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-101. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( } ] Merchandise12 Year or quarter Exports Imports Investment income3 Net Receipts Payments Net Net travel Other Balance Net serv- on goods and military and transac- transpor- ices tation net a services * A tions receipts Remittances Balance on pensions current and other ac-l unilateral transfers ' count * ^ ^ = ^ = = = = = = = = = = = I960. = = = = = = = = = = = = = : I IV : I IV = = = = = = = = = = : II * Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing o Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts ( and the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts ) although the series differ because of different handling of certain items ( gold extraordinary military shipments etc. ) revisions etc Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-101. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow < ) ] Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Statistical discrepancy Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy U.S private assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Other U.S Government assets Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] -3>43 * " : II III IV : II Ill IV : II | | | p e = Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( ItVlrJ Note. Quarterly data for U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-102 U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonpetroleurr Nonagricultural Year or quarter Total Agricultural Total Total Capital goods except automotive Other goods Petroleum and products Total Industrial supplies and materials Other goods : | | Ill I V : | | | III IV : I II | [ | P Note,- Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysts TABLE B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Item Exports first quarters at annual rate * Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Industrial countries Other countries Eastern Europe OPEC3 Other except Eastern Europe Imports '175,813 * '211,819 Industrial countries.. Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Other countries except Eastern Europe.. OPEC Other'.. Eastern Europe.. Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Trade with international organizations is included in totals for but not in area detail. This includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund in ; an export of tin to International Tin Council ( ITC ) in ; and an import of tin from ITC in Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise exports1 Year or month Total domestic and foreign Total exports3 Merchandise imports Domestic exports Food Crude Crude ManuManu materi- factured Total bever- materi- factured ages als and and and als and goods fuels fuels * goods tobacco tobacco Food F.a.s. value I960. Merchandise trade balance General imports " Total elf value7 Exports Exports Exports less less less imports imports imports customs f.a.s elf value Customs value F.a.s. value * * * * * * = = Customs value : Jan Feb Mar... June. July.. Aug., Sept. oeS Nov.. Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar.. tp June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Ocl Nov.. Dec... ^ = = = = = = = = = = = Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments through and exclude them thereafter Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. { cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the US. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data for and include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands except that for Virgin Islands exports are reflected only in the figures for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports and trade balance * Data for = for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports total general imports and trade balance Include trade of the Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration Office of Trade Investment and Analysis Trade Performance Division ) TABLE B-105. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States. U.S. assets abroad U.S. official reserve assets. Gold Special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Foreign currency reserves Other U.S. Government assets. U.S. loans and other long-term assets U.S. short-term assets other than reserves U.S. private assets Direct investments abroad ( book value ) Foreign securities Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks Foreign assets in the United StatesForeign official assets U.S. Government securities l Other U.S. Government liabilities Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other official assets Other foreign assets Direct investments in the United States ( book value ) Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere U.S. Treasury securities Other U.S. securities2 Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-106. World trade : Exports and imports and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Developed countries' United States Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom.. Area and country l Exports f.o.b. * Oil exporting countries8 Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe... China TOTAL.. Other developed countries. Developing countries Imports c.i.f Developed countries3. United States. Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries. Developing countries Oil exporting countries8 Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL. $ Preliminary estimates Free-cn-board ship value Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea. Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately 'Cost insurance and freight value ; except Eastern Europe ( except Hungary ) and U.S.S.R. which are f.o.b ( free on board ) Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-107. World trade balance and current account balances and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country World trade balance2 Developed countries3 United States... Canada Japan is '2 ~ ! o European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom... Other developed countries Developing countries Oil-exporting countries5 Other Communist countries6. U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL7.. Current account balances Developed countries ! o -A2 United States. Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom... Other developed countries Developing countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China " sis TOTAL. Oil exporting countries5. Other. * Communist cour Preliminary estimates Exports f.o.b. ( free-on-board ship value ) less imports c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) Includes the OECD countries. South Africa and non-OECO Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately * Includes Afgeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage classification timing and valuation in the recording of transactions by the countries involved OECD basis Sources : International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-108. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country a All countries * Industrial countries United States... Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark.. Finland France Germany Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom. Oil-exporting countries. Algeria Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia. United Arab Emirates. Venezuela Non-oil developing countries. Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere. November * * Includes Taiwan not shown in area detail Includes Cuba Includes Luxembourg Data are for October Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; = ; ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund " InternationalfinancialStatistics " TABLE B-109. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] Area and country Developed countries annual annual average average i U.S. dollar value in ( billions ) United States. Canada European Community France West Germany... Italy United Kingdom. Other developed countries. Developing countries Oil exporting countries Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL. Preliminary estimates Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for except for those of the Communist countries which were converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Not available Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-110. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries [ ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan European Community1 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production2 p : I II Ill I V : | I I HI IV 30O.3 I960 Consumer prices i960 : I IV : ll'ZI III IV Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom and West Germany Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Data for and are for Paris only Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade Investment and Analysis Trade Performance Division ) and Department of labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-lll. Unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Unemployment rate ( percent ) I960 : II Ill I V : | | | III IV A '.B Hourly compensation ( = ) I960 'Unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland. Quarterly data for France West Germany and United Kingdom should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Beginning changes in the Italian survey resulted in a large increase in persons enumerated as unemployed. However many also reported that they had not actively sought work in the past days. Such persons have been provisionally excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts ; their inclusion would more than double the rates shown for Italy Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics