it Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER T H E STRATEGY OF ECONOMIC POLICY CHAPTER T H E UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY : CHALLENGES OF RECOVERY CHAPTER INDUSTRIAL POLICY CHAPTER FOOD AND AGRICULTURE CHAPTER FINANCIAL MARKET DEREGULATION CHAPTER REVIEW AND OUTLOOK APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ( Ill ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : I have long believed that the vitality of the American economy and the prosperity of the American people have been diminished by inappropriate policies of the Federal Government : unnecessary government regulations that discouraged initiative and wasted scarce capital and labor ; an inefficient and unfair tax system that penalized effort saving and investment ; excessive government spending that wasted taxpayers ' money misused our Nation 's resources and created budget deficits that reduced capital formation and added to the burden of the national debt ; and monetary policies that produced frequent business cycles and a path of increasing inflation I came to Washington to change these policies. The needed reforms are far from complete but substantial progress can already be seen : the burden of regulation has been reduced tax rates have been lowered and the tax structure improved government spending on a wide range of domestic programs has been curtailed and a sound monetary policy has been established Although the full favorable effect of those reforms on our Nation 's rate of economic growth will take time to develop some of the benefit of our economic policies is already visible in the current recovery The economy 's performance in was very gratifying to me. The percent rise in consumer prices between and was the lowest rate of inflation since The recovery produced a sharp drop in unemployment and a substantial increase in the income of American families. The number of people at work increased by more than million and the unemployment rate fell from a high of percent in December to percent in December The percent rise in real gross national product ( GNP ) last year means that real annual income per person in the United States rose $ Reducing Unemployment Despite the substantial reduction in unemployment the number of unemployed workers remains unacceptably high. Continued economic recovery will mean millions of additional jobs in the years ahead and further declines in the rate of unemployment. In alone the American economy is expected to add more than million additional jobs. By the end of the decade we will need million new jobs to absorb a growing labor force. Only a strong and expanding economy can provide those jobs while achieving a progressively lower level of unemployment over the next years Although economic growth is by far the most important way to reduce unemployment special policies to help the structurally unemployed and particularly disadvantaged groups can also be helpful. To assist these individuals in developing job-related skills that will lead to productive careers in the private sector I proposed the Job Training Partnership Act that I signed into law in Last year I proposed additional measures to increase opportunities for training and retraining. Although the Congress has enacted some of my employment proposals I am still waiting for congressional action on others Of particular concern to me is the unemployment among teenagers. Such unemployment is not only a problem in itself but is also indicative of lost opportunities to acquire on-the-job training and job-related skills. It is widely recognized that the minimum wage law is a substantial barrier to the employment of teenagers especially minority teenagers. I have proposed that during the summer months the minimum wage for teenagers be reduced to percent of the regular minimum wage. This reform would give many teenagers the opportunity to get a first job and acquire the skills needed to help them with subsequent employment and would not hurt adult employment. With an unemployment rate of nearly percent among black teenagers and with only about percent of black teenagers employed we must act. The Federal Government must not be the source of barriers to employment Inflation and Monetary Policy Reducing the rate of inflation was my most immediate economic goal when I arrived in Washington. In the preceding months the consumer price level had increased more than percent. Many people feared the U.S. Government had lost its ability to control inflation. Until inflation was brought under control a healthy recovery could not get under way The inflation rate has declined dramatically over the past years Between and the consumer price index rose only percent. Americans can again have confidence in the value of the dollar and they can save for the future without fearing that the purchasing power of these savings will be destroyed by inflation. I am firmly committed to keeping inflation on a downward path. We must never relax in our pursuit of price stability The basic requirement for a continued moderation of inflation is a sound monetary policy. I continue to support the Federal Reserve in its pursuit of price stability through sound monetary policy. Last year was a particularly difficult time for monetary policy because of the substantial changes in financial regulations. I am pleased that in spite of these difficulties the monetary aggregates at the end of the year were within their target ranges. I expect that in the Federal Reserve will expand the money stock at a moderate rate that is consistent with both a sustained recovery and continuing progress against inflation There are those who advocate a fast rate of money growth in an attempt to depress interest rates. Experience shows however that rapid money growth inevitably leads to an increased rate of inflation and higher interest rates. The only monetary policy that can bring interest rates down and keep them down is one that promotes confidence that inflation will continue to decline in the years ahead The Dollar and the Trade Deficit The high interest rates in the United States and our low rate of inflation continue to make dollar securities an appealing investment for individuals and businesses around the world. In addition the United States has been an attractive place for stock market investment and for direct business investment. The result has been a continued rise in the dollar 's exchange value relative to other currencies of the world The sharp rise in the value of the dollar since has made it cheaper for Americans to purchase products from overseas thereby helping us fight inflation. But the dollar 's sharp rise has made it difficult for American businesses and farmers to compete in world markets. The decline in U.S. exports and the substantial rise in our imports has resulted in record trade deficits in and The trade deficit has been temporarily exacerbated by the international debt problems and by the more advanced stage of recovery in the United States than in the world at large Despite these problems I remain committed to the principle of free trade as the best way to bring the benefits of competition to American consumers and businesses. It would be totally inappropriate to respond by erecting trade barriers or by using taxpayers ' dollars to subsidize exports. Instead we must work with the other nations of the world to reduce the export subsidies and import barriers that currently hurt U.S. farmers businesses and workers I am also firmly opposed to any attempt to depress the dollar 's exchange value by intervention in international currency markets. Pure exchange market intervention can not offset the fundamental factors that determine the dollar 's value. Intervention in the foreign exchange market would be an exercise in futility that would probably enrich currency speculators at the expense of American taxpayers A combination of exchange market intervention and expansionary mon- etary policy could reduce the dollar 's exchange value but only by causing an unacceptable increase in the rate of inflation. The dollar must therefore be allowed to seek its natural value without exchange market intervention Regulation One of the four key elements of my program for economic recovery is a far-reaching program of regulatory relief. Substantial progress has been made during the last years. The growth of new regulations has been reduced by more than a third. The demands on the private sector of government paperwork have been reduced by several hundred million hours a year. The Congress approved legislation that has led to substantial deregulation of financial markets and intercity bus transportation. The Federal Communications Commission with our support has reduced the regulation of broadcasting and of new communications technology and the Interstate Commerce Commission and the Civil Aeronautics Board have gone far down the path of deregulation of competitive transportation markets. The benefits of these and other deregulation measures are now increasingly apparent to American consumers and businesses It is also apparent that substantial further deregulation and regulatory reform will require changes in the basic regulatory legislation. I urge the Congress to act on the several measures that I proposed last year on natural gas decontrol financial deregulation and reform of private pension regulation. I remain confident that there is a basis for agreement on measures that would reduce the burden of Federal regulations while protecting our shared values and not jeopardizing safety Tax Reforms The final installment of the 3-year personal tax cut took effect in July giving a helpful boost to the economic recovery. The income tax rate at each income level has been reduced by about percent since In a median income four-person family will pay about $ less than it would have without these tax reductions And beginning in the tax brackets will be adjusted automatically so that inflation will no longer push taxpayers into higher brackets and increase the share of their income taken in taxes The Economic Recovery Tax Act of went beyond reducing tax rates to establish important reforms in the structure of the tax system. For businesses the Accelerated Cost Recovery System increased the after-tax profitability of investments in plant and equipment. The sharp fall in inflation has also increased after-tax profit- ability. As a result investment in business equipment has recently been quite strong despite the high real interest rates For individuals the Economic Recovery Tax Act reduced the marriage tax penalty the estate tax burden and tax discrimination against saving. The response to the universal eligibility of Individual Retirement Accounts ( IRAs ) has been far greater than was originally expected. It is estimated that more than million individuals now use IRAs to save for their retirement. Last year I proposed to expand the opportunity for all married couples to use IRAs fully by allowing them to contribute up to $ each per year to an IRA even if only one has wage income Further improvement and simplification of our tax system are sorely needed. The burden of taxation depends not only on the quantity of tax revenue that is collected but also on the quality of the tax system. I have asked the Secretary of the Treasury to develop a plan of action with specific recommendations to make our tax system fairer simpler and less of a burden on our Nation 's economy. By broadening the tax base personal tax rates could come down not go up. Our tax system would stimulate greater economic growth and provide more revenue Government Spending One of my principal goals when I came to Washington was to reverse the dramatic growth of Federal spending on domestic programs and to shift more resources to our Nation 's defense. Although many doubted this could be done both goals are being achieved. We must do everything that we can to avoid waste in defense as in other areas of government. But we must also be willing to pay the cost of providing the military capability to defend our country and to meet our responsibilities as the leading Nation of the free world. Outlays for defense had declined to only percent of GNP in less than one-fourth of total government outlays. By the current fiscal year defense outlays have increased to percent of GNP and percent of total outlays. Real defense outlays have grown percent since Our spending on defense however remains a far smaller percentage of our national income than it was in when defense outlays took percent of GNP Real spending has been cut on a wide range of domestic programs and activities. Many wasteful bureaucratic activities have been eliminated and the number of nondefense employees on the Federal payroll has been reduced by We have examined every area of Federal Government spending and sought to eliminate unnecessary and wasteful spending while protecting the benefits needed by the poor and the aged. As a result total nondefense spending now takes a smaller share of our GNP than it did in Moreover under present law nondefense spending will continue to take a declining share of our GNP in the years ahead This reduction has been accomplished without any decrease in existing social security benefits or any change in the medicare benefits for the elderly. Spending on all other nondefense activities and programs has actually declined over percent in real terms since Even with no further reductions in these activities and programs their share of GNP in will be nearly back to the level of I am committed to continuing the search for ways to reduce government spending. The budget that I am submitting to the Congress identifies significant savings in entitlement programs and reductions in outlays for other programs that are excessive or that are not the proper responsibility of the Federal Government. The Grace Commission has given us some ways to reduce wasteful spending that could save billions of dollars in the years ahead Budget Deficits I have long believed that our Nation 's budget must be balanced. A pattern of overspending by the Federal Government has produced a deficit in of the last years. My most serious economic disappointment in was therefore the failure of the Congress to enact the deficit reduction proposals that I submitted last January in my budget for fiscal We would be much closer to a balanced budget today if the Congress had enacted all of the spending cuts that I have requested since assuming office and if the long recession and the sharp decline in inflation had not substantially reduced real tax revenue. In last year 's budget I proposed changes in outlays and revenues that could put the deficit on a sharply declining path that by would have been less than percent of GNP and on its way to a balance of revenues and outlays The unwillingness of the Congress to accept the proposals that I offered has made it clear to me that we must wait until after this year 's election to enact spending reductions coupled with tax simplification that will eventually eliminate our budget deficit. But we can not delay until to start reducing the deficits that are threatening to prevent a sustained and healthy recovery. I have therefore called on the Democratic and Republican leaders in the Congress to designate representatives to work with the Administration on the development of a " downpayment " deficit reduction program I believe that this bipartisan group could develop a package that could be enacted this spring which would reduce the deficit by about $ billion over the next fiscal years. The package could include a number of the less contentious spending cuts that are pending before the Congress plus additional outlay savings based on the proposals of the Grace Commission. Additional revenue could be provided by measures to close certain tax loopholes measures that the Department of the Treasury has previously said are worthy of support These deficit reductions can increase the public 's confidence in our economic future and their faith in the ability of the political system to deal satisfactorily with the deficit. The downpayment package can be a first step toward full elimination of the remaining deficits. Even with a 3-year $ billion package the deficits projected for fiscal and beyond are totally unacceptable to me. They would be a serious threat to our Nation 's economic health and a heavy burden to future generations. I am committed to finding ways to reduce further the growth of spending and to put the budget on a path that will lead to a balance between outlays and receipts. In I will submit a budget that can achieve this goal. But we must go further and make basic structural reforms in the budgetary process including the lineitem veto and the balanced budget amendment that will keep spending under control and prevent deficits in the future Looking Ahead As I look ahead I am very optimistic about the prospects for the American enonomy. Substantial progress has been made in reforming the economic policies that will shape our economic future. If we continue to develop and pursue sound policies our Nation can achieve a long period of strong economic growth with low inflation and the American people can enjoy unprecedented prosperity and economic security February THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Martin Feldstein CHAIRMAN William A. Niskanen William Poole C O N T E N T S CHAPTER THE STRATEGY OF ECONOMIC POLICY Economic Recovery Monetary Policy Government Spending The Decline of Domestic Spending The Change in Tax Structure Reducing the Budget Deficit Deficit Projection Long-Term Consequences Deficits and the Recovery Budget Strategy CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY : CHALLENGES OF RECOVERY The U.S. Trade Deficit and the Dollar Sources of the Trade Deficit Sources of the Strong Dollar The Capital Account Surplus Measures to Reduce the Trade Deficit Developments in Other Industrial Countries Europe Japan Third World Debt Problem The Nature of the Problem Origins of the Problem Will Debt/Export Ratios Improve ? Sharing the Burden Easing the Debt-Service Burden Conclusion CHAPTER INDUSTRIAL POLICY Is the United States Deindustrializing ? Comparison with Other Nations Problems of U.S. Manufacturing Implications for U.S. Policy Japanese Industrial Policy The Instruments of Japanese Industrial Policy Private Investment and Government Subsidies Page Page Has Japanese Industrial Policy Been a Success ? European Industrial Policies European Industrial Policy Tools Lessons from Europe Should the United States Have an Industrial Policy ? Coordinating Agencies and Tripartite Councils Government Development Bank Aid for Declining Industries Conclusion CHAPTER FOOD AND AGRICULTURE The Food and Agricultural Sector Farm Income Special Character of Farming Five Decades of Change Demand for Farm Products The Broader Economic Environment International Trading Environment Macroeconomic Environment Federal Policies Affecting Agriculture Policies that Reduce Production Costs Price and Income Support Policies Policies that Augment Demand Net Effects of Farm Programs Guidelines for Future Farm Policy CHAPTER FINANCIAL MARKET DEREGULATION Major Historical Forces Shaping Financial Regulation Financial Instability Credit Powers of Financial Institutions The Forces of Competition Ceilings on Interest Rates Deregulation and Monetary Control Geographical and Line-of-Business Restrictions on Depository Institutions Geographical Market Regulation Economic Issues in Geographical Market Deregulation Line-of-Business Restrictions.... Economic Issues in Line-of-Business Deregulation Deposit Insurance Reform The Impact of Deposit Insurance Proposals for Reform Summary Reform of the Regulatory Structure Conclusions CHAPTER REVIEW AND OUTLOOK Review of the Economy Personal Income and Consumption Residential Investment Business Fixed Investment Inventory Investment The Farm Economy The International Sector Government Purchases of Goods and Services Employment Unemployment and Productivity Prices Wages Compensation and Profits Financial Markets The Outlook for The Outlook for Growth in Real GNP Inflation Interest Rates The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Economic Goals Investment Policy Report APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Budget Outlays and Receipts as Percent of GNP Fiscal Years and Cyclical and Structural Components of the Deficit Fiscal Years U.S. Trade Balance by Country Decreases in Expected Inflation Rates and Increases in Real Interest Rates to Distribution of GNP by Component Debt/Export Ratios for Argentina Brazil and Mexico Aggregated Size and Share of the Manufacturing Sector Selected Years Shares of Value Added and Employment by Industry Group and Changes in Manufacturing Output and Employment in Selected Industrial Countries List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables page Net Exports in Selected High-Technology Industries and Farm Income Farm Input Use World Net Imports and Exports of Grain Selected Periods Major Federal Farm Programs by Commodity Number and Assets of Selected Financial Institutions as of December State Restrictions on Intrastate Branch Banking Selected Years Growth in Output and Employment Over First Year of Business Cycle Recoveries Contribution of GNP Components to Total GNP Growth Over First Year of Business Cycle Recoveries Real Household Income Consumption Saving and Residential Investment Labor Market Developments Output Productivity Costs and Prices in the Nonfarm Business Sector Price Changes Changes in Wages and Compensation Funds Raised in Credit Markets by the Nonfinancial Sector of the Economy Components of Ml and M2 Economic Outlook for Administration Economic Assumptions Charts Nondefense Non-Interest Spending Excluding OASDHI Balances on Current Account Trade and Services as Percent of GNP.. Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rate of the U.S Dollar Change in U.S. Bilateral Trade Balances from to Bilateral Exchange Rates Interest Rates on the Yen Sources and Uses of Foreign Exchange : Argentina Brazil and Mexico Aggregated Unemployment Rates by State in Fiscal Year Farm Productivity Output and Input Agricultural Exports as Percent of Farm Cash Receipts Charts Page Real Wheat Prices Savings Deposit Inflows versus the Interest Rate Gap Bank Failures Existing Regulation of Banks and Their Holding Companies December Real Business Inventories/Final Sales Ratio Civilian Unemployment Rate Change in the Consumer Price Index Ml : Actual versus Target Range Real Gross National Product Forecast and Trend CHAPTER The Strategy of Economic Policy THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY IN was a very favorable combination of rising output falling unemployment and declining inflation. These economic improvements and the long-term economic strategy that the Reagan Administration has been pursuing since are a welcome change for the American economy The Administration 's redirection of economic policy was a necessary antidote to the poor economic performance of the 1970s. The real earnings per week of the average employee were actually lower in than they had been a decade earlier. The unemployment rate doubled between the end of the 1960s and the start of the 1980s The level of consumer prices more than doubled and the rate of inflation increased from percent in to percent in Net private capital investment declined from percent of gross national product ( GNP ) in the 1960s to percent of GNP in the 1970s and only percent of GNP in During these same years the government expanded and tax burdens rose. Federal Government outlays for all nondefense programs rose from percent of GNP in to percent in Total Federal outlays rose from percent of GNP to percent of GNP despite the sharp fall in the GNP share devoted to defense Although Federal tax receipts took one-fifth of GNP in both and many taxpayers found themselves pushed by inflation into higher marginal tax brackets despite the absence of any rise in real income. A two-earner family earning twice the median income faced a marginal tax rate that was percent in but percent in The number of taxpayers facing marginal tax rates of percent or higher rose more than five-fold during the decade. Inflation not only pushed people into higher tax brackets but also distorted the measurement of interest income and capital gains causing dramatic increases in the effective tax rates on real income from savings Nevertheless the Federal budget moved from a position of near balance in ( a deficit of only percent of GNP ) to a deficit of percent of GNP in By there was widespread agreement that the direction of economic policy had to be changed if economic performance was to im- prove. The accelerating growth of the money stock would have to be slowed in order to bring down inflation. The high marginal tax rates would have to be reduced and the tax structure reformed in order to lower the adverse effects on the incentives to work save invest and take risks. The share of government domestic spending in GNP would have to be reduced in order to decrease the distorting effects of government programs raise defense outlays and reduce the budget deficit These aims guided the formation of the Administration 's economic policy in and in the years since then. Now years later monetary policy has been successful in reducing the rate of inflation. Government spending on domestic programs has been reduced to a smaller share of national income. Tax rates have been lowered and the tax system has been improved This chapter begins with a brief review of the economic recovery of ; a more complete analysis is presented in Chapter Here the primary focus is on the strategy of economic policy. Three elements of the Administration 's long-term economic strategy will be discussed : sound monetary policy reduced government spending on domestic programs and a tax structure that is conducive to individual initiative and economic growth. The fourth facet of the Administration 's economic strategy the reduction in regulation was discussed in detail in the Economic Report ; the deregulation of financial markets is the subject of Chapter of this year 's Report The final section of the present chapter describes the medium-term problem of reducing the projected budget deficits ECONOMIC RECOVERY The inherent vitality of the American economy was amply demonstrated in In this first full year of economic recovery real GNP rose percent and business output climbed percent. Industrial production rose percent in the months following its November low and the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing bounced back from percent to percent during this same period Civilian employment rose by million in and the civilian unemployment rate declined from percent in December to percent a year later. Although unemployment remains unacceptably high the progress in raising employment and reducing unemployment in virtually every demographic group has been gratifying Civilian employment rose percent between December and December while employment among blacks rose percent and among teenagers rose percent. The unemployment rate de- dined percentage points while the unemployment rate for blacks declined percentage points and for teenagers declined percentage points. Despite this progress it is clear that more than cyclical recovery will be needed to reduce the very high unemployment rates among these problem groups. The Administration 's employment and training policies and proposals ( discussed in detail in Chapter of the Economic Report ) offer several ways of helping these individuals and others with temporary unemployment problems to find work The sharp increases in output and employment were accompanied by an inflation rate that was even lower than in the previous year The GNP implicit price deflator rose only percent in after rising percent in and more than percent in The consumer price index at the end of stood only percent above the level of a year earlier after rising percent in percent in and more than percent in And the index of producer prices for finished goods rose only percent in the smallest increase in nearly two decades and far below the percent in percent in and percent in The decline in price inflation accompanied smaller nominal wage increases and a slower rise in nominal compensation per hour. The percent increase in compensation per hour was the slowest rise since In combination with the substantial cyclical improvement in productivity the slow rise in compensation raised unit labor costs only percent in far below the percent rise in and the lowest since Despite the slow rise in nominal compensation per hour the low rate of inflation meant that real earnings and incomes increased significantly. Real average weekly earnings rose percent in the months to December after rising percent in and declining in each of the preceding years. Real personal income per capita rose percent between the final quarter of and the final quarter of after rising a total of only percent in the entire 3-year period between and A significant problem in the otherwise outstanding recovery was the sharp decline in net exports. American imports rose while our exports of goods to the rest of the world declined. The U.S. merchandise trade deficit the excess of imports of goods over our exports of goods reached a record of about $ billion in nearly twice 's record level of $ billion. This trade deficit and the even larger trade deficit projected for reflects several causes including the decline of imports among less developed countries and the relatively advanced stage of the U.S. recovery but of primary importance is the high real value of the dollar relative to other currencies ( For discussion of the trade deficit and the high dollar see Chapter ) MONETARY POLICY The fundamental guiding principle of the Administration 's approach to monetary policy is that the rate of growth of the money stock should be reduced gradually until the rate is consistent with price stability. This principle is consistent with the general approach enunciated in recent years by the independent Federal Reserve Controlling the growth of the money stock may be viewed as a means of achieving a desirable path of nominal GNP. Because the growth of nominal GNP tends to follow the growth of the money stock this strategy of monetary policy can be expected to be consistent with a gradual decline in the trend rate of growth of nominal GNP although the mix of real growth and inflation is subject to other influences. In the remaining years of this decade this decline in the rate of growth of nominal GNP should be compatible with both a continuing growth of real GNP and a continuing decline in the rate of inflation Last year 's Economic Report discussed the difficulty of applying the principle of steady monetary deceleration in a time of rapid institutional change. An appropriate monetary policy must balance the principle of steady monetary deceleration with the need to take account of changes in asset preferences or institutional arrangements that cause sustained shifts in the velocity of money i.e. sustained shifts in the ratio of nominal GNP to the money stock. There are however many uncertainties about the timing magnitude and direction of the effects of such financial changes on velocity The year was a time of significant change in financial regulations that substantially altered the nature of the monetary aggregates ( Ml M2 and M3 ) and the pattern of portfolio demand for monetary assets. In December depository institutions were permitted to offer money market deposit accounts a form of small-denomination time deposit with no limit on the permitted interest rate. These deposits are classified as a part of M2. Beginning in January Super-NOW accounts checkable deposits with no ceiling on the interest rate were permitted. These accounts are classified as part of Ml The desirability of stable money growth rests on the stability of the demand for money relative to the stability of other relationships in the economy and on the role of stable money growth in reducing inflationary expectations. A change in the available mix of financial assets or in the characteristics of the monetary aggregates may change the equilibrium ratios of nominal GNP to the monetary aggregates. The Federal Reserve can in principle adjust the supply of money to compensate for the shift in demand without altering the degree of liquidity in the economy or equivalently the likely growth of nominal GNP ; however because of the uncertainties mentioned above in practice it is often difficult to do so. As an example of these uncertainties it is not clear at this time the extent to which the increases in the monetary aggregates in the early part of reflected demand shifts that will produce a sustained shift in the velocity of money In especially there was no way to know by exactly how much the financial deregulation changed the demand for each of the monetary aggregates. The Federal Reserve appears to have followed a relatively passive strategy during the early months of the year not putting pressure on bank reserves. This policy had the effect of not putting much pressure on interest rates. Between December and May the monthly average of the 91-day Treasury bill rate varied between percent and percent. After May however the Federal Reserve permitted short-term interest rates to increase The Federal Reserve 's approach to the very difficult task of adjusting the monetary policy to the new regulatory environment permitted major adjustments to occur in with minimal disruption in the financial markets. Some observers however are concerned that the rapid expansion of the monetary aggregates in early may lead to much higher inflation by the end of Some also fear that the slow growth of Ml in the second half of may cause output growth to decline sharply or even turn negative by the middle of All that can be said with certainty at this time is that monetary policy has come through a very difficult year of substantial deregulation without destabilizing either real growth or inflation in It may be noted also that on the basis of data currently available all three monetary aggregates ended the year inside the target ranges that the Federal Reserve had established in February for M2 and M3 and in July for Ml All too often at this stage of an economic recovery as growth slows from the unsustainable pace of the recovery 's first year political pressures have built to try to reduce interest rates through raising money growth. The Administration rejects calls to abandon a sound monetary policy. Interest rates can not prudently be lowered by creating more money. The Administration recognizes that if the Federal Reserve were to try to maintain a strong recovery through excessive expansion of money and credit the rate of inflation would inevitably rise and undercut the prospect for sustained growth of employment and output The Administration desires a steady growth of real GNP and a gradually declining inflation rate. The monetary policy consistent with this outcome is expected to be one of gradually declining rates of growth of the monetary aggregates. Although no regulatory changes comparable to those of and are expected future shifts in institutional arrangements could cause changes in velocity that would require a recalibration of the money growth targets. It is important that any such recalibration be made only in response to a significant and persistent shift in velocity GOVERNMENT SPENDING The second major aspect of the Administration 's economic strategy is to reduce the burden of government domestic spending. For the first time in a half century total appropriations for domestic programs began a sustained decline in real terms and total Federal spending on all nondefense programs began to take a declining share of the Nation 's potential output In Federal Government spending was only percent of GNP. But the Great Depression ushered in a new era for American Government. In the half century after government spending exploded. By nondefense spending ( excluding interest payments ) by the Federal Government was percent of GNP. Even after adjusting for inflation the Federal Government spent nearly four times as much on nondefense programs in as it had spent in Between and there was a dramatic increase in the role of the government and of government outlays in American economic life Of course not all government outlays represent government purchases of goods or services. By percent of Federal Government expenditures were transfers to individuals or to State and local governments. But transfers as well as direct purchases shift the use of the economy 's resources and require a sacrifice by present or future taxpayers The speed at which many of the outlays grew was itself unintended and unanticipated reflecting the so-called " entitlement " character of many of the programs introduced or modified in the 1960s or early 1970s. In such programs the basic legislation does not appropriate a fixed amount of money for a particular purpose but establishes rules that define who is eligible for benefits and the nature and amount of the benefits for which each person is eligible. Funds must then be made available for these benefits The medicare program is a good example of the unintended and unanticipated growth in outlays. Medicare was introduced in and immediately experienced costs that were far greater than had been generally anticipated. A decade ago medicare outlays were less than $ billion ; in the current fiscal year they will exceed $ billion. Medicare actuaries now project that by the cost of the program will exceed $ billion or more than percent of GNP. The dramatic growth of this program reflects greater utilization of health care services than had been anticipated and a very much faster rise in the cost of hospital care than had been forecast. For example the cost of a day of hospital care relative to all consumer prices rose percent in the decade before medicare was introduced but jumped more than percent in the decade after medicare began. This very rapid rise in the real cost of a day of hospital care reflected primarily the use of more personnel equipment and supplies for every patient. The increase in utilization and the rapid rise in cc : s were not accidents of history but were in large part a direct response to the medicare program itself The medicare example is paralleled in a wide variety of other programs in such disparate areas as housing nutrition and disability insurance. Other new programs were enacted and old programs expanded without a proper understanding of the future burdens that they would impose on the economy. The members of the Congress who enacted these programs and the analysts who advised them frequently underestimated substantially the future costs of the programs that they were creating. They failed to anticipate that introducing new programs or liberalizing old program rules would markedly change economic behavior that a higher level of retirement benefits would significantly reduce the average age of retirement that the introduction of medicare and medicaid would contribute to an explosive growth of hospital costs and that the more generous provision of disability benefits would be followed by a four-fold increase in the number of persons collecting disability checks In addition to underestimating future program costs many analysts in the 1960s and early 1970s also overestimated the future growth of economic resources with which to pay for them. The first half of the 1960s was a period of unusually rapid economic growth with real GNP rising at a percent annual rate. In the mid-1960s when the Great Society programs were launched and even in the late sixties and early seventies there was a comforting but mistaken assumption that continued rapid growth would make it easy to finance an everincreasing level of government spending. Unfortunately the real rate of growth fell from the percent experienced in the first half of the 1960s to percent in the years since then. If that earlier rate of growth had continued real GNP would now be nearly percent higher and with current tax and expenditure rules the Federal budget would now be in substantial surplus If the public had foreseen the future costs of the expanded social programs or the modest rate of economic growth during the past two decades the Congress might not have enacted all of those programs and government would be smaller today. But once those programs were started it became extremely difficult to stop them or even to reduce the level of benefits THE DECLINE OF DOMESTIC SPENDING Between and the end of the 1970s government outlays on nondefense programs nearly doubled as a share of GNP. The government took a larger and larger share of the typical family 's income and used it to finance programs that came to be widely regarded as neither generally useful nor directed at the truly needy. Many observers concluded that many well-intentioned programs were actually often exacerbating the very problems that they set out to solve and usually creating adverse side effects of their own Since there has been a remarkable revolution in government spending. Social security benefits now take a decreasing share of GNP and all nondefense spending other than social security and medicare has already declined significantly as a share of GNP. Table presents Federal Government outlays and receipts as percentages of GNP in fiscal years and through The values for through reflect current services levels for all domestic programs the Administration 's budget proposal for defense and the economic assumptions with respect to real growth and interest rates used in the Administration 's current budget calculations. ( These economic assumptions are discussed in detail in Chapter ) Spending on social security benefits ( including disability benefits as well as benefits for retirees and dependents ) rose dramatically from percent of GNP in to percent in Although social security benefits will continue to grow in the future because of the increased number of retirees and rising benefit levels the social security share of GNP has begun to decline and will shrink to percent of GNP over the next years The reduced share of GNP spent on all nondefense programs except social security and medicare ( line of Table ) has been even more dramatic. In government spending on these activities took percent of GNP. In the fiscal year that share is down to percent of GNP a decline of one-fifth Between fiscal years and real government spending on all nondefense activities except social security and medicare will have TABLE Budget outlays and receipts as percent ofGNP fiscal years and [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Estimates Actual Current services Item Total outlays Other Poti1989 National defense Net interest Non-OASDHI OASDHI Social security Medicare Total receipts OASDHI Other Deficit Sources : " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " and Council of Economic Advisers fallen by percent. This real 4-year decline which includes outlays for everything from entitlement programs to the administrative costs of running government departments is absolutely unprecedented. During each of the five 4-year periods between and this spending rose between percent and percent even after adjusting for inflation The changes that have been enacted since mean that the share of GNP spent on all nondefense activities except social security and medicare will continue to decline in the future even if the Congress adopts no further spending cuts. By fiscal this domestic spending share will be down to percent of GNP and therefore back to the same GNP share that such nondefense spending took in the late 1960s. This decline as a percent of GNP means that total spending on these nondefense government activities will average $ billion less a year in the fiscal years from through than it would have if the percent GNP share of had continued Although future spending could of course be increased by legislative action it is significant that the Congressional Budget Resolution for through also called for essentially this same declining share of GNP Moreover under current law this spending share will continue to decline to only percent of GNP by back to the level of the early 1960s. And this lower level of outlays means savings that aver- age $ billion a year from through relative to what would have been spent if the share of GNP had been maintained Chart shows the share of potential GNP that nondefense spending excluding social security and medicare would represent at full employment. The growth in the 1960s and 1970s of these outlays will have been almost completely reversed by Chart Nondefense Non-Interest Spending Excluding OASDHI Percent of potential GNP I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I I Fiscal Ye ^ rs Sources : Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers These projected spending reductions relative to the GNP share reflect the current rules of entitlement programs and the assumption that the Congress will continue to appropriate funds to maintain the current level of service for all programs governed by annual appropriations. The President 's budget proposes additional reductions in nondefense spending in each year from through These spending reductions total an additional $ billion Total nondefense government spending as a share of GNP including social security and medicare as well as all other domestic programs is now falling and will on the basis of current law and the current services levels of annually appropriated programs decline from percent of GNP in to percent of GNP in This decline represents an annual saving of more than $ billion a year in One implication of the very substantial reduction in nondefense spending is that it permits an increase in defense spending without an equal increase in tax revenue. The Administration 's budget calls for a rise in defense spending from percent of GNP in to percent of GNP in For comparison defense spending was percent of GNP in and percent of GNP in Unfortunately the rapid rise in interest on the national debt will absorb a substantial share of the budget savings achieved by reduced domestic spending. The net interest paid by the government will increase from percent of GNP in to percent in even if the rate of interest on Treasury bills declines from the current level of nearly percent to less than percent by the end of Putting these pieces together shows that nondefense spending excluding social security and medicare will decline by percent of GNP between and while defense spending will rise by percent of GNP and the net interest paid by the government will rise by percent of GNP. The reduction in domestic outlays financed by general revenues is thus slightly more than sufficient to balance the increase in defense spending and interest costs leaving total outlays excluding social security and medicare virtually unchanged as a share of GNP Despite the dramatic progress in reducing spending on domestic programs government outlays are still projected to equal percent of GNP in about percentage points higher than in and percentage points higher than in This increase in outlays does not reflect greater defense spending because the GNP shares devoted to defense would actually be lower in than in either or The rapid growth of social security and medicare outlays ( from percent of GNP in to percent of GNP in and percent of GNP in ) accounts for nearly all of the increases in outlays as a fraction of GNP since and The additional source of increased outlays the rise in interest payments on the national debt will be more than offset by the fall in defense spending as a share of GNP between and These are the fundamental facts that define the budget dilemma Despite the remarkable reduction in domestic spending on a wide range of activities the growth of the social security and medicare programs raises the share of Federal Government outlays in national income. With the budget balanced in and with taxes taking the same share of GNP in as in the growth of spending since then implies large budget deficits. Before discussing the problem of the budget deficit this chapter considers the changes in the nature of the tax system that have occurred in the past years THE CHANGE IN TAX STRUCTURE The third principal part of the Administration 's economic strategy is to reduce the tax burden and restructure the tax system. The Economic Recovery Tax Act passed in substantially changed the quantity and quality of taxation. It reduced personal income tax rates by a cumulative percent over years. Special provisions reduced the tax on two-earner families introduced the indexing of tax bracket and personal exemptions and lowered the effective tax rates on income from saving and investment. The total Federal taxes paid by a median-income family including both the personal income tax and the social security payroll taxes will be $ lower in than they would have been without the tax cuts. These changes represent a reduction of percent in Federal income tax liabilities and of percent in total tax liabilities The total share of GNP taken by taxes has come down significantly ( see Table line ) In fiscal all Federal taxes took percent of GNP. In the current fiscal year this tax share will be percent of GNP. Continuing economic recovery and the rise in social security payroll taxes will raise the tax share of GNP to percent by if there are no further legislative changes. Without the changes the tax share would have risen substantially from the percent share of These tax reductions occurred despite the rise in the social security payroll tax. If the social security payroll tax is excluded the reduction in all other taxes has been even greater falling from percent of GNP to percent of GNP. This fall is equivalent to a $ billion tax cut in alone The tax changes in the past years have however gone far beyond reducing the amount of taxes and have achieved fundamental improvements in the nature of the tax system. The tax burden on the economy depends not only on the quantity of taxes but also on the quality. Although most taxes have adverse economic effects some taxes are more harmful than others. Taxes are undesirable not only because they take away the fruits of labor of risk-taking and of saving but also because they distort economic decisions and thereby lead to a wasteful misallocation of resources. Although there is no simple rule for improving the quality of taxes there are a few useful principles. The most basic principle is to minimize the tax-induced distortions of economic choices choices about which goods to buy how much to work how hard to save and how to invest the capital that results from savings. A key implication of this principle is that the marginal tax rates paid on additional income or profits are more important than the average tax rates. A second implication is that taxes do more harm when levied on individuals or activities that are more responsive to tax rules. Taxes that reduce the incentive to save or that cause a misallocation of capital among different uses are particularly undesirable because they unnecessarily increase the total economic burden of the tax system and reduce productivity and economic growth The tax changes improved the quality of the tax system in several ways. The top marginal individual income tax rate was reduced from percent to percent and marginal tax rates at all income levels were reduced nearly one-fourth. Moreover the reduced tax rates for two-earner families focuses tax relief on married women a group whose labor supply is known to be particularly sensitive to tax rates In addition to reducing marginal tax rates the Economic Recovery Tax Act provided for the indexing of tax brackets beginning January to prevent inflation from pushing individuals into brackets with higher marginal tax rates. Without indexing a decade of percent inflation would more than offset the percent reduction in tax rates Perhaps the most fundamental change has been in the taxation of personal saving. The American tax system has long been biased against saving and in favor of current consumption. The tax law changes in the Economic Recovery Tax Act represent a major shift away from this antisaving bias. The universal extension of eligibility for Individual Retirement Accounts ( IRAs ) the expansion of IRA and Keogh plan limits the reduced tax rates on investment income and other specific changes should spur private saving in the years ahead The favorable effect of these tax changes on saving can be expected to occur only gradually. At first by transferring previously saved funds from existing accounts many individuals can deposit the maximum $ a year to an IRA without doing any additional saving Some individuals may extend this period by borrowing. But after a few years most taxpayers will have exhausted all previously accumulated funds ; they can then make additional IRA contributions only if they save more The new tax treatment of saving represents something far more basic than just an increased stimulus to saving. The universal availability of IRAs and the increase in IRA and Keogh limits will allow most American taxpayers to pay tax only on that part of their income that they do not save that is only on the part of their income that they consume. It is also true that two-thirds of taxpayers do not itemize deductions and therefore can not deduct interest expenses. Thus for most Americans the income tax system has now been virtually transformed into a consumption tax. This is a very fundamental change in the character of our tax system An indirect but important source of reduction in the effective tax rate on the income from savings has been the fall in the rate of inflation. Because our tax law bases tax liability on nominal interest income and nominal capital gains a lower rate of inflation implies a substantial reduction in the effective rate of tax. An individual in the percent tax bracket who earns a percent nominal interest rate when the inflation rate was percent had an after-tax nominal yield of percent and an after-tax real yield of only percent. By contrast if the individual earns a nominal percent interest rate when the inflation rate is percent the nominal after-tax yield is percent and the real after-tax yield is percent. The effective tax rate on the same real interest income falls from percent when inflation is percent to percent when inflation is percent. With no inflation and an interest rate of percent the effective tax rate would fall to percent and the real after-tax rate of return would be percent or times as great as it was with a percent inflation rate The tax climate for business investment has also been substantially improved in the past years. During the 1970s the rising rate of inflation combined with the old depreciation rules to raise very substantially the effective rate of tax on the income from investment in business plant and equipment. The changes in the tax rules governing depreciation as modified in the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act and the sharp decline in inflation reduced this effective tax rate substantially. The result is higher after-tax rates of return on business investment and therefore a renewed incentive to invest in plant and equipment The present strength of business investment in the face of very high real rates of interest can be attributed at least in part to the lower effective tax rates on business income and the higher real after-tax rates of return that result. What matters for investment is not just the rate of interest or the profitability of investment but the difference between the net-of-tax real cost of funds and the after-tax real profitability of investment Similarly the strength of the stock market in the face of very high real interest rates reflects in part the improved after-tax profitability that investors now expect. Indeed one way to explain the current level of investment is to note that the change in business tax rules has raised the value in equity markets of new physical capital ( or equivalently reduced the cost of equity capital to finance new investment ) This has stimulated business to increase its investment The recent reductions in high marginal tax rates and the improved tax treatment of saving and investment represent major improvements over earlier tax rules. Much more can and should be done however to reduce the adverse effects of the tax system on individual and business incentives and therefore on the potential income and growth of the economy. The President has emphasized his interest in further improvements of the tax law. The Administration will continue to examine possible directions for tax reform and will propose reforms aimed at making the tax system simpler fairer and more efficient REDUCING THE BUDGET DEFICIT Despite the dramatic reduction in the share of national income taken by government domestic spending and the fundamental improvement in the character of our tax system the Nation still faces the serious potential problem of a long string of huge budget deficits. Vigorous economic growth can eliminate the cyclical component of the deficit. But without legislative action the structural component is likely to grow just as fast as the cyclical one shrinks. The Administration 's economic projections imply that the budget deficit will remain roughly $ billion a year or about percent of GNP for the rest of the decade unless there is legislative action to reduce spending or raise revenue. Deficits of that size would represent a serious potential threat to the health of the American economy in the second half of this decade and in the more distant future DEFICIT PROJECTION The cyclical component of the budget deficit is the part of the deficit that occurs because the unemployment rate exceeds the inflation threshold level of unemployment i.e. the minimum level of unemployment that can be sustained without raising the rate of inflation This excess unemployment raises the deficit by depressing tax revenues and by increasing outlays on unemployment benefits and other cyclically sensitive programs The remaining part of the budget deficit known as the structural component is the amount of the deficit that would remain even if the unemployment rate were at the inflation threshold level. The Administration estimates that the inflation threshold level of unemployment is now percent and will decline in the coming years as the relative number of inexperienced workers declines and as the Administration 's employment policies are enacted and take effect Table presents the cyclical and structural components of the budget deficit for through The deficit of $ billion was divided about evenly between the cyclical and structural components. Because of the lower level of unemployment projected for a much larger share of the current year 's deficit is structural. The projected deficit of $ billion includes a cyclical component of $ billion and a structural component of $ billion. By the entire projected budget deficit is structural TABLE Cyclical and structural components of the deficit,fiscalyears [ Billions of dollars ] Total Fiscal year Structural Cyclical Actual : Estimates ( current services ) : Sources : Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year and Council of Economic Advisers A rate of economic growth for the next years that is sufficiently greater than the growth forecast by the Administration and by virtually all private forecasters could in principle eliminate the deficit without legislative action. However a percent increase in the current level of real GNP would reduce the budget deficit by only about $ billion. It would require an increase of percent in the projected growth rates over the next years to eliminate the budget deficit by the end of the decade without a change in spending or tax rules It would clearly be unwise to rely on such an unprecedented and improbably fast rate of growth. A prudent policy at this point must assume that economic growth alone will not eliminate these deficits The economic assumptions that are used to project the budget outlays and receipts are based on the premise that there will be a sound monetary policy and that future legislative changes will reduce budget deficits sharply in the years ahead. In the absence of legislative changes to reduce deficits substantially in future years interest rates will be higher than projected and the real growth rate will probably be lower than projected. The budget calculations assume that real GNP grows at an average annual rate of percent from to The calculations also assume that the Treasury bill rate will fall from the current percent to percent by These assumptions are reasonable if the budget deficit in that year is about percent of GNP and is moving toward complete balance. But if legislative changes to reduce outlays and increase receipts are not enacted and the Treasury bill rate remains at its current level the higher interest payments on the national debt will raise the deficit by about $ billion bringing the total deficit in that year to approximately $ billion. Growth rates of real income slower than those assumed in the budget calculations would raise the deficit even more LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES The projected budget deficits would directly and substantially increase the future size of the national debt. If legislative action is not taken the cumulative budget deficit would be more than $ billion over the next years. The annual interest on this extra debt alone would represent a permanent cost of about $ billion in if interest rates fall as assumed or at least $ billion a year if the interest rates remain at their present level. These amounts are equivalent to between percent and percent of the personal and corporate income tax revenue now projected for This growth of the national debt and the interest on the national debt shows that budget deficits do not eliminate the need for spending cuts or tax increases but just postpone the time when extra spending cuts or larger tax increases must take effect to pay for current deficits The most important long-term economic effect of the prospective budget deficits would be to absorb a large fraction of domestic saving and thereby reduce the rate of capital formation and slow the potential long-term growth of the economy. Federal borrowing to finance a budget deficit of percent of GNP would absorb about twothirds of all the net domestic saving that would otherwise be available to finance investment in plant and equipment and in housing The reduced availability of investable funds means that the real rate of interest must rise until the demand for funds for private investment is reduced to the available supply. Stated more generally the real net-of-tax cost of capital must increase relative to the real net-of-tax return on capital until the demand for funds is reduced to the available supply Although the tax changes and the reduced rate of inflation will direct a higher share of the remaining capital formation to business investment and away from owner-occupied housing the effect of the budget deficits nevertheless would be a lower rate of investment in business plant and equipment as well as in housing Each dollar of additional budget deficit does not necessarily reduce capital accumulation by a dollar. The actual impact varies over time with less crowding out of capital formation likely in the first year or two after an increase in the budget deficit than in subsequent years This is particularly so when as in recent years the increase in the budget deficit occurs when there is substantial excess capacity in the economy The current situation also shows how the extent of the crowding out of capital formation in the United States can be temporarily reduced by an inflow of foreign funds that are attracted to the United States by the rise in our real interest rate and increased real after-tax return on equity investments. This capital inflow usually begins after a lag rises to a peak and eventually shrinks. Even if the budget deficit remains at a high level the inflow of capital from abroad eventually contracts as foreigners become increasingly unwilling to hold even more U.S. assets in their portfolios If the current services budget deficits that are currently projected were actually to occur the likely result would be to reduce net investment in plant and equipment to a substantially lower share of GNP than prevailed in the 1960s and 1970s. Net private investment has fallen from percent of GNP in the three-decade period through to only percent of GNP in the past years. Much of this decline is attributable to the stage of the business cycle. The deficit strengthened the recovery and thereby boosted business fixed investment although the government 's competition for funds to finance the structural deficit also depressed the level of investment below what it would otherwise have been DEFICITS AND THE RECOVERY The deficits will have effects on the economic recovery as well as on the capital stock and on long-term economic growth. To understand the effect of budget deficits on the economic recovery it is important to distinguish the deficits in the early years of the recovery from the deficits that are projected for subsequent years. Although the projected future deficit would be likely to have serious adverse consequences on the character and possibly the duration of the recovery the near-term deficits probably have a positive impact on the pace of recovery in and The tax cuts in and raised after-tax incomes and therefore contributed to the rise in consumer spending that has been responsible for so much of the recovery. Similarly the direct fiscal stimulus of the large deficit will do more to raise demand in than the increased real interest rates that result from the deficit will do to depress demand It is the continuing string of large deficits projected out through the end of the decade and beyond that is the serious threat to the health of the near-term recovery. The prospect of such prolonged deficits inevitably raises the real long-term interest rate above what it otherwise would have been reducing current activity in key interestsensitive sectors and causing the recovery to be lopsided. The most conspicuous example of such current crowding out is the sharp decline in net exports. High interest rates in the United States attract funds from the rest of the world causing the exchange value of the dollar to rise. The strong dollar makes it difficult for U.S. products to compete in world markets and makes foreign products more attractive to American buyers. In addition the high real interest rate is no doubt also causing the demand for housing for some consumer durables and for some plant and equipment investment to be lower now than it would otherwise have been. In these ways the anticipation of future deficits may weaken the pace of recovery now even though the current deficit strengthens the pace of the current recovery If the deficits persist the crowding out would also persist but the pattern of crowding out would change over time. As the value of the dollar declines the merchandise trade deficit is likely to shrink focusing more of the crowding out on the domestic capital market. The current rise in profits and retained earnings that result from the cyclical upturn and from the tax changes temporarily protects business investment and concentrates more of the domestic crowding out on residential construction. This too will change with time placing more of the burden of future crowding out on business investment in plant and equipment No one can be sure of exactly how the pattern of crowding out would evolve through time. It is clear however that the persistence of large structural budget deficits would contribute to producing a lopsided recovery. The recovery would not be shared fully by the export industries and by those firms that compete with imports from abroad Nor would the construction industry and those industries that are directly involved in the production of capital goods and consumer durables be likely to keep pace with overall economic activity As a result employment and economic activity would shift from these contracting interest-sensitive sectors to the areas of expanding demand in the services and nondurable goods industries and in the defense-related industries. If this shift of demand proceeds smoothly enough the overall recovery would continue at a satisfactory pace with declining total unemployment. It is quite possible however that the additional demand would concentrate in sectors that are operating close to capacity while the crowding out withdraws demand from industries where a great deal of excess capacity exists. If so much of the additional demand might be absorbed in price increases while the crowding out adds to unemployment. If this occurs the resulting recovery would be slower paced more fragile and more inflationary than a more balanced recovery No one can predict in detail the effects of a continuing series of such large deficits. The economy could continue to experience a satisfactory overall pace of recovery for several years with declining rates of unemployment and inflation. But deficits of this magnitude could lead instead to imbalances within the economy that cause the recovery to lose momentum. There is also the risk that the persistent deficits could lead to inappropriate economic policies in the future An overly expansionary monetary policy would cause increased inflation while a sudden large fiscal contraction could depress economic activity. Although no one can be sure just how the economy would behave in the face of such unprecedented deficits the longer the deficits are allowed to persist the greater are the risks to our economic future BUDGET STRATEGY A major reduction in the structural budget deficit must therefore be achieved over the next several years. This must be done without causing a contraction of economic activity. Because the direct effect of reducing the budget deficit is to reduce government spending and private consumption there must be an increase in investment and net exports if real incomes and economic activity are to remain at high levels A reduction in the level of the current or future budget deficits automatically stimulates investment and net exports by lowering the real rate of interest and the exchange value of the dollar. However experience shows that the rise in investment and in exports follows the fall in interest rates and the exchange rate only with a substantial lag It would be unwise therefore to reduce the deficit by a very substantial amount. To reduce the deficit by a significant amount without jeopardizing the recovery the financial markets should be given adequate advance notice of the intended deficit reduction. The result would be a stronger economy that could absorb the deficit reduction without a contraction of overall economic activity In the fiscal year budget that was presented to the Congress in January the Administration proposed a deficit reduction program that would begin with small reductions in the deficits of and but then would reduce the deficit by percent and cut the deficit by percent to only percent of GNP. Unfortunately the Congress failed to adopt those proposals The Administration is now taking a two-stage approach to dealing with the prospective budget deficits. The President has called upon the leaders of the Congress to establish a bipartisan group to work with the Administration to develop a " down payment " package that will reduce the deficit by about $ billion over the next fiscal years. The aim of these negotiations is to achieve a deficit reduction package in the next few months. This package would be comprised of some of the less contentious spending cuts still pending before the Congress certain measures to close tax loopholes and additional outlay savings achieved through improvements in management procedures and elimination of unnecessary or inefficient activities Such legislation to reduce the deficit by about $ billion during the next fiscal years would make a significant contribution to reducing deficits and the future national debt. It could also give increased confidence to the financial markets business investors and consumers that the projected deficits can be controlled and eventually eliminated. The result should be a stronger economy in and Enacting a " down payment ' * package is just a first step in reducing budget deficits. The President has indicated that he will propose legislation in early that will further reduce deficits and point the way toward budget balance. If these proposals are enacted the economy can enjoy continuing expansion and a reduced burden of national debt CHAPTER The United States in the World Economy : Challenges of Recovery THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY is in a much stronger position today than it was one year ago. In late the world was still in a severe recession and prospects for recovery were uncertain ; the third world debt crisis was a source of deep concern ; and economic stagnation had given rise to strong protectionist pressures. In a vigorous recovery originating in the United States began to lead the world out of recession. Many of the high-debt countries made major strides toward successful adjustment. Despite increasing protectionist pressures the open international trading system remained fundamentally intact But the outlook is not entirely sunny. The recovery is not a cure-all for the serious strains that remain in the world economy. " From the U.S. point of view the focus of these strains is the emergence of record trade deficits. Closely related to the problem of the trade deficits is the problem of the continued high value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets. There are also other economic troubles around the globe. Trade relations among the United States Japan and the European Community remain a source of friction. Much of Europe is lagging behind the recovery in North America. The highdebt countries are finding the road back to financial health to be slow and painful This chapter takes the U.S. trade balance as a starting point for an examination of the challenges that still face the world economy. It is organized in three sections. The first section examines the rise in the trade deficit and the related problem of the strong dollar. The second section covers developments among industrialized trading partners : Japan Canada and the European countries. The third section explores the third world debt problem THE U.S. TRADE DEFICIT AND THE DOLLAR The most dramatic recent development in U.S. international economic relations is the rising trade deficit and associated capital inflow. The deficit in merchandise trade was about $ billion approaching twice the previous record which was set in A deficit in the neighborhood of $ billion is forecast for three times the level. The deficits signify loss of income and employment in those U.S. industries that depend on exports or compete with imports. A common reaction is one of concern. It is easy to draw the impression that there is a serious adverse long-run trend in the competitive standing of the United States in the world economy The greatest danger is that such ideas will come to be believed and that as a result the Nation will opt for major departures from its traditional economic system Understanding the source of the rising trade deficit is an essential precondition to making intelligent policy choices. If policy is charted in an atmosphere of panic then crucial mistakes will be made. Mistakes in trade policy once committed can not be easily undone. Foreign trading partners often react to protectionist measures in kind while domestically powerful interest groups coalesce around the new status quo SOURCES OF THE TRADE DEFICIT Although the and likely trade deficits are without precedent they are not difficult to explain. To begin with the United States has a normal or " structural " deficit in merchandise trade that is offset by a surplus in exports of services and therefore need not be a cause for special concern. But it is the recent increase in the trade deficit that has attracted attention. The increase can be broken down into three parts. First the appreciation of the dollar has made it difficult for U.S. firms to compete in world markets. Second there has been a substantial loss in net exports to debt-troubled countries Third the United States is experiencing more rapid growth in income and therefore in imports than are Europe and Japan. These three factors concern economic perturbations that though large are believed to be temporary. The structural deficit is normal in that it would exist even in the absence of the temporary factors The Structural Trade Deficit In the 1970s the United States ran a merchandise trade deficit that was on average equal to percent of gross national product ( GNP ) with a gradual increasing trend as Chart illustrates. This deficit in merchandise does not imply a failure of the Nation to pay its way in international trade. The United States normally runs a surplus in services to offset the deficit in merchandise trade. The largest component of the surplus is the earnings on overseas investments that American residents have made in the past ; these earnings are counted as services because they are payments for the use of U.S. capital But such exports as the services of lawyers engineers and computer programmers and banks insurance companies hospitals and universities are also an important and growing component of the U.S. balance of payments. The balance in services trade has a gradual upward trend as Chart shows Chart Balances on Current Account Trade and Services as Percent of GNP Percent of GNP 8-Quarter Moving Average I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i h i i l I i I l I I I l1 Note. -Based on seasonally adjusted data Source : Department of Commerce Indeed it is possible that because of measurement errors the true U.S. surplus in services is greater than that recorded. Statistics show that the sum of the services balance of all countries is a large negative number on the order of $ billion. Because one country 's exports are another country 's imports this number should in theory be zero. It must necessarily be that some countries are underreporting their services balance. For example fleets of open registry ( i.e. flying " flags of convenience " ) often do not report their earnings to any country. Another example is investment income that is channeled through tax havens and is thus unrecorded in the recipient country Given the importance of the United States in services trade it is possible that part of the unreported service exports are American Adding together the balances in merchandise trade services and transfers ( such as immigrants ' remittances to their countries of origin ) gives the balance on current account. A country 's current account balance indicates its changing investment position vis-a-vis its trading partners. A current account deficit means that foreigners are on net accumulating claims on assets located in the domestic country Countries with profitable investment opportunities such as South Korea Taiwan Singapore and other rapidly industrializing countries are normally in this situation borrowing savings from abroad to finance their development. A current account surplus means that the domestic country is on net accumulating claims on assets located abroad. Capital-rich countries with high saving rates such as Japan and West Germany are normally in this situation lending their savings to other countries where they can earn a higher rate of return There is no clear argument as to whether the United States should normally be a net borrower or net lender at this stage in its history The United States has been a capital-rich country throughout the 20th century and before the 1970s the current account was normally in surplus. But the U.S. saving rate now appears to be the lowest among major countries. As it happens the U.S. current account balance as shown in Chart was on average virtually zero during the 1970s The point is that a certain amount of the U.S. merchandise trade deficit is normal : it would be there offsetting the surplus in services even if the U.S. current account balance were zero. Judging from the long-run trends in the merchandise trade deficit and the services surplus this structural trade deficit now appears to be in the range of $ to $ billion. Most of the recent trade deficit is thus still to be explained Effect of the Strong Dollar The high value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets is the most important cause of the recent increases in the trade deficit. As Chart shows the dollar has appreciated sharply over the past years. As of December the dollar had risen percent against an average of trading partners ' currencies weighted by their shares in world trade relative to the average for ( Weighting countries by trade with the United States alone which gives relatively less weight to Europe and relatively more to Canada and Japan yields a smaller number. ) Exchange rate trends sometimes match international differences in inflation rates but that has not been the case in this episode. Very little of the appreciation of the dollar was offset by a more rapid increase in the foreign price level than in the U.S. price level. In other words the dollar appreciated not only in nominal terms but in real terms as well. The real appreciation of the dollar between and December came to percent. This means that U.S. firms are now offering their products on world markets at prices that on average have risen significantly relative to those of their competitors when compared in a common currency Chart Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rate of the U.S. Dollar March Q llHiiliiiiiliiiiiliiiiiliiuiliniiliiiiiliiiiihniiliuiiliiiiiliMiiliiNilnMilMMihiiiiliiiiilniiiliiiiiliii liiiiihiiin Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The year does not constitute a proper standard of comparison because the dollar had depreciated in real terms in the late 1970s : in U.S. firms were offering their products on world markets at prices that on average had fallen relative to those of their competitors when compared in a common currency. If one takes the average over the period as the standard of comparison then the real appreciation of the dollar as of December comes to percent This real appreciation represents a large loss in competitiveness of U.S. producers. In response foreign residents are more likely to buy their own country 's products than to buy the more expensive U.S exports and U.S. residents and companies are more likely to buy cheaper imports than to spend their money on products made at home The effect on the trade balance is complicated by questions of timing. Although the dollar 's rise began in it was not until that the negative effect on the trade balance began to show up It was not until late that the balance on goods and services turned to deficit. This pattern is in line with historical experience The immediate effect of a dollar appreciation is actually to improve the trade balance because it takes fewer dollars to buy a given quantity of imports. As time passes more and more customers both domestic and foreign switch to the less expensive foreign producers. The real volume of imports rises and of exports falls and the trade balance worsens. The dollar had completed a real appreciation of percent by late relative to the standard of comparison. If the usual pattern of recent years holds up the full effect on the trade deficit will be reached in late Estimates indicate that every percent real appreciation adds about $ billion to the deficit at the peak. Thus the percent real appreciation of the dollar translates into about $ billion of the projected deficit in The continued appreciation of the dollar through portends further deterioration of the trade balance in Effect of Debt Problems in Latin America In the last couple of years a number of highly indebted third world countries have experienced great difficulty meeting their debt obligations. They have had to take strong measures to reduce their imports and to boost their exports in order to generate the foreign exchange to pay the interest on the debt. Many of these countries are in Latin America and conduct an especially high proportion of trade with the United States. Mexico alone accounted for percent of U.S. exports in Seven of the most indebted Latin American countries together accounted for percent of U.S. exports. The reductions in net imports that these countries have been obliged to undertake because of a shortage of foreign exchange are so great that the U.S. share looms large in the U.S. trade balance. Exports of U.S. industries such as farm and construction machinery have been particularly hard-hit As Table shows the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Mexico alone which changed from surplus to deficit in registered a decline of $ billion between and The U.S. loss in net exports to Latin America was about $ billion. By comparison the projected U.S. loss in net exports to Japan from to was only $ billion and to all of Western Europe about $ billion as illustrated in Chart ( The only source of improvement U.S trade with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) is registering smaller deficits than in the past as a consequence of a decline in the demand for OPEC oil and in the dollar price of oil. ) As many of the Latin American debtors still have further economic adjustments to make the loss in U.S. net exports to that region is not expected to diminish much in Chart Change in U.S. Bilateral Trade Balances From to Change in billions of dollars OPEC JAPAN CANADA OTHER WESTERN EUROPE LATIN AMERICA Note. Based on preliminary data for Source : Department of Commerce Effect of Relative Cyclical Position of the United States A country 's level of imports varies with its level of income during the course of the business cycle. Thus world trade in general contracted in the period of recession As of late cyclical factors were a plus for the U.S. trade balance. In the first place even when business cycles are synchronized across countries the U.S. trade balance historically tends to improve in recessions and worsen in expansions. U.S. imports from other countries are usually more responsive to U.S. income than other countries * imports are to their incomes. In the second place as of the recession had been more severe in the United States than for most trading partners. Real GNP had been on average almost constant in the United States from to but had grown at TABLE 2-X. U.S. trade balance by country [ Balance of payments basis millions of dollars ] Country Canada Western Europe United Kingdom. Germany Other Japan Total. Other developed countries. Latin American republics... Brazil Mexico Venezuela Other OPEC ( non-Latin America ) Other developing countries * = = Preliminary estimates Residual excluding Eastern Europe and international organizations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis an average annual rate of percent in other industrialized countries. As of December U.S. industrial production was percent below its previous peak but industrial production in the other six major industrialized countries had fallen only percent over the same period. Thus the recent recession tended to reduce U.S. imports from the rest of the world more than it reduced the rest of the world 's imports from the United States The cyclical position of the United States relative to its trading partners began to turn around rapidly in early In the third quarter of the United States reattained its previous peak in the level of economic activity as measured by industrial production ; most of the major industrial countries had not yet done so. For the year real GNP grew at an annualized rate percent faster in the United States than among a weighted average of trading partners. Thus sometime in the middle of the year the two output paths crossed ; the relative cyclical position was a positive factor in the trade balance in the first half of the year and a negative factor in the second half. The overall effect in was probably close to neutral With U.S. growth from to expected to continue well above that of its major trading partners U.S. imports from other countries will rise faster than other countries ' imports from the United States. The relative cyclical position becomes an increasingly negative factor for future trade balances. Estimates suggest that the relative cyclical position will account for $ to $ billion of the projected worsening in the trade deficit between and Each of the three sources of the increase in the trade deficit the exchange rate the third world debt problem and the relative cyclical position of the industrialized countries warrants further analysis. In each case the impact on U.S. trade may be the channel through which the problem is most forcefully brought to the attention of the American citizen ; but each topic bears examination for its own sake The exchange rate and related topics are considered in the remainder of this section ; the cyclical position of other industrialized countries and the third world debt problem are considered in the second and third sections of the chapter SOURCES OF THE STRONG DOLLAR In the 1950s and 1960s central banks were committed to maintaining their countries ' exchange rates at fixed levels. This effort became increasingly difficult over time due particularly to divergent inflation rates among countries. By the dollar had become unsustainably overvalued in the sense that the supply of dollars greatly exceeded the private demand for dollars. Central banks made up the difference buying unwanted dollars in exchange for foreign currencies The effort was abandoned in and the major currencies moved onto a system of floating i.e. market-determined exchange rates When exchange rates float there is no such thing as undervaluation or overvaluation in the sense of excess market supply or demand for currencies. The value of the currency is whatever the market dictates that it should be The Floating Exchange Rate System It is nearly impossible to imagine the world economy going through the past years in the straightjacket of fixed exchange rates. Given the events of this period notably the large changes in oil prices and the divergent macroeconomic policies among the industrialized countries floating exchange rates have performed well Nevertheless some critics argue that the system is not working as it should. They base their case on the large fluctuations that exchange rates have exhibited over the past years short-term variability as well as longer term swings such as the large rise of the dollar from to The critics also point to the fact that many exchange-rate fluctuations can not readily be explained. Few believe that an early return to fixed exchange rates is possible but there is sentiment in some quarters for government action to try to dampen the fluctuations Transactions costs in financial markets and government-imposed barriers to the flow of capital across national boundaries are today very low among most of the larger industrialized countries. The high international mobility of capital means that the foreign exchange market is now dominated by capital transactions not by trade transactions. The foreign exchange market is an asset market like the stock or bond market ; the exchange rate is the price of one currency in terms of another. It is not surprising that it is difficult to explain all the month-to-month ups and downs of the exchange rate just as it is difficult to explain all the ups and downs in stock prices or bond prices. But most observers agree that an increase in the demand for dollar assets underlay the appreciation. An increase in the demand for a currency results in an increase in its price for the same reason that an increase in the demand for any commodity results in an increase in its price Three reasons are often given for the recent increase in demand for dollar assets. They are ( ) reduced expectations of U.S. inflation ( ) increased U.S. real interest rates and ( ) " safe-haven " and other possible portfolio shifts. We consider each in turn Effect of Reduced Expectations of Inflation In the long run the exchange rate tends to follow the differential trend in the domestic and foreign price levels. If one country 's price level gets too far out of line with prices in other countries there will eventually be a fall in demand for its goods which will lead to a real depreciation of its currency Investors in international money markets are fully aware of the relationship between the price level and the exchange rate. If market participants think that a currency will be losing value in the future through inflation then they will seek to avoid losses by immediately shifting their holdings out of that currency and into other assets This attempt to sell the currency will cause its price to decline even before the anticipated inflation occurs. For example in the late 1970s the value of the dollar declined in large part because of heightened expectations of U.S. inflation There is no way to know exactly what the market expects the inflation rate to be in the future as opposed to what the inflation rate actually is. Table shows three alternative measures of expected inflation : the actual inflation rate over the preceding year ; a weighted average of actual inflation over the preceding years ( with more weight on the most recent years ) ; and forecasts of future inflation made by Data Resources Inc. Regardless which measure is used there was a large drop in the expected U.S. inflation rate between and The market reduced its expectations of U.S. inflation in response to the firm anti-inflation policies of the Administration and of the Federal Reserve to the and recessions and to the actual decline in the observed inflation rate. As the table shows expected inflation also fell in other countries between and but not as much. The differential between U.S. and foreign expected inflation declined The fall in the expected inflation differential is the first of the three reasons for the appreciation of the dollar. Investors who had previously shifted out of dollar assets because of fears of inflation now shifted back. The increase in the demand for dollar assets caused an increase in the price of dollar assets i.e. the exchange rate TABLE Decreases in expected inflation rates and increases in real interest rates to average Item November Change Trading partners Trading partners Trading partners United States Difference United States Difference 1-year inflation Difference Percentage points Percent per annum Long-term government bond rate United States 3-year distributed lag inflation Real interest rate DRI 3-year forecasted Inflation * Real interest rate Real interest rate Canada France Germany Italy Japan and United Kingdom. WeUm u * Change in the consumer price index <CPt ) over the preceding months Weights beginning with the immediately preceding 12-month change in the CPI are and Forecasts of CPI inflation over the subsequent months. is the average of the four quarters ' forecasts Sources : International Monetary Fund and Data Resources Inc. ( DRI ) Effect of Increased Real Interest Rates The effect of the decline in expected inflation is only part of the story. If exchange rate movements were determined solely by inflation rates the decline in expected inflation could explain the nominal appreciation of the dollar but not the real appreciation of the dollar The latter is the important concept for the question of the competitiveness of U.S. producers in world markets A second cause of the appreciation of the dollar between and and the major cause of its real appreciation is the increase in the U.S. real interest rate. The real interest rate is defined as the nominal interest rate corrected for expected inflation. If nominal interest rates had come down as quickly as the expected inflation rate then there would have been no increase in the real interest rate. But by the three measures in Table the U.S. real interest rate rose between and This is typical of historical experience with monetary disinflation : it takes time for reduced expectations of infla- tion to be reflected in reduced nominal interest rates. Real interest rates rose somewhat in other countries too but not by as much. The real interest differential shifted in favor of dollar assets Because U.S. assets now pay a higher expected real rate of return than foreign assets they have become more attractive to hold. The increase in demand for dollar assets arising from a higher real interest differential can explain an increase in the exchange value of the dollar above and beyond the increase that would be due to a lower expected inflation differential in the absence of a change in the real interest differential. It explains why the dollar appreciated not only in nominal terms but in real terms as well Large real appreciations of a currency tend to be temporary. In the long run the real value of the dollar is widely expected to fall back to a level that allows U.S. firms to compete in world markets on an equal basis. To believe otherwise would be to believe that U.S. producers can continue to be priced out of world markets and the United States can continue to run 12-digk trade deficits indefinitely It is impossible to say when the dollar will come back down. The decline could start in or it could come later. To judge by past experience even if there were no unforeseen developments it could be as long as years before the dollar returns to its long-run value It is possible to get a rough idea of how much above its long-run real value the dollar is currently in the market 's view by looking at the long-term real interest differential in favor of the dollar. The long-term interest rate is the one reported in Table The 10-year real interest differential is the compensation that investors get for holding assets in a currency that is expected to depreciate in real terms over the next years. Taking the present 10-year real interest differential to be points the implication is that the market expects the dollar to depreciate in real terms at an average rate of percent a year over the next years or percent altogether ( ignoring compounding ) This arithmetic example would suggest that the market regards the dollar as currently being about percent above its long-run real value In the real interest differential was negative ; the market regarded the dollar as being about percent below its long-run real value. Taking the increase in the real interest differential between and to be points the implication is that this factor by itself is sufficient to explain an increase in the dollar 's value over this period of about percent ( without any change in its long-run real value ) One can get different answers by choosing different horizons or different measures of the rise in the real interest rate. It is possible that none of the three alternative measures of expected inflation in Table adequately reflects true expectations over the 10-year horizon that is relevant. Nevertheless it is evident that the real interest differential is capable of explaining the sort of real appreciation that the dollar has experienced Effect of " Safe-Haven " and Other Possible Portfolio Shifts The third reason that is commonly given for the current strength of the dollar is the " safe-haven " effect : capital flees social and economic instability in other countries for the safety of the United States. There is some danger here of using the term " safe-haven " as a vague label for unexplained shifts in investors ' portfolios. But one concrete interpretation is that investors have shifted their portfolios into dollar assets in response to the increased riskiness of investments in other parts of the world Latin America in particular A decision by Latin Americans to move capital into the United States generates partly offsetting capital outflows from the United States to Europe and other countries. But in the eyes of some observers investments in Europe have also become riskier as a result of economic and political developments. Thus a worldwide portfolio shift into U.S. assets in response to a change in relative risk may explain some part of the dollar appreciation. Other factors that are sometimes mentioned are the more favorable tax treatment for capital investment in the United States and the strength of the U.S. recovery in The Source of High Real Interest Rates If high real interest rates are the most important explanation for the high real value of the dollar what is the explanation for the high real interest rates ? This question is a subject of some controversy The real interest rate equilibrates the supply of saving both private and public to the demand for saving in the form of investment The real interest rate will rise either if the supply of saving shifts down or if investment shifts up. The contribution of the corporate income tax to the cost of capital facing firms has been reduced under this Administration. It is hoped that the increased incentive to firms will stimulate investment in the future. Unfortunately as the second column of Table shows investment as a percentage of GNP was still lower in than in or than the average since Thus an upward shift of investment can not be the sole explanation for the increase in real interest rates. A decrease in the supply of saving also must have played a major role. Indeed there has been a decline in private saving probably because of the recession and a large decline in government saving i.e. a large increase in the Federal budget deficit Although the decline in private and public saving is the most widely cited explanation for high real interest rates other explana- TABLE Distribution ofGNPby component [ Percent ] Period Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Government Net exports purchases of goods of goods and services and services Inventory investment average l Preliminary estimates Source * Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis tions are sometimes given. One is that an increase in uncertainty usually ascribed to increased variability in the U.S. money supply makes nominal dollar assets less attractive so that they must yield a higher expected real return as a " risk premium " if they are to be willingly held. This argument could account for why real interest rates are high but it can not also be an explanation of the strength of the dollar. Any increased uncertainty attaching to dollar assets would cause a fall in demand for them and therefore in the price of the dollar not a rise. Only increased uncertainty in other countries could induce the observed portfolio shift. Indeed that was one possible interpretation of the safe-haven argument discussed above THE CAPITAL ACCOUNT SURPLUS The U.S. current account deficit in was nearly three times the previous record which was set in The immediate connotation of the current account deficit as of the trade deficit is lost production in import-competing and export industries. But there is another way to look at it. The current account deficit is financed by a capital inflow from abroad. Foreigners have been investing in the United States for example participating in the rising stock market and buying Treasury bills Relation to Crowding Out This capital inflow has an important implication for the U.S. economy. Under the natural assumption that the capital inflow is not somehow offset by an equal decrease in domestic saving it keeps real interest rates lower than they otherwise would be. As such it allows those components of GNP that are especially sensitive to the real interest rate housing consumer durables and business investment in plant and equipment to be higher than they otherwise would be. Of course the capital inflow has not been large enough to prevent real interest rates from rising since as reported in Table or investment as a share of GNP from falling as reported in Table Table also shows how two other components of demand consumption and government expenditure have risen since as a percentage of GNP. Indeed it was the increases in these components of spending that drove up real interest rates and crowded out investment as explained in Chapter The important point regarding the inflow of capital into the United States from abroad is that it dampened the rise in the real interest rate and thus reduced the degree of crowding out of investment. This bonus did not come free The counterpart to the capital inflow is the appreciation of the dollar and the worsening of the trade deficit. In effect much of the crowding out is now borne by the import-competing and export industries with the consequence that less of it is borne by the construction consumer durable and capital goods industries In the U.S. current account deficit is forecasted to be roughly percent the size of the Federal Government budget deficit. This means that a capital inflow from abroad is financing the equivalent of percent of the budget deficit and the crowding out of other sectors of domestic demand is reduced correspondingly. International capital flows of this magnitude are consistent with the increasing integration of world capital markets Benefits of the Capital Inflow and Dollar Appreciation Is the inflow of capital and the associated strength of the dollar desirable ? In one sense it is not ; the appreciation of the dollar imposes great costs on import-competing and export industries in terms of lost income and employment. But the strong dollar has substantial benefits too. It keeps down the general price level both directly through lower dollar prices of imports and indirectly through lower prices for domestically produced goods that compete with goods produced abroad. The important question for policy is whether the costs of artificially reducing the capital inflow are greater than the costs of the existing trade deficit In the long run expansion of potential GNP is limited by such factors as growth of the labor force and of the capital stock. Even in the short run monetary policy puts a limit on the expansion of actual dollar GNP because the Federal Reserve is currently committed to a monetary policy that avoids a resurgence of inflation. It follows that if the capital inflow were somehow shut off the dollar allowed to depreciate and export and import-competing industries stimulated to increase production the gains in those industries would probably be offset by losses in other industries so as to leave total GNP unchanged. The mechanism whereby this would happen is an increase in the real interest rate ; the industries that would lose include con- struction and other interest-sensitive industries whose customers are primarily firms undertaking investment There are two reasons why the investment sector should not have its share of the national pie reduced in favor of the export and import-competing sectors as it would be if the capital inflow were shut off. The first is that there is no reason to think that the profitability of investment has fallen. Investment determines how big the national capital stock will be in the future and thus how big output can be. It is true that a capital inflow which constitutes the sale of assets to foreigners represents a loss of future income in the form of capital earnings paid overseas. This loss in income is as great as the loss of returns to plant and equipment never built. Indeed if the United States continues to run current account deficits at anything like the rate forecasted for sometime in the Nation will pass from being a net creditor to being a net debtor for the first time in years. But from the viewpoint of maximizing domestic output and employment it is better to have machines working in the United States even if owned by foreigners than not to have them at all The second reason for sharing economic expansion proportionately among sectors to whatever extent possible has to do with inflation. Expansion is often associated with an increase in inflation Whether U.S. inflation is reignited depends among many other things on the distribution of expansion across sectors. It seems possible that industries that sell their goods and services primarily to the consumer and government sectors will begin to run into capacity constraints before the rest of the economy. At that point any further increases in demand in those sectors are more likely to be reflected in higher prices than in higher production. In the industries that sell their products to firms undertaking investment by contrast there is still tremendous room for expansion. Some industries such as nonresidential construction have only begun to share in the recovery The noninflationary payoff to expansion in these industries is large But if the country had never had the capital inflow the interest rate would be even higher and production in the interest-sensitive industries would be lower without much gain in reduced inflation. The export and import-competing industries would be benefiting from a cheaper dollar. But they might now be starting to run into capacity constraints more quickly with an adverse effect on the overall inflation rate MEASURES TO REDUCE THE TRADE DEFICIT Four kinds of policy measures have at times been proposed to improve the trade balance : protectionism to keep out imports foreign exchange intervention to reduce the value of the dollar capital controls with the same aim and a change in macroeconomic policy. Each of these has costs. Of the four protectionism is the most dangerous Protectionism In a dynamic economy there are always some sectors expanding and others contracting because of technical change shifting consumer tastes and so forth. This is particularly true of an economy exposed to the rigors of competition in world markets. Earlier in its history the U.S. economy with its large domestic market diversified economic resources and geographic remoteness from Europe was less dependent on international trade. But as domestic economies of scale were exhausted as tariffs were reduced worldwide and as declining transportation costs made geography increasingly irrelevant international trade became increasingly important. The growth in exports allowed many U.S. sectors to expand rapidly that otherwise might not have been able to do so. Major examples in recent decades include agriculture high-technology products and services. But the increase in U.S. imports which sooner or later must accompany any increase in exports meant a loss in demand for other U.S. sectors Some sectors that had previously had the domestic market to themselves found that their foreign counterparts could produce quality products at costs far below what they had become accustomed to receiving. Some major examples are the auto and steel industries The economic strains associated with long-term structural trends have always generated political pressure on the government to protect the adversely affected industries. In recent years temporary macroeconomic factors the rise in unemployment during the last recession and the high value of the dollar have exacerbated the economic difficulties of sectors vulnerable to import competition and have intensified accordingly the political pressure to protect them. In addition some exporters are finding that the strong dollar and subsidies by some foreign governments are making it more difficult to compete in foreign markets. This group traditionally forms a constituency for free trade but is now in some cases generating political pressures of its own for government action The Administration 's stated policy is to resist these pressures. Protectionism usually succeeds in increasing the income of the sector seeking protection. However it imposes costs on other sectors that more than outweigh the benefits for the protected sector. These costs are of three kinds. First are the effects on the purchasing power of consumers. A tariff or quota on imports can not succeed in raising the prices received by domestic producers without at the same time raising the prices paid by domestic consumers. Second are the effects on other industries that use the output of the sector in question as an input into their own productive process. Protection for the steel industry raises costs for the auto industry protection for sugar growers raises costs for candy manufacturers and so forth. Third are the effects on export industries. The dollars that foreign countries earn by selling to the U.S. market are useless to them unless sooner or later they spend them on U.S. exports. If the United States cuts off imports of foreign goods foreigners will not have the dollars to buy U.S. exports. Usually it is difficult to identify the specific U.S. export industry that would benefit from increased trade. When the dollars come back to the United States it will not necessarily be in the form of spending by the same foreigners that originally earned them nor in the same year. But in one recent example the connection is clear : China has indicated that if the United States cuts off imports of textiles from it China will cease purchases of agricultural products from the United States The American public retains a broadly based commitment to the ideals of free trade. Nearly all political factions support free trade in principle. But there is a common fallacy that the arguments for free trade are theoretical arguments that lose applicability if other countries are not practicing free trade that market distortions imposed by trading partner governments automatically warrant retaliation by the U.S. Government The desire to retaliate against a foreign government that is for example subsidizing exports is understandable. Such retaliation has two effects one predictable and one unpredictable. The predictable effect is to impose immediate costs on domestic consumers and other domestic producers that exceed the immediate benefits for the protected sector. It is irrelevant to this effect why foreign producers were underselling domestic producers whether it was because of government subsidies the level of the exchange rate or lower labor costs. Export subsidies by foreign governments are in essence income transfers i.e. foreign aid to the importing country The unpredictable effect is the reaction of the foreign government If the foreign government were to respond by removing its subsidies in exchange for the domestic country removing its measures then both sides would be better off. All too often however the foreign government retaliates with more of the same. U.S. measures must be well targeted and explicitly temporary if they are to have the desired effect on foreign governments. There are no winners in a trade war The issue of the duration of protectionist measures is an important one. Frequently measures that are originally adopted as temporary such as quotas imposed to protect a domestic industry " just until it can get back on its feet " turn out later to be very difficult to remove Often protection encourages the industry to delay making needed adjustments rather than to speed them up Foreign Exchange Intervention A second measure that has been proposed to improve the trade balance is intervention in the foreign exchange market by the monetary authorities to force down the value of the dollar and thus to restore price competitiveness to American industry. At the beginning of August and later in the year U.S. authorities did intervene on a small scale buying marks and yen in exchange for dollars in cooperation with monetary authorities in other countries. The intervention did not noticeably depress the value of the dollar nor was it intended to. It is U.S. policy to intervene only to calm disorderly markets There are two kinds of foreign exchange intervention known as sterilized and unsterilized. Sterilized foreign exchange intervention occurs when the central bank at the same time that it is buying foreign currencies with domestic currency sells Treasury securities in the market in order to take the domestic currency back out of circulation. The point of sterilizing the foreign exchange intervention is to keep the domestic money stock unchanged. This is the type of intervention the U.S. monetary authorities undertake when they do intervene Unsterilized intervention has the effect of increasing the domestic money supply. This would have a strong downward effect on the value of the domestic currency. But like any other increase in the money supply it can be inflationary The effect of sterilized intervention is much less clear than the effect of unsterilized intervention. The summer intervention amounted to $ million on the part of U.S. authorities. This was only percent of the flow through the U.S. interbank foreign exchange market on a typical day in It was even less significant relative to the trillions of dollars in funds that investors around the world can commit to the foreign exchange market if they think that the exchange value of the dollar has been temporarily pushed below the true market level. Investors will move in quickly to exploit the potential profit opportunity buying dollars and thereby returning the price of the dollar to its previous level. This process ensures that unless monetary authorities are prepared to intervene on a massive scale any effects on the exchange rate will be transitory. After the Versailles Summit of a working group with representatives of the seven Summit countries was set up to study exchange market intervention. Its report released in April concluded in part that there was " broad agreement that sterilized intervention did not generally have a lasting effect. ' * If monetary authorities were prepared to intervene on a sufficiently massive scale there could conceivably be some permanent effect on the exchange rate even if the intervention were sterilized so as to leave the money supply unchanged. But to the extent that sterilized purchases of foreign currency were successful in reducing the value of the dollar they would also be successful in raising the U.S. interest rate. The reason is that sterilized intervention does not leave market participants holding any more dollar currency than before ; it leaves them holding more dollar Treasury securities than before. The interest rate would have to rise to induce the market to hold a greater quantity of Treasury securities just as it does whenever the government sells large enough quantities of Treasury securities. The exporting and import-competing industries would be happy with the lower value of the dollar. But the capital goods construction and other interest-sensitive industries would be unhappy with the higher interest rate Capital Controls The third kind of measure that has been suggested to reduce the U.S. deficit is the adoption of an international " interest equalization tax " or other restrictions on the international mobility of funds. The aim would be to shut off or reduce the inflow of capital and thus reduce the exchange value of the dollar The case against restrictions on the international flow of capital is analogous to the case against restrictions on the international flow of commodities i.e. the case for free trade. Controls on international borrowing and lending interfere with the efficient allocation of capital among countries. The Administration is opposed to capital controls as a matter of general principle What effect would controls on capital inflow in the United States have in the present context ? As with exchange market intervention there are two possibilities. One possibility is that the controls would not even be effective. The experience of the United States in the 1960s and of other countries today is that there are many ways to circumvent capital controls. The alternative possibility is that the controls would be strong enough to reduce the capital inflow and thereby reduce the value of the dollar. But if so the reduced supply of saving from abroad would also raise the real interest rate and once again concentrate all the crowding out in the interest-sensitive sectors Macroeconomic Policy The fourth kind of measure that has been suggested to reduce the U.S. trade deficit is a change in macroeconomic policy One possibility is a more expansionary monetary policy. This would clearly reduce the value of the dollar. In the short run before prices throughout the economy had time to adjust it would reduce the value of the dollar not only in nominal terms but in real terms as well. Thus it would succeed in stimulating the demand for U.S. products. Unfortunately a more expansionary monetary policy would also have adverse consequences for inflation. In the long run when prices have had time to adjust there would probably be no effect on the real exchange rate or real output only an increase in the general price level. Because of the inflationary consequences the Administration does not advocate using expansionary monetary policy to depress the value of the dollar On the other hand for those who are concerned that monetary policy should be tightened it is worth taking note of the undesirable consequences for the exchange rate in the short run. The fact that the price of the dollar in foreign exchange markets remained high throughout is a clear signal that the market had confidence in the Federal Reserve and that the money growth rate was not excessive The last possibility is a policy of reducing the budget deficit. Measures to reduce the budget deficit would lower real interest rates and thus allow the investment sector to share more fully in the recovery that is now taking place primarily in the government and consumer sectors. But further it would also lower the real value of the dollar and thus allow the exporting and import-competing sectors to share in the recovery as well. Of course just as there are costs to the other proposed measures to improve the trade balance there are also costs to reducing the budget deficit whether by reducing government expenditure or by raising taxes DEVELOPMENTS IN OTHER INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES One of the challenges facing the world economy is the uneven geographical distribution of the recovery. Among the industrialized countries only in Canada is real growth in expected to be as strong as in the United States. The implication for U.S. trade is negative : slower growth among trading partners than in North America means slower growth in U.S. exports than in U.S. imports. As Chart shows U.S. trade with both Europe and Japan is deteriorating EUROPE The recovery in the United States and Canada is in the process of spreading to Europe as well. The United Kingdom and West Germany seem to have embarked on a path of renewed growth. Ex- pansionary policies in France in postponed the recession there but deteriorating inflation and balance of payments situations led to the adoption of austerity measures. Though the French trade balance improved in worries about inflation remained serious enough to keep a lid on expectations of future French expansion. In Italy and most of the smaller European countries there was no significant recovery for as a whole although there were some signs of a pickup in economic activity toward the end of the year Effects on Europe of U. S Economic Developments Inflation has declined in all the larger European countries since This accomplishment has not been easy. The weakness of their currencies against the dollar has meant higher prices for oil and other imports in Europe. To limit the damage from both domestic and imported inflation most European countries have accepted higher real interest rates than they would have accepted otherwise Indeed this is the mechanism through which recession was transmitted to Europe in Just as capital flowing into the United States has kept real U.S. interest rates lower and U.S. investment higher than they would otherwise be so has capital flowing out of some European countries probably kept real European interest rates higher and European investment lower than they would otherwise be. In effect the low U.S. rate of private and public saving is crowding out investment not just in the United States but in the rest of the world as well The counterpart to a capital outflow is a current account surplus This is the positive side of the ledger from the viewpoint of the European countries. Their depreciated currencies give their exporting and import-competing industries a competitive advantage in world markets. Until now the Europeans have not on the whole considered that they were benefiting from the strength of the dollar and the U.S trade deficit despite their sizable share of it illustrated in Chart Some have found it politically convenient to focus exclusively on the negative aspects of the exchange rate movement. The world current account discrepancy may also be part of the explanation : it is as if each country thinks it is running a deficit in goods and services and someone else must be running the surplus In any case in U.S. growth will lead to greater demand for European goods and thus is likely to help pull Europe out of its recession. The prospective reversal of the appreciation of the dollar is another development to which the Europeans can look forward. If the dollar depreciates as many expect the reduction in import prices will make the task of fighting inflation easier in Europe Of course the reversal in the gain in European competitiveness would also lead to an eventual reversal in the gain in net exports to the United States. But it might allow European monetary authorities to bring down interest rates and stimulate domestic demand at least in those countries such as West Germany and the United Kingdom that have relatively strong current account and inflation positions The weaker-currency countries in Europe would find it difficult to expand on their own. The French franc for example might come under renewed pressure within the European Monetary System if a prospective world portfolio shift out of dollars were accompanied by a portfolio shift into marks Structural Problems in European Labor Markets Regardless of what happens in the international financial markets the problem of million unemployed workers still plagues Western Europe. Indeed in the unemployment rate continued to climb throughout Europe. In sharp contrast to the United States Western Europe employs about the same number of workers on an absolute basis as it did in The most commonly cited cause of the bleak employment picture is excessive labor costs. Due to wage contracts indexed to consumer prices and other less institutionalized social forces real wages in Europe never adjusted in the 1970s to reflect the negative effect of oil shocks on the productivity of labor. Some observers argue that the greater rigidity of real wages in Europe than in the United States explains European governments * lack of enthusiasm for expansionary demand policies despite low growth. For example some European governments have taken steps to reduce government expenditure. They have also expressed the wish that the United States would reduce its budget deficit. Whether or not it is correct that expansion requires real wages to fall it seems likely that any expansion of employment in Europe will greatly lag expansion of output. The implications for investment and long-term growth are also disturbing JAPAN Economic performance in Japan has been impressive by the standards of most countries even though the world recession was reflected in Japan as a clear slowdown in real growth. The Japanese trade account moved into substantial surplus again in as declining oil prices reduced the import bill and recovery in the United States and some others of Japan 's trading partners boosted exports Domestic demand remained somewhat sluggish Trade with the United States and Japanese Commercial Policy As Table shows the U.S. trade deficit with Japan known as a bilateral trade deficit is larger than with any other single country Trade relations between the two countries are a source of special concern and warrant a careful analysis To some extent the bilateral trade imbalance follows naturally from three other facts : Japan usually runs a merchandise trade surplus with the rest of the world as a consequence of its high rate of saving and its deficit in services The United States usually runs a merchandise trade deficit as a consequence of its low rate of saving and its surplus in services Japan and the United States are the two largest market economies in the world and account for large shares of each other 's trade There is an important reason why even if Japan 's overall trade balance were zero it would still run a large bilateral trade surplus with the United States and a very large surplus in manufactured goods in particular. Japan has few natural resources and is dependent on imports for its supply of primary products especially oil and other mineral fuels. It must earn the foreign exchange to pay for the oil by exporting other goods. If the United States were willing to sell enough Alaskan oil to Japan for example the bilateral trade imbalance would be reduced. As it is Japan buys its oil elsewhere running a large bilateral deficit with OPEC countries. And Europe normally runs a bilateral deficit with the United States. It is as though the United States sells to Europe in order to be able to buy from Japan Japan sells to the United States in order to be able to buy from OPEC and so forth around the circle of trading partners The important point is that it is neither necessary nor desirable that any two countries ' bilateral trade be in balance any more than it is necessary or desirable for an auto manufacturer to be in bilateral balance with its steel supplier or a household with its plumber. One looks at the overall balance of a household company or country not at bilateral balances to see if it is earning more from all its trading partners together than it is paying out One widely held belief is that Japanese trade policy is responsible for the fact that Japan does not buy as much from the United States as the United States buys from it. Because the Japanese have accelerated tariff reductions agreed to in the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations their tariffs are now lower than those of the United States and the European Community. But the Japanese maintain a number of nontariff barriers against imports that are a source of friction with the United States. These include import quotas for some agricultural products and less tangible barriers to imports of manufactured goods such as inspection requirements and government purchasing policies. Recent negotiations between the two governments in such areas as beef and citrus products metallur- gical coal and natural gas cigarettes and telecommunications equipment have made some progress in reducing these barriers. But frictions remain Import barriers in every country protect those sectors that would not have the comparative advantage in a fair fight at the expense of those sectors that would. In the Japanese case it is agriculture that is easily the least competitive sector and therefore the most protected with beef and citrus products the most highly visible examples. Japan already imports a lot of agricultural products ; indeed it is the largest customer of U.S. agricultural exports. But in general a high observed degree of " import penetration * ' does not preclude the existence of a high degree of protection. In fact import penetration is often the cause and protection the effect rather than the other way around. Many countries invoke national security arguments as a justification for protectionist measures ; it should be noted that Japan does so on behalf of its agricultural sector It would be in the Japanese interest to reduce or remove the agricultural barriers because they can import these products far more cheaply than it costs to produce them domestically. Japanese liberalization would of course also be in the interest of U.S. farmers. It probably would not be in the interest of the U.S. manufacturing sector however. In view of Japan 's deficits in oil and services it must run surpluses in its trade in other goods. If Japan were to start importing more agricultural products its trade balance would not simply worsen by the same amount. Rather the yen would eventually depreciate in order to generate the required trade surpluses in other sectors i.e. manufactures. The point is that Japanese protectionism like all protectionism distorts the pattern of trade in such a way as to hurt both countries on net ; but it is not a major source of the Japanese trade surplus The Yen Exchange Rate and Japanese Foreign Exchange Intervention Another common claim is that an undervalued yen is the source of the trade problem. One version of this view is that the Japanese are deliberately keeping the yen undervalued presumably either through foreign exchange intervention or through capital controls. No aspect of this view stands up well to the facts however The value of the yen has indeed fallen in terms of dollars since though this movement was largely reversed in late As of December the yen had depreciated percent relative to the average. This depreciation has not been an offsetting reaction to different rates of inflation. Rather the opposite is the case : because of superior inflation performance the gain in Japanese competitiveness over this period has been percent as measured by consumer prices However the dollar has appreciated against all foreign currencies not just the yen. Chart shows the value of the yen mark franc and pound each in terms of dollars. The mark franc and pound are all clearly down in value by more than the yen. In fact relative to the average the yen has actually risen.in nominal terms by more than percent against the dollar. It is difficult given Chart to single out the yen as the troublemaker Chart Bilateral Exchange Rates = U.S. dollars per unit of foreign currency f 1111111111MIL111M111J111 r i 11111111111111111M11111111111111111 i 1111M111111 i L1111111J111 Source : international Monetary Fund The bilateral exchange rate between the yen and the dollar remains a source of difficulty for U.S. businessmen who compete with Japan in domestic or foreign markets. Have the Japanese intervened to keep the yen at a lower level against the dollar than it otherwise would be ? Although the Japanese authorities practice occasional exchange market intervention their intervention has if anything prevented a further decline of the yen relative to the dollar. The Japanese monetary authorities have long followed a policy of trying to dampen fluctuations in the exchange rate known as " leaning against the wind. " In and when the dollar was weak against the yen the Japanese authorities bought dollars to dampen the down- ward movement of the dollar against their own currency. In the period since April when the dollar has been strong against the yen the Japanese have sold dollars to dampen the upward movement of the dollar against their own currency. The intervention does not appear to have been effective at moderating the swings in the yen/ dollar rate. But it has worked in that direction Liberalization of Japanese Capital Markets The cause of the decline in the exchange value of the yen against the dollar since is the flow of capital out of Japan and into the United States. A primary reason for this capital flow is the high real U.S. interest rate. But it has been suggested that Japanese restrictions on the international flow of capital may also be a factor Japan like the United States and European countries maintained into the 1970s controls on the international flow of capital that had originated under the fixed exchange rate system. After the shift to floating exchange rates in the United States West Germany and the United Kingdom one by one removed their capital controls As recently as Japan still retained formidable barriers to both inflow and outflow. For example foreigners were not allowed to hold many Japanese securities such as gensaki a 3-month repurchase agreement. Chart shows the Tokyo gensaki interest rate and the London 3-month Euro-yen interest rate. The fact that the Tokyo gensaki rate exceeded the London Euro-yen rate in is clear evidence that capital controls were operating to reduce capital inflow into Japan. Otherwise foreign residents would not have been willing to hold Euro-yen in London when a higher interest rate was available in Tokyo. The yen was then at an all-time high against the dollar and the Japanese were trying to dampen its appreciation by keeping capital from flowing into the country When the yen depreciated rapidly in the Japanese moved quickly to remove controls on capital inflow making it possible for foreigners to hold Japanese securities. Japan 's Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Control Law of December established a presumption that international capital flows are permitted. Chart shows that the de jure liberalization took place de facto as well. The differential between the gensaki and Euro-yen rates dropped sharply In fact the differential though small became negative in and This is evidence that Japanese controls on the inflow of capital were liberalized more quickly than controls on capital outflow. If some barriers to capital outflow had not remained Japanese investors would not have been willing to hold assets in Tokyo when a higher interest rate on comparable yen securities was available in London. Thus those capital controls that remained were more a force keeping capital inside the country than outside and thus more a Chart Interest Rates on the Yen Percent per annum Euro-Yen ( London ) Source : Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York force keeping the yen value up than keeping it down. By the gensaki-Euro-yen differential was so small as to suggest that Japanese capital markets for short-term negotiable instruments were as open as for example European capital markets The governments of both Japan and the United States recognize that the yen/dollar exchange rate remains a source of concern particularly insofar as it heightens protectionist pressures in the United States. One proposal is that the Japanese government take positive action to bring about some capital inflow. In some Japanese government-affiliated agencies plan to issue foreign currency bonds in New York. However the governments of both countries feel that more direct measures such as reinstatement of some of the controls on capital outflow even if they were effective would be counterproductive to the longer term goal of completing the integration of Japan into world financial markets In the past the yen has not occupied a place in world financial arrangements that is commensurate with Japan 's importance in world trade. For example the yen 's share in world official holdings of foreign exchange though it has risen rapidly still falls short of not only the dollar 's share but the mark 's share as well. Similarly the percentage of Japan 's exports that are denominated in its own currency though it has risen rapidly is still below the corresponding percentage for other large industrialized countries. At the time of the President 's trip to Japan in November the Japanese agreed to promote increased " internationalization " of the yen. This includes such concrete measures as relaxing the rules that previously restricted use of the yen forward exchange market to transactions arising from foreign trade. There is no reason to expect such measures to have a noticeable upward effect on the value of the yen in the short run. Nevertheless in the long run an enhanced role for the yen in world financial markets is considered by some to be desirable in that it reflects Japan 's importance in the world economy and is hoped to contribute to some increase in its exchange value against the dollar as well A related goal is continued deregulation of domestic Japanese capital markets which lags behind deregulation in the United States. Here the major beneficiary of liberalization would be Japanese households who in the past have not been paid competitive interest rates on their savings. But it is also sometimes argued that if interest rates rose in Japan there might be a decline in capital outflow from Japan and an appreciation of the yen Changes in the Japanese-U.S. Trade Balance The Japanese government is not using either foreign exchange intervention or capital controls to keep the yen " undervalued. " Indeed it would be more accurate to say that the dollar is " overvalued " than to say that the yen is " undervalued. " The other major currencies are down against the dollar to a greater extent than is the yen. One would expect that the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Japan would not have worsened more than the bilateral trade balance with other countries This is indeed the case. As Chart and Table show the bilateral balance with Japan has worsened. But the deterioration in the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Japan represents less than oneeighth of the total decline in the overall U.S. trade balance The deterioration in the bilateral balance is less severe as a proportion of U.S. imports from Japan than the deterioration in the overall U.S. trade balance. The deterioration in the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Japan is also far less severe on either an absolute or relative basis than the deterioration in the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Mexico over the same period This is not to say that U.S. trade with Japan does not remain a source of concern. The point is that the trade balance with Japan has deteriorated for the same reasons as the balance with other countries THIRD WORLD DEBT PROBLEM The decline in the U.S. trade balance is good news for many trading partners. In the cases of Canada Japan and Europe it represents a pickup in exports that has helped to pull their economies out of recession. But in the cases of the third world countries particularly those in Latin America the changing pattern of trade represents something quite different. As seen in Chart the decline in the U.S. trade balance with Latin America is much greater in magnitude than the decline in the U.S. trade balance with other parts of the world. The increase in their trade balances is not good news for the Latin Americans ; it is the reverse. It is a symptom of the severe debt problem that afflicts most of these countries and many in Asia Africa and Eastern Europe as well and of the wrenching adjustments that they are finding it necessary to undertake THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM Recent Developments in the Debtor Countries Although there had been previous isolated cracks in the international debt terrain it was not until that the problem erupted in dramatic proportions. In August of that year Mexico announced that it was unable to meet its debt obligations to foreign creditors although it was taking steps to rectify the situation. In response the U.S. Government mounted a rescue operation involving the creditor banks the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and other creditor governments. The package included a strict program of adjustment for the Mexican economy and a rescheduling of much of the debt Nervous banks began to cut back lending to other countries that appeared to be heavily indebted with Brazil the most obvious target As long as the banks had been willing to continue lending the debtor countries had had the foreign exchange necessary to continue servicing their accumulated debt i.e. making scheduled payments of interest and amortization of principal. As the banks cut back the debtors found debt-service obligations increasingly difficult to meet One by one Brazil Argentina and many other debtor countries found it necessary to seek debt relief from their creditors while implementing programs of economic adjustment monitored by the IMF The most important result of these programs of adjustment has been a sharp improvement in trade balances so that interest pay- merits do not have to be met entirely out of new loans but can be largely met out of foreign exchange earnings from international trade. In the adjustment efforts of several of the most troubled debtors were successful to the point of achieving significant surpluses in their balances of trade. By the end of the year the situation looked considerably brighter especially in Mexico. If all concerned parties continue their efforts and there are no unforeseen calamities the system can be expected gradually to work its way back to normalcy The increases in debtors ' trade balances have been achieved largely by cutting imports. Cutting imports is the only practical way of achieving a large increase in the trade balance in a short period of time. But past a certain point it is difficult to sustain. It means that the population 's standard of living is falling inventories of raw materials and spare parts have been exhausted and investment is at a standstill. In some cases inadequate supplies of imported inputs have forced firms to curtail production even firms producing for export markets. Beginning in further progress will depend most critically on expansion of exports rather than further contraction of imports. Only then will adjustment be compatible with a world of economic growth Liquidity Versus Solvency Central to an analysis of the current debt problem is the distinction between liquidity and solvency. Because countries do not go out of business * as do firms the distinction is not absolute but is rather a matter of degree. A country might be defined as insolvent if it is likely to find servicing its debt increasingly difficult over time and eventually to have to default. A country is merely short of liquidity if its economy is believed to be fundamentally sound and its debt-servicing difficulties are believed to be temporary. In that case continued lending to keep the country liquid is justified so as not to cause unnecessary damage to the local economy and so as not to risk more drastic solutions with their adverse economic and political repercussions. In the case of insolvency however there would be no point in the country making it through another year only to face the same difficulties next year that much further into debt ; more drastic solutions would be called for Argentina Brazil and Mexico are the three debtor countries that have dominated the discussion not only because of their size but also because of the acuteness of their financial distress. One indication of their difficulties is that in all three cases debt-service obligations ( interest and amortization including short-term debt as originally scheduled ) exceed percent of exports of goods and services. This means that even if the countries could somehow cut their imports to zero their export earnings would not be sufficient to serv- ice the debt in the absence of continued new lending. But many healthy developing countries borrow abroad to finance their development and would be hard put to meet their debt obligations if for some reason they were suddenly cut off from new lending. Furthermore debt-service numbers are particularly sensitive to yearly fluctuations in interest rates. A longer term measure of " how far in over their heads " the debtor countries have gotten is the ratio of debt to exports. This ratio is reported in the first row of Table for Argentina Brazil and Mexico taken together. The ratio increased rapidly between and and now exceeds percent. If the debt/export ratio were expected to continue to increase in the future the countries could be considered insolvent ORIGINS OF THE PROBLEM The solvency issue is analyzed below. But to evaluate the future it helps first to recount the past The 1970s : Incurring the Debt The present pattern of lending to third world countries with its heavy concentration on bank lending is only years old. In the aftermath of the oil price shock banks " recycled " billions of dollars of savings that the OPEC countries could not in the short run absorb. World inflation rates were high and real interest rates very low even negative through the remainder of the decade signaling a high level of savings in search of investment opportunities. The funds went not to all the third world countries that were having difficulty paying their higher oil bills but mainly to those judged to have good prospects for future growth and thus good prospects for full repayment of the debt This lending seemed sensible at the time. The high world inflation rates and low real interest rates meant it was advantageous for the countries in question to borrow and that servicing the debt did not look difficult. A high level of indebtedness is not necessarily a source of concern as long as the borrowing countries are expected to grow Corporations whose income is expected to grow in the future often have a high ratio of debt to earnings. Countries do the same. The United States in the 1880s had debt/export ratios as high as those in Table Nor were the banks * expectations of high growth rates in the debtor countries in the 1970s disappointed. The rate of growth of exports from to was as great as the rate of growth of debt in Argentina Brazil and Mexico taken together. Thus the key measure the debt/export ratio did not rise during this period Prior to private capital flows to third world countries had predominantly taken the form of foreign direct investment bonds issued for specific projects and short-term trade credit for specific imports. The pairing of loans to projects has the virtue of ensuring that the sum of the lending equals the sum of the investment. The bank lending of the 1970s was more often for general balance of payments financing. There is nothing wrong with this in itself. But it allowed total lending to exceed total project investment. The fact that a large number of banks were involved and that good aggregate statistics on lending did not at first exist added to the confusion. The banks may not have realized the extent of their collective investment The debtor countries also made policy mistakes. The mistakes fall into two broad categories : overexpansion of demand and overvaluation of currencies. Both kinds of mistakes led to excessive trade deficits and therefore excessive borrowing to finance those deficits. But beyond this observation generalization is difficult. In many countries the government sector expanded too quickly especially in the form of credit to inefficient state enterprises. Often government deficits were monetized and the currency was not devalued fast enough to keep up with inflation ; then the loss in competitiveness of export industries led to trade deficits that were financed by borrowing from abroad. The end result was the same as when the governments financed their deficits by borrowing from abroad directly. Though much of the money was used for profitable investment some went to unwise projects to consumption and to capital flight out of the countries involved In some countries a capital inflow and consequent real appreciation of the currency were the unintended effects of favorable developments. For example the discovery of oil in Mexico brought about an increase in indebtedness financing the investment necessary to develop the oil. Furthermore the monetary inflow added to inflationary pressures and the loss in price competitiveness had an adverse effect on the exports of other industries especially the manufacturing sector on which previous hopes for growth had been pinned In other countries the simultaneous adoption of an array of monetarist and free market policies did not prevent indebtedness. Monetary stabilization made the country 's assets seem attractive to hold trade liberalization increased the trade deficit and removal of capital controls allowed foreign capital to flood in. In several countries real overvaluation of the currency was an intentional element of the plan to reduce inflation quickly. The magnitude and duration of the loss in export competitiveness that followed were not intentional : A Change in the International Environment As of there was little reason to doubt the ability of most of the debtor countries to sustain high rates of growth. If the international economic environment had remained favorable it is possible that the debtor countries could have gone for years without having to adjust their policies. But beginning in they were buffeted by several blows not of their own making. First inflation rates fell and real interest rates rose in the United States and in other countries Because the percentage of the debt that was short term had been increasing and most of the rest carried floating interest rates the rise in the market rate of interest showed up quickly in debt-service requirements Second came the world recession. The export earnings of the debtor countries fell sharply. The demand for the primary products that many of the countries produce has always been highly sensitive to income in the industrialized countries. The years and saw sharp drops in the prices of these products relative to goods produced in the industrialized countries. In addition the nontraditional exports that had grown rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s were hurt by the increased application of protectionist measures in the industrialized countries. Protectionist measures sometimes operated to limit exporters to their past levels of sales in which case exports from the " new arrivals " in the market were hurt disproportionately. In Argentina Brazil and Mexico total export revenue fell about percent in in dollar terms A third factor that contributed to the debtors ' loss in export revenue was the large appreciation of the dollar. The strength of the dollar was in particular a source of the fall in primary product prices when expressed in dollars which is the appropriate measure because most of the debt is denominated in dollars A fourth factor for some countries was the decline in dollar oil prices after ( which in turn derived partly from the other three factors ) The oil price decline of course helped the oil-importing countries which are the majority. But it added to the list of problem debtors a number of oil-exporting countries OPEC members such as Venezuela and Nigeria as well as nonmembers such as Mexico The loss in export earnings attributable to the world recession shows up immediately in the denominator of the debt/export ratio The higher interest payments show up immediately in the current account deficit which in turn shows up over time as a rise in the numerator of the debt/export ratio. As seen in Table the ratio rose sharply in It is worth noting that virtually all the major Latin American countries got into trouble the oil exporters as well as the oil importers those that followed monetarist and free market policies as well as those that increased the money growth rate and expanded the role of the government in the economy. This suggests that in retrospect the key factor which they all shared was getting deeply into debt in the first place TABLE Debt/export ratios for Argentina Brazil 2nd Mexico aggregated < Item ( ) Debt/export ratio Billions of dollars ( ) Interest payments { ) Trade deficitl ( ) Debt2 ? ? Percent ( ) Implied interest rate ( ) / { ) ( ) Trade deficit/debt ( ) / ( ) ( ) Current account deficit/debt ( ) ( ) ( ) Change of exports to next period = Trade deficit on goods and services excluding interest Gross debt including short-term debt Sources : International Monetary Fund Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York and Council of Economic Advisers It is however true that South Korea and other Asian countries that had become as indebted as many of the Latin American countries as measured by debt/output ratios encountered less severe problems in the 1980s. What distinguishes South Korea and other Asian debtors from most Latin American countries is not the degree of government intervention in the domestic economy but the degree of export-orientation. Exports of goods services and private transfers are percent of GNP in South Korea as the result of years of vigorous export promotion. By contrast they are percent of GNP in Mexico percent in Argentina and just percent in Brazil Indeed of the major Asian debtors the one to run into the most serious problems the Philippines also has the lowest ratio of exports to output. While many other factors are relevant a debtor country with a high ratio of exports to GNP is less likely to get into debtservicing difficulties than an otherwise similar debtor country WILL DEBT/EXPORT RATIOS IMPROVE ? Argentina Brazil and Mexico are all expected to receive new loans in One point of view is that this is throwing good money after bad that the loans will never be repaid that the problem is one of insolvency rather than illiquidity. According to this view the present case-by-case approach is unrealistic and should be replaced by some sort of general write-down of the debt. This view is accompanied by widely ranging degrees of sympathy for the debtors. Some observers call for a new agency to buy the written-down debt and extend more favorable terms to the debtors. Others believe that the countries should be left to fend for themselves An evaluation of the insolvency versus illiquidity issue is critical The question is what debt/export ratios are likely to do over the course of the next decade. Ever-rising debt/export ratios imply insolvency. Ratios that decline over time and eventually reach reasonable levels imply that the difficulty is only one of liquidity The debt/export ratio will decline if the rate of growth of debt is less than the rate of growth of exports. The growth of the debt can be identified with the current account deficit. ( In the past current account deficits could also to some extent be financed by foreign direct investment and temporary drawing-down of international reserves. In the long-term future a successful resolution of the debt problem would include a revival of foreign direct investment. But as of in many countries there is now little likelihood of a continuation of these flows. ) The current account deficit consists of interest payments plus the deficit in merchandise trade and non-interest services and transfers. Rows and in Table report interest payments and the trade deficit respectively each as a percentage of the level of the debt. If the expected rate of growth of exports is greater than the sum of these two numbers i.e. greater than the current account/ debt ratio reported in row then the debt/export ratio can be expected to decline over time. This criterion was easily met by the percent average annual growth rate in exports that prevailed from to The sharp increases in interest rates after made the criterion much more difficult to meet. If the trade balance had remained in deficit or had been zero the criterion would not now be met. But Argentina Brazil and Mexico succeeded in switching their trade balances from deficit to surplus by Comparing expected export growth with the average interest rate being paid on the debt ( the number in row percent in ) alone would be too strict a criterion. It would not give the countries credit for the adjustment they have accomplished. But the total current account deficit/debt ratio in row was only percent in This is a more reasonable target against which to compare the rate of exporj growth What is export growth expected to be in coming years ? The answer depends on the growth rate in the industrialized countries among other factors. Even assuming the industrialized world 's real growth rate has now returned to that of the late 1970s there is little likelihood of the growth rate of export earnings returning soon to the percent average annual rate of the earlier period. The quantity of debtor country exports demanded is expected to respond less favorably to this recovery than to past recoveries in part because in recent years the debtors had come to rely to a greater extent on exports to each other and to OPEC and strong recovery in the near term is expected only in the industrialized countries. But allowing for some improvement in the dollar prices that the debtor countries are paid for their products and the improvement might be large over the next few years if the dollar depreciates there does not seem to be much doubt that the rate of growth of export revenue will exceed percent by a comfortable margin in and into the indefinite future. Thus there is not much doubt that the debt/export ratio will decline. Eventually as export growth and lender confidence are restored the debtors can be expected to return to the trade balance deficits appropriate to developing countries SHARING THE BURDEN Because the debt problem seems to be one of liquidity rather than one of solvency i.e. continued lending will permit exports to grow more quickly than the debt burden it is important to keep the lending going. Chart illustrates the amount of foreign exchange available to Argentina Brazil and Mexico taken together. In the 1970s imports exceeded exports that is they ran trade deficits. Because the prospects for future growth looked good voluntary private lending was sufficient to finance both the trade deficit and interest payments on previously incurred debt. By interest payments had become very large and because of worsened prospects banks had become reluctant to extend enough new lending to cover the interest payments let alone any trade deficit. It was only as part of a cooperative effort among the debtors banks industrialized country governments and the IMF that the debtor countries were able to get through the year. The next four subsections consider in turn each of the four parties to this cooperative effort Adjustment by the Debtor Countries By far the greatest share of the burden was borne by the debtors themselves. Between and the three Latin American countries taken together succeeded in improving their aggregate trade balance in goods and services ( excluding interest ) by $ billion. In the larger debtor countries most of the change was accomplished by cutting imports sharply mainly by contracting income and expenditure although partly by devaluation and other methods. From to imports were slashed about percent in Argentina percent in Brazil and percent in Mexico. All three countries have had to suffer severe recessions in order to reduce expenditure on traded goods. Real GNP has been falling rapidly. In these and other countries unemployment is very high and the standard of living of most of the population including the middle class has deteriorated sharply Chart Sources and Uses of Foreign Exchange : Argentina Brazil and Mexico Aggregated Billions of dollars Sources Uses Sources Uses Notes : Capita ! Inflow/Outflow : Nonbank long-term lending from private sources and non-debt-creating flows { such as foreign direct investment ) ; net ( of capital flight ) Official : Long-term borrowing from official sources official transfers and reserve-related liabilities ( such as loans from the Bank for International Settlements ) IMF : Use of Fund credit Services : ' Net payments for services excluding interest less private transfers Source : International Monetary Fund Calls for solutions to the debt problem through adjustment by the debtor countries must acknowledge the fact that an enormous amount of adjustment is already taking place. Indeed it was the large swing in the trade balance from deficit to surplus that allowed the debt/export ratio to begin falling New Bank Lending As can be seen from Chart the increase in the debtor countries * trade balances in was still not enough to pay for all of the interest they owed. In other words most of them ran current account deficits. The largest source of financing of the deficits was the banks New bank lending to Argentina Brazil and Mexico in was about $ billion The role of the banks has been controversial. One commonly expressed point of view is that the banks made unwise loans and they now deserve to suffer the consequences. A related viewpoint is that regardless of whether in the 1970s one could have foreseen the debt crisis a necessary part of the discipline of the marketplace is the taking of losses when things go wrong unmitigated by help from national or supranational government institutions. Proponents of this philosophy will be skeptical of solvency calculations like those in Table They may ask why it is necessary for the IMF and the United States and other governments to get involved if the loans are profitable and repayable In the current international financial system an individual bank particularly one of the many smaller banks has an incentive to discontinue new lending to a problem debtor. A new loan adds to the amount of capital the bank has at risk. Yet if the bank 's share is small relative to the total a new loan does not visibly add to the debtor 's ability to remain current in its payments on its previously incurred debts. If all the banks as part of a package continue new lending this does add significantly to the ability of the country to service its debt on schedule. But an individual bank has no incentive to take into account that its actions might contribute to the failure of the package and thus precipitate the default that it fears. Left to itself the bank would be a " free rider " allowing the quality of its portfolio to benefit from the new loans of others without putting up any new money itself. This free-rider problem is one justification for a role for the IMF and other public institutions The International Monetary Fund The IMF is the third of the four legs after the debtors and the banks on which responsibility for managing the debt problem rests In the Administration sought and eventually won congressional approval for the U.S. share of an increase in resources for the IMF The IMF lends money to any of its member governments that are in balance of payments difficulty. No member has ever defaulted on an IMF loan. In the past the two biggest borrowers have been the United Kingdom and the United States The IMF has increased total lending in the period of financial distress in the third world and tight liquidity worldwide as it did in the aftermath of the oil shock. However the magnitude of the resources supplied by the Fund is often less important than its role as a catalyst. In the past this has meant giving a " seal of approval " to countries that have agreed to follow particular programs of needed policy changes enabling them to borrow from banks and other sources. In the financial packages of the past years the Fund has gone a step further. In these cases as a precondition to the IMF stamp of approval to a particular debtor country and to the availability of IMF resources not only must the country agree to a set of policies but the banks to which the country is indebted also must agree to extend new loans. In this sense the IMF is " bailing in " the banks rather than bailing them out. Chart shows that the total amount of Fund lending to Argentina Brazil and Mexico in about $ billion is less than half the amount of new bank lending which is in turn less than the reduction of net imports achieved by the three countries In recent years the Fund recognizing that many countries ' balance of payments problems require more than short-term stabilization policy and short-term financing has at times extended financing for longer term structural adjustment. However longer-term development loans remain the special province of the Fund 's sister institution the World Bank. Neither institution offers substantially concessional interest rates. Only the World Bank affiliate the International Development Association ( IDA ) provides " soft " loans to poor countries. The recipients of IDA loans are not the debtors with which this chapter has been concerned. The debtors were rapidly growing economies until recently. Most of the IDA recipients are African and Asian countries that are poor and have always been poor. They do not have big debt problems because banks in the past have not been willing to lend to them Thus the purpose of the IMF is neither to bail out banks nor to give foreign aid. The IMF is rather as the President has described it " the linchpin of the international financial system. " The Role of National Governments The fourth leg in the cooperative effort to resolve the debt problem after the debtor countries themselves the banks and the IMF is the governments of the creditor countries. Besides supporting the IMF there are two ways in which the governments play a crucial role in the process : direct credit and trade policy In a variety of ways credit is extended directly by governments to the debtors that are the most afflicted and the most important to them. First a crisis sometimes comes up so quickly that an IMF package can not be assembled in time. Then the Bank for International Settlements ( the " central bank for central banks " in Basle Switzerland ) or monetary authorities in the industrialized countries acting on their own may extend a short-term " bridge loan " to tide the debtor over until the longer term financing and adjustment program are in place Second most industrialized countries have government trade credit agencies that grant short-term trade credit to countries buying their exports. Many U.S. firms that normally export to the debtor countries especially Mexico and Brazil are currently unable to do so as trade credit from private sources has disappeared. The U.S Export-Import Bank as currently constituted has a mandate to raise its levels of credit in these circumstances when reasonable assurance of repayment exists. Such credit simultaneously increases the ability of U.S. firms to export and the ability of the debtor countries to import. Other wealthy countries * trade credit agencies are granting corresponding credits for their own firms ' exports to the large debtor countries Third is the Paris Club a forum where debtor countries can negotiate debt-relief terms on credits extended by or guaranteed by official government agencies. Paris Club rescheduling along with the other forms of direct credit from national governments is a significant element in the financing picture for many of the problem debtors Government financing for Argentina Mexico and Brazil was about $ billion in This amount like the IMF lending is much smaller than the shares of the burden borne by the banks and the debtors themselves as Chart shows In the longer run more important than the role of the national governments in lending may be their role in trade. Currently for the debtor countries to meet their debt obligations they must necessarily run trade surpluses. Up until now they have mainly been cutting imports but in the future they will have to boost exports. Even in the short run the promise of future export growth is necessary to keep private capital flowing in In order for these countries to export the industrialized countries must import from them. Real growth in the industrialized countries is the most important determinant of imports from the debtor countries. The U.S.-led worldwide recovery was the best possible development for the debt problem. While policies that bring down real interest rates and sustain the recovery are desirable in any case their implications for the debt problem make them doubly desirable Trade policy in the industrialized countries is the second most important determinant of imports from the debtor countries. The industrialized countries have a variety of tariff and nontariff barriers against imports from these countries. It would be inconsistent for the industrialized countries to expect the debtors to meet their debt obligations and at the same time expect their trade balance with the debtors not to turn negative. It is essential to the successful resolution of the current international debt problem that the industrialized countries not shut out the products that these countries wish to sell EASING THE DEBT-SERVICE BURDEN The soundness of the current four-way strategy and its success to date do not mean that future crises even major ones can not occur It would take a major unforeseen event such as a sudden end to the world recovery to change the outcome of the debt/export calculations ; but it might take somewhat less than that for the four-way cooperation to fall apart The breakdown of the strategy could hypothetically come from either of two directions : ( ) declaration of default and withdrawal of lending by nervous banks or ( ) suspension of payments or even repudiation of the debt by suffering debtor countries. Both of these worst-case scenarios are unlikely. Nevertheless there is an undesirable all-or-nothing element to the present system. From the viewpoint of the creditor nations a default or repudiation means that the value of the loans drops essentially to zero. From the viewpoint of an individual debtor country it might mean ostracism from the world system of trade and finance. Not only would many years pass before the debtor could resume the long-term borrowing necessary for economic development but it would be subject to legal entanglements and probably cut off even from the short-term banking services necessary to carry on trade. Ways might be found to reinforce the current strategy that although not necessarily altering the distribution of gains and losses in an average sense would take some of the instability out of the system Credit Terms Versus the Level of Financing One way to ease the burden on the debtor countries would be to increase the level of financing and thus allow them to import more The obvious drawback to allowing too high a level of financing is that it leaves the accumulated debt that much higher at the end of the year and reduces the pressure on the country to adjust There is a more promising alternative to ease the burden of adjustment that is being implemented for the case of Mexico in The banks rather than increasing new lending to Mexico in are reducing it below levels but are agreeing to lower the interest rate and loan fees charged. This tradeoff reduces the banks ' total exposure relative to what it would otherwise be and at the same time increases the probability that they will eventually be repaid in full Mexico 's financial position is improved because for a given trade surplus lower interest payments mean a lower current account deficit and thus a lower level of indebtedness at the end of the year Any easing of terms on bank lending must be tied to good performance on the part of the debtor. If the criterion for granting reduced interest rates were the seriousness of the country 's difficulties as measured for example by debt-service figures then the incentives facing the debtor governments would be perverse. Reducing the costs of economic mismanagement can make it more likely to occur One possibility is to use as the criterion an improvement in the trade balance to the point of a substantial surplus in the balance on goods and ( non-interest ) services. This would ensure that the benefit is limited to those countries that have serious debt problems and have taken the necessary steps to adjust Expenditure-Reducing Policies Versus Relative Price Policies The level of financing and the level of interest payments together determine the trade surplus that a debtor is obliged to run to generate the foreign exchange needed to make interest payments. These levels still leave open the question of whether to attain that trade surplus through high levels of exports and imports or low levels of exports and imports. The course up until now has been closer to the latter : expenditure on imports has been cut largely through cuts in government expenditure and in national expenditure generally. Both Mexico and Brazil appear to have cut imports in below the levels that had been agreed upon with the IMF. The price has been low levels of output income employment consumption and investment. Particularly in the cases of the larger countries where imports are a small share of expenditure cutting expenditure is an inefficient way of cutting net imports The alternative strategy is to slow the rate at which budget-cutting and other expenditure-reducing policies are implemented and to substitute policies that raise the prices of traded goods relative to the prices of nontraded goods. Such " supply-side " policies would provide the incentives for labor and capital to shift into the production of the now more profitable traded goods. ( In the case of Brazil for example a shift of resources into export production equal to percent of gross domestic product would itself be enough to pay all the interest on the debt. ) At the same time such policies would provide the incentives for consumers to switch expenditure away from traded goods. The trade balance which is the difference between the production and consumption of traded goods would increase without a drastic decline in the level of output The obvious way to raise the prices of traded goods relative to nontraded goods is to devalue the currency. Devaluations cause immediate corresponding increases in the prices of traded goods at least in the case of agricultural and mineral products. But there is no reason why devaluations need to be reflected as fully or as quickly in wages and the prices of nontraded goods. It is always easier to provide firms the incentive to export by reducing wages relative to the prices of traded goods rather than by reducing wages relative to the general price level Three arguments are heard against an approach of substituting some increases in the relative prices of traded goods for some decrease in the level of expenditure. The first is that devaluation is contractionary because of its negative effects on real wages the real money supply and the balance sheet of firms with dollar-denominated liabilities. But this argument applies more strongly to the approach of attaining a given trade surplus through expenditure reduction than to the relative-price approach The second argument is that devaluation is a ''beggar-thy-neighbor " policy that is unlikely to be effective when other countries are trying to do the same thing. This argument however applies equally to the alternative expenditure-reduction approach. In other words both the " contractionary ' * and " beggar-thy-neighbor " arguments are really arguments for allowing smaller trade surpluses through increased financing ; they are not arguments about the best way to attain a given trade surplus The third argument is that devaluation would result in a higher inflation rate than would expenditure reduction. Inflation is undesirable and overexpansionary policies in the past were to some extent responsible for both the inflation and the debt problem. But it does not necessarily follow that there is an ironclad connection between continuous progress on the inflation problem and progress on the debt problem. The need to generate foreign exchange to meet interest obligations and the need to put a limit on the rate of decline of production consumption and investment would seem to be absolute constraints. This calls for a judicious mix of policies that reduce expenditure and policies that change relative prices CONCLUSION The strong U.S. recovery is creating jobs both at home and abroad. It is helping to pull the other industrialized countries out of recession and is providing markets for the exports of the debtor countries as well. For the first time since the oil shock Canada Japan and the European Community are all running current account surpluses. Many of the debtors are showing sharply improved international payments positions ; a few such as Mexico have even attained current account surpluses. The United States is acting as an engine of growth in the world economy The composition of the recovery remains lopsided as a result of high real interest rates. If real interest rates can be brought down in the United States it will alleviate the pressure for capital inflow and for current account deficits vis-a-vis Japan Europe and other trading partners. At the same time lower real interest rates would alleviate the debt-service burden on the debtor countries thus reducing the trade surpluses that they must run and making things easier for all concerned In the meantime the greatest danger in the United States as elsewhere is that the desire to boost exports and reduce imports will be reflected in protectionist measures. The only sound way to improve the U.S. trade balance is to adopt macroeconomic policies consistent with a recovery in which all sectors of the U.S. economy share. The only sound way to promote world trade is to adopt policies consistent with a recovery in which all members of the world economy share. In particular it is essential to the favorable outcome of the debt problem that the debtor countries be allowed to increase exports to the industrialized countries. The liberal world trading system can only lose if its members resort to heightened barriers to the international flow of goods services capital and labor. All parties can only gain if the debtor countries are restored to health CHAPTER Industrial Policy SHOULD THE UNITED STATES adopt an industrial policy ? Proponents argue that such a strategy is necessary to revitalize our manufacturing sector. They claim that U.S. manufacturing has done poorly compared with the manufacturing sectors of other countries and that we are losing our international competitiveness. These claims have led to the perception that manufacturing 's share of our economy is eroding and that we are " deindustrializing. " To reverse this alleged decline some industrial policy advocates propose that the government encourage new high-technology industries and help older industries regain their former strength. They also recommend that the government assist declining industries to adjust more smoothly to lower levels of output and employment Others propose government aid to prevent a decline in selected basic industries Industrial policy solutions seem attractive to observers who think that such policies have contributed to Japan 's emergence as a major economic power. Since World War II Japan has had rapid growth in manufacturing output productivity and exports. The main sources of this growth have been high rates of saving and investment the migration of workers from farms to factories and the adoption of modern technology. In addition the Japanese government has used an array of tools to encourage certain industries to develop and others to adjust to decline. Some observers argue that unless the United States adopts an industrial policy of its own Japanese growth will contribute to U.S. decline In this country industrial policy advocates have advanced several proposals that would increase the government 's role in directing resources into or out of specific industries. First there would be a central agency to shape the Federal Government 's industrial policy Second councils including representatives of business labor and government would gather information on specific industries and forge a consensus strategy. Third a Federal development bank would invest money in industries deemed to receive inadequate capital from private financial markets. Fourth declining industries would receive government aid and import protection to adjust to new economic conditions Some industrial policy advocates claim that the United States already has an industrial policy. They argue that such policies as trade protection and subsidies for exports and research and development are components of an industrial policy simply because they affect the composition of industrial output. The difference between our present policies and what they advocate they say is that the former is ad hoc industrial policy while the latter is coherent It is true that many Federal policies affect industrial output. But the argument about whether they constitute industrial policy like all arguments about definitions is pointless. What is relevant is whether the proposals of industrial policy advocates are a good idea. Should the U.S. Government have a larger role than it now has in deciding the composition of U.S. industry ? The answer is " no. " An industrial policy would not solve the problems faced by U.S. industry and would instead create new problems Industrial policy has a mixed record in Japan and has been unsuccessful in Europe. Most of the problems of U.S. industries can be solved with prudent monetary and fiscal policies. The best way to deal with the many changes in demand that occur in a dynamic economy is to allow investors and workers to respond to such changes Because they reap the rewards of their successes and bear the costs of their failures investors will seek out industries that pay the highest rates of return. Similarly workers have incentives to work where they can earn the highest wages. The free movement of capital and labor in response to new profit opportunities and wage differentials increases growth. Government allocation of investment that ignores market signals usually stunts growth by diverting labor and capital from more productive uses IS THE UNITED STATES DEINDUSTRIALIZING ? Although selected manufacturing industries face serious problems the United States is definitely not " deindustrializing. " Table shows that the output employment and capital stock of U.S. manufacturing grew from through Moreover manufacturing 's share of total output and capital stock was roughly constant between and The manufacturing share of total employment progressively declined but the decline is a sign of relative productivity growth not a sign of industrial demise. There is no evidence of either an absolute or relative long-run decline of U.S. manufacturing output TABLE Size and share of the manufacturing sector selected years Manufacturing Output ( billions of dollars ) Year Employment ( millions ) Share of total Capital stock ( billions of dollars ) Output Employment Capital stock Percent I960 Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) It is true that the composition of U.S. manufacturing has changed substantially over the past two decades. As Table shows between and U.S. manufacturing shifted away from capital-intensive labor-intensive and resource-intensive industries toward hightechnology-intensive industries. High-technology industries are defined as those with a high ratio of research and development spending to value added. ( Value added equals industry revenue minus the cost of inputs purchased from other industries. ) In high-technology industries value added increased by more than percent and employment increased by more than percent This shift in the composition of manufacturing output and the movement of capital and workers toward other sectors is not a threat to our economy or to our international competitiveness. Although we commonly call some industries " basic/ * the products of these industries are no more important than the products of the agricultural or service sectors. Nor is our position in world markets endangered if our exports shift from steel and machinery to engineering services Using industrial policy to halt the decline of our basic industries would not increase growth. It would merely shift investment and employment from one sector to another. Increasing the total level of saving and investment is the best way to increase economic growth TABLE Shares of value added and employment by industry group I960 and [ Percent of manufacturing total ] Employment Value added Group High-technology Capital-intensive Labor-intensive Resource-intensive Source : Robert Z. Lawrence Brookings Papers on Economic Activity COMPARISON WITH OTHER NATIONS U.S. manufacturing output and employment have generally performed well compared with other major industrial nations. Table presents manufacturing data for France West Germany Japan the United Kingdom and the United States from to the first oil shock in and from to The data show that the slowdown in the growth of output and employment in manufacturing since was not limited to the United States but also occurred in Europe and Japan. Whatever the causes of this slowdown it is shared by our international trading partners many of whom have industrial policies TABLE Changes in manufacturing output and employment in selected industrial countries [ Average annual percent change ] Output Country Employment France Germany United Kingdom. United States Japan Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development The U.S. manufacturing sector grew more rapidly than most European manufacturing sectors between and Japanese manufacturing output increased most rapidly during this period but the difference between the Japanese and the U.S. growth rates declined substantially after Between and U.S. manufacturing employment grew slightly while manufacturing employment fell in France West Germany Japan and the United Kingdom Some industrial policy advocates also claim that the United States is losing its competitive edge in high-technology. Since World War II other countries have followed the United States in developing this sector. As the number of producers has increased the U.S. share of this rapidly expanding market has gradually declined. Between and the U.S. share of industrial countries ' high-technology exports fell from percent to percent. During the same period the Japanese share rose from percent to percent and the German share stayed constant at about percent However the United States is still the leading exporter of hightechnology products. In the United States exported $ billion of high-technology goods compared to $ billion for West Germany $ billion for Japan $ billion for the United Kingdom and $ billion for France. In that year we were the leading exporters of office machines and automatic data processing equipment and professional and scientific instruments. As Table shows from to the real value of net exports in many high-technology industries increased more in the United States than in Japan West Germany France and the United Kingdom TABLE Net exports in selected high-technology industries and [ Millions of dollars ] Medicinal and pharmaceutical products Country France Germany Artificial resins and plastic materials Electrical machinery Professional scientific and controlling instruments United Kingdom United States Japan Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers PROBLEMS OF U.S. MANUFACTURING Although U.S. manufacturing in general is not in a long-term decline it has experienced serious short-term difficulties. In addition certain industries have serious long-term problems Macroeconomic Problems In the short run U.S. manufacturing like other cyclically sensitive industries such as housing declined during the recent recession Manufacturing employment fell from its peak of million in July to million in November Manufacturing output declined by percent over the same period. However employment has risen sharply since then and stood at million by the end of while output rose percent between November and December As the recovery continues manufacturing employment and output will also continue to grow. In any event monetary and fiscal policies are the appropriate tools for avoiding cyclical problems. Industrial policy can not hope to eliminate the effects of the business cycle on manufacturing A second short-run problem is the high value of the dollar relative to other currencies. The dollar appreciated percent between and December after taking inflation into account. This increase in the dollar 's exchange value has put U.S. producers at a serious competitive disadvantage in world markets. However the problem is not limited to manufacturing but extends to agriculture and such services as construction engineering and tourism. As Chapter explains the solution once again lies with fiscal and monetary policies Problems of Basic Industries Unfortunately industries such as autos and steel which have been hurt by the recession and the rise in the dollar also face longer run problems. Foreign competition increased in both of these industries during the 1970s. The two oil shocks increased the U.S. demand for small cars much of which was met by imports. Competition from imported steel increased as shipping costs fell and as foreign steel producers cut their prices in response to excess worldwide capacity During this period management decisions may have worsened the competitive positions of these industries. U.S. auto firms let quality control slip and they did not respond quickly to the shift in demand toward smaller cars. Some observers claim that steel firms were slow to adopt new technologies. In addition labor costs increased more rapidly in autos and steel than in other manufacturing industries. In hourly compensation for auto and steel workers was about percent higher than the average compensation in manufacturing. By the difference had grown to percent for steel workers and percent for auto workers. Since then workers in both industries have made significant wage and benefit concessions which may or may not be temporary These industries are now going through significant adjustments. If foreign firms continue to produce goods at lower costs than U.S firms then domestic output and employment in the affected industries will fall. The only ways to reduce the cost differentials are to increase productivity or to reduce or even reverse the growth in real wages Otherwise preserving output and employment would require a continuing subsidy from consumers or taxpayers to workers and stockholders in these industries Regional Problems Employment declines in manufacturing have created serious problems because of the regional concentration of job losses. In the late 1970s manufacturing employment grew by about percent a year for the country as a whole but fell in the Middle Atlantic and Great Lakes States. The recent recession exacerbated these regional disparities. Chart shows the uneven distribution of unemployment in fiscal Many of the States with high unemployment depend heavily on basic manufacturing industries for jobs These State unemployment rates hide a wide diversity of economic health within a State ; real trouble spots are much smaller areas. In Ohio for example the unemployment rate in Columbus was half of Youngstown 's in fiscal In Indiana the unemployment rate in Lafayette was half the rate of Gary 's Chart 3-,i Unemployment Rates by State in Fiscal Year Percent H H 10t.4to17.8 to ^ [ | to 8L5 Source : Department of Labor These small pockets of real distress persist in spite of job opportunities elsewhere because of the reluctance among some workers to move. Many unemployed workers do move and broad regional population changes reflect these movements. One detailed study of two depressed areas found that among people who changed jobs onethird found new jobs outside the region. However many unemployed workers in depressed areas do not move. Some are tied to their communities by financial and family commitments working spouses homes that are hard to sell and children in school. Unemployment benefits and the hope of returning to a high-wage job near home reduce the incentives for unemployed workers to move in order to find new jobs But unwillingness to move is not sufficient to cause lengthy unemployment workers who are unwilling to move can still find work if their local economies are healthy. As one study shows in regions with healthy local economies unemployed workers from declining industries are not out of work any longer than unemployed workers from other sectors. Geographic immobility together with depressed local economies is the source of the special distress associated with the decline in specific manufacturing industries For people in these depressed local areas the shift in manufacturing employment has been difficult. But the total amount of long-term unemployment caused by shifts in the manufacturing sector is relatively small. Workers from declining industries who suffer long-term unemployment are only about percent of the unemployed. Other larger groups appear to have bigger labor market problems Since hardships caused by economic adjustment are often regional problems programs to ease adjustment should be targeted regionally. Otherwise those in need do not get enough aid or budget costs of the program become too large. But the prospects for regionally specific programs are dim. Federal programs to extend unemployment benefits illustrate this problem. The original intent of the Federal program was to channel benefits to States with the highest unemployment rates. Under the current Federal Supplemental Compensation program all States get benefits regardless of their unemployment rate. Complicated clauses in the law reduce the decline in benefits when State unemployment rates fall The general history of regionally targeted programs is a steady expansion of eligibility rules until all States get some portion of the program. The prospects for a good Federal adjustment program may be limited by the same problems that would plague industrial policy initiatives in general possibly deserving groups would be crowded out by their less deserving but politically powerful competitors IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. POLICY There is no evidence of a general deindustrialization of the U.S economy. Over the long term U.S. manufacturing has accounted for approximately percent of real output. Although manufacturing 's share of total employment has declined the number of workers employed in manufacturing rose by nearly million between and and productivity growth was higher than in the rest of the economy. Nevertheless the combination of a recession at home and a strong dollar abroad caused manufacturing output and employment to suffer. However manufacturing output is currently rising almost three times as fast as the rest of the economy This suggests that the most important contribution of Federal policy to the strength of American manufacturing would be monetary and fiscal policies that are consistent with long-term economic growth and a sustainable trade balance. Such policies would not resolve all the problems of the few industries in long-term trouble. But they would probably resolve most of the concerns that have led to the calls for industrial policy JAPANESE INDUSTRIAL POLICY Proponents of an industrial policy often use Japan as a model for the United States. First Japan has enjoyed rapid economic growth since World War II. Second many Japanese products compete successfully in export markets. Although Japan has had great economic success it is not clear that industrial policy contributed on net to this success. Other features of the Japanese economy such as the high saving rate and the transfer of labor from agriculture to industry were undoubtedly more important. Net saving in Japan over the past three decades has been over one-fifth of Japan 's net domestic product. By contrast net saving in the United States has averaged less than one-tenth of net domestic product THE INSTRUMENTS OF JAPANESE INDUSTRIAL POLICY The first step in formulating an industrial policy for an emerging or declining sector of the Japanese economy is gathering information and creating a consensus. To gather the information about potential growth industries and the best way of developing them the Japanese government meets with outside experts and convenes councils of informed individuals from banks trading firms producing and consuming firms universities and trade unions as well as relevant government agencies The final product of the council process is either a general " vision " urging private firms to develop a sector or a specific plan to produce certain goods by some future date. The detailed plans however are simply targets that the government officials and private experts believe are both possible and desirable to meet. Japan 's economy is not centrally planned nor is there much government ownership of manufacturing firms. Although the government may provide incentives to encourage the development of certain industries it does not force individual firms to comply with its targets The incentives provided by the Japanese government have included tariffs or import quotas special tax treatment research subsidies subsidized loans antitrust immunity and administrative guidance During the early postwar period of reconstruction Japan had steep barriers against all imports. Japan began to relax these barriers over years ago. Since the mid-1970s Japan 's tariffs on manufactured goods have been similar to those of the other major industrial nations and today they are among the lowest of all major industrial nations including the United States. However Japanese tariffs are markedly higher than average on some manufactured goods in which Japanese producers are relatively uncompetitive Significant nontariff barriers continue to protect parts of Japan 's manufacturing sector. Standards and certification requirements impede imports of automobiles and many other consumer durables Government procurement restrictions protect Japanese electronics and computer industries. These restrictions have recently been relaxed somewhat but they remain significant obstacles to trade Special tax treatment subsidized loans and loan guarantees have been used to stimulate emerging industries and to ease the adjustment of declining sectors. Until recently firms purchasing numerically controlled machine tools were eligible for depreciation schedules more generous than those available for other equipment. Today computer software producers and investments in robotics receive special tax benefits. Subsidized loans and loan guarantees also have helped to develop the steel computer shipbuilding and semiconductor industries and have assisted firms in the aluminum and petrochemical industries in reducing capacity and employment The Japanese government has also encouraged the development of certain industries by providing subsidies for applied research. The work subsidized with tax dollars is usually only part of larger joint research projects financed mainly by private firms. Japanese firms have used joint research successfully in developing several important products including the 64K RAM chip Finally firms in industries with temporary or permanent declines in demand are sometimes allowed to form cartels to restrict output in order to raise or maintain prices. Cartels have been formed during cyclical downturns in some segments of the aluminum paper and steel industries and have also been used to maintain prices and reduce capacity in declining industries including synthetic fiber ammonia and urea. In these cases the government has allowed firms to cooperate in restricting output in exchange for promises by firms to scrap excess capacity. Higher prices have often meant lower domestic consumption reduced exports and either increases in imports or increased trade barriers This list of industrial policy tools may understate the role of the Japanese government in the development of specific industries. Various government agencies review conditions in industries within their jurisdiction in consultations with outside experts. If they see problems or opportunities these agencies look for solutions and then try to persuade the private sector to follow their advice. The advice may be accompanied by promises of loans research subsidies or other government aid. The total effect of the advice and the aid on private investment decisions may be greater than the actual amounts of aid would suggest PRIVATE INVESTMENT AND GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES These industrial policy tools import barriers special tax treatment research subsidies subsidized loans and antitrust immunity may have been important in stimulating the growth of Japanese industries such as steel shipbuilding machine tools and computers However government financial aid to many of these industries including steel and computers is only a small fraction of the investments made by the private sector Subsidized lending by the Japan Development Bank for instance averaged only percent of total bank lending to the steel industry between and and only percent between and Japan Development Bank loans to the electrical machinery sector which includes computers and semiconducters were only and percent of total bank lending to those industries during the same periods. Although they may have been instrumental in encouraging private banks to invest in favored sectors government loans were not a large factor in the growth of these industries Furthermore Japanese subsidies to encourage the development of certain manufacturing industries have been only a small fraction of total government subsidies to specific sectors. As seems to be the case for all developed countries by far the largest subsidies and the highest trade barriers go to agriculture. Energy projects designed to decrease Japanese reliance on imported oil subsidies to small businesses and Japan 's government rail system also claim a large share of subsidies. Subsidies to emerging manufacturing industries are small by comparison with subsidies to these other sectors The sectoral distribution of the Japan Development Bank lending program reflects these priorities. In about percent of the total loans of $ billion was earmarked for energy projects. The next largest shares went to urban and regional development ocean shipping and " quality of life " projects such as pollution control About percent or $ million was allocated to the development of technology which encompasses the computer electronics and semiconductor industries. For comparison plant and equipment investment in Japan in was about $ billion and electronic computer production was $ billion Total spending for research and development in Japan as a percent of GNP exceeds that of France but is less than that of Germany and the United States. Furthermore in contrast to these countries the Japanese government accounts for a small share of Japan 's total research and development expenditures and provides less than per- cent of the funding for all research and development undertaken by the business sector Government research and development funds in the late 1970s have been estimated to account for percent of total research and development in the computer and semiconductor industries versus percent in agriculture and percent of transportation research and development. The Ministry of International Trade and Industry ( MITI ) Japan 's most important industrial policy agency controlled about percent of public research and development funds in or about $ million and allocated about one-half of these funds to energy-related research and development. About $ million went to manufacturing industries Finally Japanese government spending goes primarily to social welfare aid for local governments and public works rather than to develop emerging industries. In spite of its unique industrial policy process Japan allocates government support to many of the same sectors that are favored in other advanced market economies including the United States HAS JAPANESE INDUSTRIAL POLICY BEEN A SUCCESS ? Japanese industrial policy has had both successes and failures Some targeted industries including semiconductor and machine tools are almost certainly stronger than they would have been without government support and can be claimed as successes for Japanese industrial policy. Other industries such as shipbuilding and steel probably grew more quickly because of government aid but undoubtedly would have developed without any government intervention. However the Japanese government has also picked losers Aluminum smelting and petrochemicals were favored industries years ago but the public and private investments have paid off very poorly and now their capacity is being reduced. There are also several examples of successful industries that did not receive government assistance including motorcycles and consumer electronics. Nevertheless these industries have dominated world trade in the products they produce The Japanese automobile industry also received protection from imports. But the auto industry followed a course very different from that suggested by MITI. In MITI tried to force the industry 's many firms to merge into a few. In MITI exhorted the industry to develop a prototype " people 's " model of its product so MITI could designate the winning firm as the single producer. In both cases the industry rebuffed MITI. Moreover although import protection helped the Japanese auto industry develop protection given to other industries hurt the auto industry by raising the price of inputs such as steel. Furthermore the auto industry has not received special tax treatment or subsidized loans for over years. Therefore the success of Japan 's auto industry can not be attributed to industrial policy Furthermore Japanese industrial policy did not create additional investment. It simply directed the existing pool of savings from one industry to another. It is possible that the industries that lost funds as a result of government industrial policy would have been at least as successful as the industries that received the government 's blessing In conclusion Japanese industrial policies have undoubtedly influenced Japan 's industrial structure. However the government and its councils of experts have a mixed record of success. They have indeed picked some industries that turned out to be winners in part because of their efforts but they also picked industries that ended up losers They failed to pick some big winners and they also picked industries that would have become winners without any help. The net effect of these policies on economic growth is not clear EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL POLICIES European economies have grown rapidly since World War II primarily because of high rates of saving and investment increases in education and migration from agriculture to other sectors. However many European policies that aid specific industries have been costly failures. Large scale efforts by European governments to promote high-technology industries have rarely produced commercially successful products. And attempts to ease the adjustment of declining industries have generally produced little reduction in excess capacity despite enormous government subsidies EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL POLICY TOOLS The tools used to implement industrial policies differ considerably among European countries. In France the country with the most elaborate industrial policy state efforts to develop the economy can be traced at least as far back as the time of Louis XIV. Since World War II a series of 5-year " indicative " plans has set comprehensive targets for the French economy often with specific sectors selected for special support. Although these targets have been voluntary they have been designed as a framework for French economic growth The government owns a large portion of France 's manufacturing and financial sectors and thus is able to allocate resources directly into targeted industries projects or companies. Most of the capital for several emerging industries including civil aircraft and comput- ers has come from the government. France has also used research and development subsidies and government procurement to encourage high-technology industries. In addition the French government owns subsidizes and protects certain declining industries including steel. Other declining industries such as textiles and shipbuilding receive subsidies and trade protection but are privately owned Britain does not have comprehensive economic plans or government ownership of banks and insurance companies but government equity involvement in heavy and high-technology industries is common. Steel autos and semiconductors have received state equity support. In addition many declining industries have received trade protection manpower training grants and financial subsidies As members of the European Community ( EC ) all the major industrial countries of Europe have common external trade barriers most notably in steel and textiles. But West Germany with its relatively efficient steel industry has been less energetic than France or Britain in lobbying for barriers to protect declining industries. The West German government has provided substantial subsidies for research and development but its subsidies for declining industries are low by European standards. There is little public ownership of manufacturing firms but an important share of West Germany 's banking system is state owned LESSONS FROM EUROPE In spite of massive aid to favored European industries such as aircraft computers and semiconductors most of the firms in these industries are not commercially successful. The explanation for this record may stem from the competing goals that governments generally pursue The Concorde is probably the most famous product of European industrial policy. Built by a British-French joint venture and flown only by their national airlines the Concorde had cost French taxpayers $ billion by At no time have revenues covered the costs of operating the Concorde much less the capital costs of the firms that built it. Work on the Concorde helped develop France 's aerospace industry and may have achieved certain political and social objectives But these benefits aside the Concorde project is a clear reminder of the costs of government encouragement of emerging industries The Airbus is another large scale project that has so far been a commercial failure. Produced by a firm owned mostly by a consortium of European governments the Airbus has been a profitable investment for the airlines that bought it but a costly burden for the sponsoring governments. The Airbus still requires production subsi- dies despite the sale of about planes. Bolstered by government guarantees Airbus did not follow the usual commercial practice of collecting purchase agreements before beginning production. As a result early production levels were too low to benefit from scale economies The French government also decided to develop an internationally competitive computer industry in the mid-1960s. Today neither of France 's two recently nationalized computer companies is profitable in spite of over $ billion in direct subsidies support through government procurement programs and research and development subsidies. Many analysts conclude that the French government pursued an unrealistic goal of self sufficiency and ignored its competitors ' comparative advantage and market share. Business decisions were made by the government and did not always reflect commercial realities Britain 's computer and semiconductor industries seem similarly unable to overcome the competitive advantage of foreign producers in the British market despite aid programs that include equity financing loan guarantees and government procurement policies Neither the government-owned semiconductor firm nor the computer firm most heavily supported by the government is profitable Once again the appeal of technological independence outweighed economic considerations Aid to declining industries also reflects the sometimes competing goals of government intervention. Efforts to ease the adjustment of declining industries apparently slow that adjustment process at enormous cost to European taxpayers. It appears to be difficult for governments to encourage an industry to decline sufficiently after giving it subsidies. Government assistance to the steel shipbuilding and textile industries has been designed to protect employment while encouraging restructuring. Despite massive infusions of aid and trade protection over a long period there is still much excess capacity in the steel and shipbuilding industries Since the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community in steel has been the most closely regulated and protected industrial sector in Europe. After years of import protection subsidies and output controls designed to raise prices many European steel producers continue to sustain large losses. Although steel employment in the United Kingdom fell by almost percent between and and has also declined in other EC countries substantial restructuring remains to be done Restructuring of the European textile industry has also not been generally successful according to most analysts. Even when progress has been made in reducing excess capacity and modernizing equip- ment trade barriers have remained in place. Indeed from bilateral quotas on cotton in the early 1960s to the current form of the Multifiber Arrangement protection from imports has increased in scope and intensity European governments may be learning from their failures. The current French policy in electronics seems to be more competitively oriented than earlier policies and since the British government has cut subsidies to declining industries. However the French commitment to early development of a new commercial airplane suggests a continued belief that government can outguess the market SHOULD THE UNITED STATES HAVE AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY ? The perception that the United States is deindustrializing has spurred interest in industrial policy in this country. But we are not deindustrializing. Moreover Japan 's record with industrial policy is mixed and industrial policy in Europe has generally failed. Industryspecific measures are not well suited to deal with the special problems of some U.S. industries and workers. Unemployment problems in declining industries are best solved with programs that focus aid on individuals rather than on entire industries. Allocating resources to different industries is best done by the market. Profit opportunities and wage differentials give investors and workers powerful incentives to seek out industries where their capital and labor are most valued and most productive Nevertheless some people argue that industrial policy could promote growth and smooth adjustment. Many claim that government now fails to take account of the effects on industries of its various policies and that better coordination within the government would improve the situation. Others claim that investors are reluctant to finance emerging industries because the time horizons of private investors are too short. These advocates therefore propose government aid to help emerging industries. Still others argue that government aid is needed for industries with learning curves high value-added industries linkage industries and industries that compete with products subsidized by foreign governments. Finally some industrial policy advocates argue that special aid should be given to declining industries to help them adjust COORDINATING AGENCIES AND TRIPARTITE COUNCILS Industrial policy advocates argue that current Federal Government programs often conflict with each other. Creating a new agency and establishing tripartite councils of business labor and government they say would bring these conflicts to the attention of government officials who would then make more judicious tradeoffs among competing goals Different government programs sometimes do have conflicting effects on an industry. Unintended consequences are inevitable in a complex economy where each policy affects a large number of sectors. More important many policies have conflicting effects because governments have competing goals. Reducing air pollution for example raises the cost of producing steel and conflicts with the goal of a more competitive steel industry There is little reason to believe that introducing another agency would improve coordination. Government agencies and forums already exist to coordinate policies and many government departments already have advisory committees to provide information on private sector views. Additional tripartite councils and a new agency would not necessarily be able to obtain better information than what is already available Tripartite councils are proposed to promote a consensus on policy decisions. This would strengthen the current tendency of government policy to take inadequate account of the interests of consumers and taxpayers who have very weak incentives to organize on any particular issue. Business and labor groups are already heavily represented in Washington. An additional agency with stronger representation of business and labor interests would make the policy debate even more one-sided GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT BANK Many industrial policy proponents propose a government development bank to augment private investment in certain industries. Some proposals include other types of aid such as research and development subsidies to specific industries. These proponents claim that government support is necessary because the market does not invest enough in several types of industries emerging industries industries with learning curves high value-added industries basic or " linkage " industries and industries that have been targeted by foreign governments. To supplement private capital the proposed bank would lend additional money to industries in these categories Emerging Industries Government investment in emerging industries is said to be desirable because private investors are too risk averse or have time horizons that are too short. Therefore they invest too little in risky ventures with long-delayed payoffs Investors may appear shortsighted or risk averse when they can not capture all the returns from their investments. For example patent and copyright protection for computer software and integrated circuits is probably inadequate and may have deterred investors from taking risks and investing their time and money in these areas. More generally research and development gains are often spread among many firms not just the firm that incurs the costs The solution to these problems is not government investment in specific firms but policy changes that improve incentives for all firms to invest in research and development. The Administration supports the provision of copyright-like protection for integrated circuit designs and in supported enactment of a temporary tax credit for research and development expenditures The proposal to target emerging industries suggests that government can obtain better information than the private sector. It is difficult to understand how government officials together with private business and labor leaders will be able to gather more accurate information and use the information more wisely than the private sector. The United States has numerous investors willing to finance new ventures through equity or bank loans. Private investment analysts spend a great deal of time and effort evaluating new technologies and advising private investors on the most promising firms. Information on emerging industries is also exchanged by job shifting among scientists and engineers who are close to the development of new technologies. Ties between industry and the academic community also contribute to the spread of new ideas. In the United States the private sector already has information at least as good as the proposed government councils and banks could expect to gather In any event a government agency is more likely to be shortsighted and risk averse than private investors. Since politicians face frequent elections they often have very short time horizons. A government agency is also more likely to make decisions based on the shared expectations that are the conventional wisdom of the time ; these processes tend to neglect or reject the idiosyncratic information that is the basis for decisions by the most successful private entrepreneurs Finally government officials will often make investments based on politics rather than economics. One country tries to develop a computer industry before it has sufficient technical workers. Other countries invest in highly visible but wasteful energy projects that private firms think are likely to fail Learning Curves In some high-technology industries production costs drop significantly as firms gain experience. Some proponents of industrial policy say that the government should subsidize these industries or protect them from foreign competition to allow them to move down a " learning curve. " This would presumably speed up the drop in costs and increase their ability to compete in international markets Learning curves may exist for individual firms for entire industries within a country or for an industry in the world as a whole. If the learning curve is at the level of the firm the U.S. market is likely to be far larger than the cumulative production required to advance an individual firm along its learning curve. Moreover choosing a single firm to subsidize and protect in the beginning stages of a new technological development would be very risky. In every new industry there are false starts. Having government and private experts determine the best approach to a technical problem early in the process will generally produce a worse result than letting different firms compete to see whose idea is best If the learning curve is for the entire world then the optimal strategy may be to let other countries go first and enter the industry only after initial research and development costs have been borne by foreigners. The Japanese have profited enormously by adopting U.S technology While there may be special cases in which learning curves justify import protection identifying them in practice would be very difficult Because of this difficulty many firms and industries would incorrectly claim that their learning curves justify import protection or subsidies A similar problem arises in the Federal procurement process. Firms sometimes claim to have steep learning curves in order to justify becoming the only supplier to the government. Often actual learning curves are flatter than predicted In short knowing that a theoretical case exists may be of little practical importance. The end result of protecting or subsidizing a high-technology industry could be a domestic industry unable to compete in international markets. The trade protection granted to such industries could force U.S. buyers to pay higher prices and erode their competitive position in other markets Industries With High Value Added Some proponents of industrial policy advocate redirecting investment to industries with high value added per worker. Value added is the revenue earned above that needed to purchase inputs from other industries. Value added is therefore the return to labor capital and know-how Total value added or equivalently real income in the economy is raised when a dollar of investment is moved from a use where its productivity is low to a use where productivity is higher. There is no reason however to believe that a dollar of investment in an industry with high value added per worker will be more productive than a dollar of investment in a low value added industry. What matters is not the average productivity of labor or capital in that industry but the return on one more unit of capital. When markets work properly investment is distributed among industries until the rate of return on additional investment is the same in all industries. In this situation shifting investment from one industry to another will not raise total real income or value added The same is true of reallocating labor among industries. Although the average productivity and value added per worker differ among industries a well-functioning labor market assures that employees will end up in industries where their contribution to output is highest. If this were not so the employee would have an incentive to shift jobs in pursuit of a position with a higher wage The best way to promote high value-added industries is to expand the total capital stock of the economy. Investors will naturally seek to put that capital to its most productive use. If our tax laws distort the relative payoffs from investing in different uses then it is the tax laws that need to be changed. Incentives to save and invest such as Individual Retirement Accounts and accelerated cost recovery are more likely to expand and modernize the Nation 's capital stock and thereby promote economic growth than a government bank that merely reallocates a fixed amount of savings from one industry to another Linkage Industries Some industrial policy proponents advocate government aid to " linkage " industries that is manufacturing industries whose output is a vital input into other industries ' products. Steel and semiconductors are often cited as examples of " linkage " industries. However if such an industry is vital then the industries that rely on it will demand its output. The profit motive will ensure that this demand will be filled. If the demand can be met more cheaply by producers abroad then it makes good economic sense for the firms that use the input to buy it abroad. The more uses the input has the more important it is for the U.S. economy that the companies obtain this vital input at the lowest possible cost. Otherwise the competitive position of the U.S. companies that use the input would be threatened Proponents of aid to linkage industries may have another idea in mind. They might be saying that producers of a particular good need to have producers of inputs nearby so that they can coordinate their plans. There do appear to be examples of industries that grew because they were near producers of vital inputs and therefore able to coordinate plans. Some observers have attributed part of the success of the U.S. personal computer industry to its location in the Silicon Valley near the semiconductor industry. But if the advantages of locating nearby outweigh the disadvantages companies will do so. Just as steel plants located close to coal mines earlier in this century so computer producers have located near semiconductor firms in the Silicon Valley. No government direction is needed Industries Targeted by Foreign Governments Some industrial policy proponents also argue that the United States should subsidize industries targeted by foreign governments If we do not they claim our industrial structure will be determined by other countries. A foreign subsidy that reduces the price of U.S products clearly distorts the market but a policy of countersubsidy by the United States would further depress prices and the return on capital. A general policy of countersubsidy would lead to increasing misallocation of capital and labor and lower economic growth Our present trade laws authorize countervailing duties on subsidized foreign products sold in the United States. In addition selective subsidy of export financing may deter foreign export subsidies The Export-Import Bank of the United States provides loans loan guarantees and export credit insurance for U.S. exports to counter foreign export subsidies. The Administration has been successful in the past years in sharply reducing the export credit subsidies of other countries Some observers think that certain foreign industrial policies are responses to what they perceive as a U.S. industrial policy. They point to the stimulus provided by defense spending to our computer aircraft and nuclear reactor industries and observe that our space program has made the United States the world leader in commercial telecommunications satellites. It is certainly true that the billions of dollars spent by the United States since World War II to develop new weapons and explore space have given a fortunate boost to some high-technology industries. However the primary purpose of this spending has been to protect the United States and its allies and to pursue space science. If the main reason for this spending had been to develop commercial computer civil aircraft or satellite industries our defense and space programs would certainly not have been the least expensive way of doing so AID FOR DECLINING INDUSTRIES Most industrial policy proponents recommend government action to slow or reverse declines in " basic " industries. In addition to loans and special tax treatment many proposals include government-sponsored restructuring plans that would spread adjustment burdens among labor management shareholders suppliers and creditors. In declining industries that face competition from imports industry commitments to restructure would be extracted in exchange for trade protection while expanded compensation and retraining programs would be used to help workers whose jobs are lost A basic problem with such proposals is that they would divert resources from emerging industries and from healthy established firms Workers stockholders and suppliers in declining industries would exert political pressure to gain government aid. Experience here and abroad strongly suggests that resisting the pressure from declining industries would be difficult Aid to Firms Proponents of aid to declining industries often cite Chrysler as an example of a company that has survived because of a government loan guarantee tied to a restructuring plan. But the Chrysler case should not be used as a model for several reasons. First Chrysler might have survived even if it had gone bankrupt. The concessions extracted from workers suppliers and creditors in return for the loan guarantee might well have been made as part of an ordinary bankruptcy proceeding. Second even if government aid were required to keep Chrysler in business the auto industry and the economy as a whole may have derived little benefit from the guarantee Many of the autos produced and jobs saved at Chrysler were at the expense of other U.S. automakers and their employees. Similarly the loans that went to Chrysler would have gone to other sectors possibly including emerging industries Third loan guarantees to Chrysler may have been successful because such guarantees to failing companies are now the exception not the rule. If loan guarantees became standard practice in such situations workers management creditors and suppliers might be less willing to make sacrifices. They might come to expect government aid whatever they did. Establishing a loan guarantee program would certainly encourage many other firms to apply for aid and could lead to even more costly Federal commitments to firms that did not pull through after the first round of aid. This has been the common European experience and it could well happen here Import Protection and Restructuring Some observers suggest that trade protection be granted to industries hurt by imports in exchange for commitments to restructure and adjust. Without such commitments trade protection reduces the pressure on firms and workers to make painful changes. Under existing trade law import protection is granted with no guarantees that the workers and firms who benefit from the import protection will make the necessary investments or take other measures to become more competitive. The result is higher prices for consumers often with little long-term improvement in the industry. The protected industry seldom becomes competitive and usually continues to pressure government for more protection Strictly enforced agreements it is argued could encourage workers and firms to use the financial benefits of temporary protection either to become more competitive or to scale down production. The current practice of granting import protection often has the opposite effect. It forces consumers to pay higher prices without requiring the industry to undergo difficult adjustments The main objection to this proposal is that once the presumption of aid is established it is difficult to extract concessions from an industry How often will government officials in this country be able to tell workers that they must accept lower pay suppliers that they must cut their prices and banks that they must write off loans in order to obtain import protection ? Political pressure as well as economic considerations would undoubtedly influence the process In addition an agreement to grant trade restraint in exchange for restructuring by an entire industry would be more difficult to enforce than a loan agreement with one firm. Should the government expect efficient firms as well as inefficient firms to make the same sacrifice ? How would conflict between different segments of an industry be resolved ? How would the agreement be enforced if some firms complied and others did not ? Aid to Workers Industrial policy proponents who want to aid declining industries are motivated in part by concern for the workers in these industries They often argue that manufacturing provides " good " jobs that can not be replaced by jobs in other sectors of the economy. In fact basic manufacturing jobs are no more important for the economy as a whole than jobs in say the service sector. The real difference between manufacturing jobs and service sector jobs is that the former often pay more than the latter because of differences in worker skills or in some cases because of the monopoly power of the manufacturing firm or of its union CONCLUSION Many people advocate industrial policy as a way of stemming the alleged long-term decline in the U.S. manufacturing sector. But there has been no such long-term decline. Manufacturing 's share of national output in was virtually the same as its share in Moreover since the U.S. manufacturing sector has grown more rapidly than the manufacturing sectors of many of the major European industrial nations. And while our growth of manufacturing since has been less than Japan 's the difference in the U.S. and Japanese growth rates is less than half of what it was between and While there was a short-run decline in U.S. manufacturing due to the recent recession this was to be expected. Manufacturing is cyclically very sensitive and our experience in the most recent recession was similar to our experience in earlier postwar recessions. Since the recovery began in the last quarter of manufacturing output has increased at almost three times the rate of total output. The answer to the short-run problems of most of our manufacturing industries is economic recovery A few industries however may be in long-term decline in part because they face foreign competition. The problems of these industries stem partly from past mistakes by management partly from wage increases that exceeded productivity gains and partly from factors outside the industries ' control. If these industries do not continue to make significant adjustments either they will suffer additional declines in output and employment or they will require permanent trade protection or subsidies at substantial cost to American consumers and taxpayers Using industrial policy to solve the problems of these few industries would be mistaken for two main reasons. First industrial policy in the form of either subsidies or trade protection in return for industry restructuring would slow adjustment. Once the government helped these industries it would find it very difficult to cut off or even phase out the aid as various European governments ' experiences with declining industries have shown Second if the goal of industrial policy is to help the long-term unemployed then helping declining industries is not an effective way of doing so. In healthy local economies unemployed workers from declining industries find jobs as quickly as unemployed workers from other industries. Depressed local economies not declining industries are the real problem. The solution to the problem of the unemployed from declining industries is to enable them to find new jobs and to focus aid on those workers who are hurt by industrial change as the Job Training and Partnership Act of is intended to do While some people advocate industrial policy to stem the alleged decline in U.S. manufacturing others see it as a way of nurturing emerging industries or industrial " winners. " Some of these advocates argue that entrepreneurs in the United States have too much difficulty getting " patient " capital that is capital whose owners or lenders are willing to invest in a risky idea and to wait a few years for their returns. These advocates therefore want the government to give subsidies or subsidized loans to entrepreneurs with new ideas But to the extent the United States underinvests in new ideas it is because the investors can not capture the returns from such investments. The straightforward solution to this problem if it is general is to increase tax incentives to research and development as this Administration did with the Economic Recovery Tax Act. If the problem is specific to a few industries the solution is to strengthen patent and copyright protection Moreover even if there were too little " patient " capital there is no reason to think that government finance would improve the allocation of capital. Government officials simply do not have the right incentives to make wise choices about which industries or companies to invest in. Governments often invest in projects with high political value but little economic value or in safe projects favored by the conventional wisdom of the time. Neither way of choosing is likely to pick the potentially winning industries that lack capital and both kinds of investments siphon off capital that could have gone to the real winners To foster more rapid economic growth the primary focus of government policy should be to strengthen the natural forces of the private economy by reducing the burdens and disincentives imposed by existing government laws. The most important goal of these changes should be to increase the rate of capital formation. A higher rate of capital formation fosters growth directly and permits a more rapid introduction of new technologies. The lower cost of capital and the faster technological advance also enhance the competitiveness of American industrial products in world markets To increase the rate of capital formation the tax laws were reformed in in ways that reduced the burden of taxation on personal saving and on business investment in plant and equipment The sharp decline in the rate of inflation since has also raised real after-tax rates of return and thereby increased the incentives to save and invest. As we look to the future it is important to raise the Nation 's rate of saving by reducing the government budget deficits We must also seek new ways to revise the tax laws in order to reduce the disincentives that still restrict the rate of capital formation Our market economy and its system of rewards for superior performance have made the American economy the most productive and innovative in the world. An industrial policy that increases government planning government subsidies and international protectionism would only be a burden on our economic life and a threat to our long-term economic prosperity Ill CHAPTER Food and Agriculture AMERICAN AGRICULTURE is one of the most successful examples of agricultural development in the world. The industry is very productive : only percent of the civilian labor force produces enough to feed the entire domestic population at low cost and still export enough to earn almost percent of the total export revenue of the United States. Although farmers in most countries earn much lower incomes than nonfarm workers the average disposable income of the U.S. farm population over the past decade has averaged close to that of workers in the rest of the economy. Average wealth per farmer is much higher than of people employed in the rest of the economy and half of American farmers have no debt Despite these successes all is not well with American agriculture Farm export earnings and asset values have declined for the past years. Recent entrants and farmers who have recently expanded their businesses have experienced cash flow difficulties. Although the farm bankruptcy rate is well below that for nonfarm businesses the number of farm bankruptcies has substantially increased. The fraction of the farm population with incomes below the poverty level is still almost double that for the nonfarm population In fiscal Federal Government outlays for farm price and income support programs totaled $ billion an increase of $ billion in years. To this must be added another $ billion worth of payment-in-kind ( PIK ) commodities committed in to compensate farmers for reducing their crop acreage in order to reduce inventories These programs cost taxpayers almost $ per farm While Federal expenditures have been curtailed in many domestic program areas the cost of farm programs has exploded Farm programs affect not only the taxpayer but also the consumer Some farm policies clearly benefit the consumer. In particular federally sponsored research has lowered food costs by generating a steady increase in agricultural productivity. Other policies artificially raise food prices through price supports and restrictive marketing and trade practices. This reduces consumers ' purchasing power The present Federal farm programs were designed to address the problems of farming as it existed in the 1930s but American agricul- ture has changed dramatically since then. Farming has become a much more specialized capital-intensive and high-technology business. Many people justify farm income and price support programs on the basis of low farm incomes. But average farm family incomes of the commercial producers to whom most benefits of the Federal programs go are above income levels in the rest of the economy Net farm incomes however vary substantially from year to year Exports now account for one-quarter of all farm sales. Yet present price support programs along with the strong dollar make U.S. agricultural products less competitive on world markets. If we value the foreign exchange earnings generated by farm exports and the market this provides for a quarter of the Nation 's farm sales our farm price and income support policies must become more market oriented than they are now THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL SECTOR In the farm sector employed percent of the U.S. civilian labor force and generated percent of national income. In for comparison percent of the labor force was employed in farming and produced percent of national income. With this shift have come increases in employment and income in industries producing goods and services purchased by farmers and processing farm products. Farmers now spend almost half of their gross income on inputs such as seed feed pesticides fuel and fertilizers percent of which is produced in the nonfarm sector. After the products leave the farm for every dollar 's worth of sales destined for domestic consumption processing packaging transportation and other services add another $ before it reaches the retail purchaser FARM INCOME In farm cash receipts from product sales totaled about $ billion ( Table ) This includes the net purchases by the government to support the prices farmers received for grains cotton tobacco and milk. For example to support the price of milk the government purchased $ billion worth of dairy products. American farmers also received direct government payments in cash and in kind totaling about $ billion. These total less than the fiscal budget authority for price and income support programs because part of those outlays occurred in the fourth quarter of and because farmers will take delivery of over half of their PIK commodities in The PIK program was designed to reduce the stocks that had accumulated following years of bumper crops and weak demand particularly from exports. The acreage cutbacks plus the severe drought of reduced grain and cotton inventories by $ billion Gross income of the farm sector totaled $ billion. Production expenses which dropped substantially from because of reduced plantings came to $ billion. This left net farm income of $ billion up marginally from Net cash income which excludes nonmoney income the value of inventory change depreciation and perquisites to hired labor reached a record high of $ billion in In addition farmers earned $ billion of income from nonfarm sources TABLE Farm income [ Billions of dollars ] Item * Production expenses5 Gross farm income Cash receipts Net CCC loans Direct Government payments2 Other cash income Nonmoney income Value of inventory changes Net farm income Addenda : Net cash incomefl Off-farm income Change in loans outstanding7 Capital expenditures Preliminary Cash Government payments except which includes $ billion of payment-in-kind ( PIK ) commodities Custom work machine hire and farm recreational activities Value of home consumption of farm products and imputed value of dwelling Cash expenses plus depreciation and perquisites to farm labor but excluding expenses associated with farm dwellings Excludes nonmoney income value of inventory change depreciation and perquisites to hired labor. Includes net Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) loans Excludes CCC loans Source : Department of Agriculture As officially defined a farm is a place that sells at least $ worth of agricultural products per year. So defined there are million farms which in had an average net income from farming of $ and an average income from nonfarm sources of $ for a total $ The average family income for the whole population that year was $ More than one-third of the million farms sell less than $ worth of products per year and percent sell less than $ These smaller farms are not generally full-time commercial operations produce only a small share of national farm production and on average have negative net income from farming The percent of the farms with annual sales of more than $ generate percent of total farm receipts. In these commercial farms had average annual gross receipts of about $ and net farm income of about $ Their net farm income however varies substantially from year to year. These farms have average assets of about $ million and average equity of about $ This group received percent of all direct government payments under farm programs in This accounted for percent of their net farm income. These averages mask considerable diversity. For example the largest percent of all farms which have annual sales of over $ produce percent of all farm sales SPECIAL CHARACTER OF FARMING The commercial farm like the small manufacturer is a business that buys raw materials transforms them through a capital-intensive process and sells the finished products How then does a modern commercial farm differ from a small manufacturing company ? Its most distinguishing characteristic is a biological production process that involves lags arising from growth cycles. This severely constrains the speed with which farmers can respond to changing market conditions. In addition the volume of farm production is less predictable than in the nonfarm economy because of the random effects of weather disease insects and genetics These supply conditions contribute to substantial year-to-year variability in farm incomes. Since the annual output of major field crops is harvested within a few weeks in the autumn this requires storage capacity for most of a year 's output Agriculture and manufacturing also differ in the role played by land. Because crop production and livestock grazing are land based they have to be dispersed over a wide geographic expanse from which the marketing system must assemble the production. The geographic differences in climate and soil limit what products can be produced in each location Land has characteristics that distinguish it from other inputs. As the demand for land increases users must bid against a relatively fixed supply. They bid on the basis of expected future returns to the use of that land. The price of farm land increases in response to expectations of higher returns whether from strong demand for what it can grow from inflationary expectations or from artificial price enhancement associated with government policy. Appreciation of land prices tends to increase the wealth of its owners and often represents a significant fraction of an owner-operator 's total returns. It also raises the entry cost for new farmers. Physical capital being reproducible tends not to appreciate over time in this manner but rather to depreciate A third way in which farms differ from manufacturing plants is in the proportions in which they use labor and capital. Most farms are family owned and operated with little hired labor. ( Only percent are owned by nonfamily corporations. ) In American agriculture used $ of physical capital stock ( machinery and buildings ) per worker compared with $ for the economy as a whole. Farming used three times as much physical capital per unit of production ( GNP basis ) as the average for the total U.S. economy. In both agriculture and the rest of the economy this capital stock tends to be quite specialized although machinery used to produce field crops has multiple uses FIVE DECADES OF CHANGE In the 20th century the structure of U.S. agriculture and the wellbeing of farmers have undergone profound change. Farm production has tripled while employment in agriculture has fallen by percent ( Table ) The increase in labor productivity and in turn farm family income was achieved by improving technology and by increasing the land and capital used per worker. As a result employment in farming fell substantially In the 1930s disposable farm family income per capita was less than percent of that in the rest of the economy. Over the past decade however farm family income has averaged percent of that in the rest of the economy and exceeded that in the nonfarm sector in This income differential was the driving force behind the structural change in agriculture. As the proportion of the labor force employed in agriculture fell and the proportion employed in higher productivity nonfarm employment rose migration contributed to national economic growth The rate of migration from farming to the rest of the economy was strongly motivated by the income differential. As the differential narrowed in the 1970s the rate of migration slowed. The rate has also been sensitive to the nonfarm unemployment rate slowing when the perceived chances of getting a nonfarm job were low and accelerating when the unemployment rate fell Rural industrialization has increased the number of off-farm jobs in rural America. Most farmers who did not acquire more land and capital have become part-time farmers ; almost two-thirds of all farm family income now comes from nonfarm sources. This additional farm family income has reduced significantly the farm-nonfarm income differential The number of farms and the farm labor force peaked during the 1930s. Employment in farming went into a pronounced decline after World War II when a major technological revolution occurred in agriculture. The replacement of draft animals by the tractor which had begun in the 1930s was virtually completed by This released about one-fifth of our cropland which had been used to grow feed for draft animals The increased mechanization of farming permitted the amount of land cultivated per farm worker to increase five-fold from to The amount of capital used per worker increased more than times in this period. As Chart shows total farm production grew percent but total input use rose only percent. Total productivity ( production per unit of total inputs ) more than doubled because of adoption of agricultural research results such as hybrid seeds and improved livestock feeding. Table illustrates that use of both agricultural chemicals and feed grew very rapidly in the postwar period Agricultural production now relies heavily on the nonfarm sector for machinery fuel fertilizer and other chemicals. These not more land or labor produced the growth in farm production. These changes have also greatly increased the capital investment necessary to enter farming ; they have also generated new requirements for operating credit during the growing cycle Education has been an important stimulus to growth in the economy as a whole and agriculture in particular. Rural education facilitated the move from farm to off-farm jobs. As the rate of technological change accelerated rural education also helped farmers to adopt new technology and adjust to technological change The farm sector has undergone a major shift in what it produces Total farm production is now split about equally between crops and livestock as it was early in the century. The composition of each however has changed in response to changes in demand and in technology. In value terms the largest increases have been in beef cattle and oilseeds production and to a lesser extent in feed grains and poultry. The proportions of cotton hogs eggs sheep lambs and wool in farm output have fallen The two largest components of farm cash receipts today are beef cattle and dairy products making up and percent respectively of the total. These are followed by corn and soybeans with percent each and hogs and wheat with percent each. Cotton chickens greenhouse products eggs and tobacco each contribute about percent of the total DEMAND FOR FARM PRODUCTS Changes in demand have been an important factor underlying the changes in the product mix of the farm sector. In the total value of farm marketings was $ billion with $ billion from livestock production and $ billion from crops. The largest market for crops is domestic human consumption which absorbed percent of the value of crop sales. The second largest component of Chart Farm Productivity Output and Input Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE Farm input use [ Index = ] Real estate Mechanical power and machinery Agricultural chemicals Feed and seed ? Source : Department of Agriculture demand is exports ( percent ) followed by livestock feeding ( percent ) The remaining percent goes to industrial use and seed Within the crop sector there is great variation among these proportions. For example most fruit and vegetable output goes for human consumption while virtually all of the tobacco and cotton is for domestic industrial use or exports. Most of the livestock production goes to feed the domestic population while by-products such as hides and animal fats go to industry or exports Domestic Consumption In Americans spent $ billion for food ( excluding alcoholic beverages ) of which $ billion was for consumption at home and $ billion for eating away from home. On the average this represents percent of their disposable personal income although the poor spend a larger percentage of their income on food than do the more affluent. Of the total retail expenditures for domestically produced food consumers spent percent for meats percent for fruits and vegetables percent for dairy products percent for bakery products percent for poultry and eggs and the remaining percent for miscellaneous food items Eighty-five percent of retail food expenditure originates from domestic farm production and percent is from imported foods About one-third of our agricultural imports are products that we can not produce in a temperate climate in particular coffee tea cocoa spices and bananas. Other imported goods that are produced domestically although perhaps less efficiently include sugar dairy products grass-fed beef and some fruits vegetables edible oils and beverages. In agricultural imports totaled $ billion making the United States the world 's third largest agricultural importer after the European Community ( EC ) and the U.S.S.R Food consumption per capita appears to have reached saturation levels in the United States with most growth in aggregate consumption now coming from population growth. Total consumption ( by weight ) per person of foods other than beverages ( coffee tea and soft drinks ) has changed little since However there have been major changes in what products are consumed. In the 20th century direct consumption of grain products has fallen by more than half while use of fats and oils more than doubled. Consumption of meat poultry fish and sweeteners has risen sharply ; consumption of dairy products and eggs first rose and then fell. Nonalcoholic beverage consumption has almost doubled since Aggregate food purchases tend to be less sensitive to changes in price and in family income than are purchases of manufactured goods. However within their food budgets consumers select from among many choices in food items. Purchases of meats and of miscellaneous foods are quite sensitive to changes in family income while consumption of fruits and vegetables and particularly of cereals and bakery products are quite insensitive. Consumption of the more income-sensitive products such as meats tends to be more cyclical As family income increases people tend to purchase relatively more services in the food they buy including eating out more often The share of the retail food dollar received by the farmer therefore has declined to about percent. Labor packaging and transport account for much of the additional cost after products leave the farm As a result retail prices particularly of bakery and cereal products tend to adjust much less than proportionately to changes in farm prices Livestock consume about percent of U.S. crop sales. This includes corn and other grains protein meal by-products from milling grains and forage. This understates the feed use of farm output however. For example percent of corn production is fed to livestock on the same farm where it is produced. The demand for feed is derived from consumers ' demand for livestock and poultry products. Forces that alter the demand for meat in particular income are reflected in the demand for livestock feeds. Therefore feed demand tends to have a stronger cyclical response to the level of economic activity than does consumer demand for cereal products Livestock feed demand for crop output also tends to be more responsive to price changes than does consumer demand for the final products. An increase in feed prices that turns the profit margin on livestock feeding negative can trigger a substantial slaughter of livestock. In the short run consumers benefit from cheaper meat at the supermarket. However to rebuild their herds farmers must later withhold animals from slaughter for breeding. This rebuilding takes time during which meat supplies are reduced and retail prices tend to be higher than normal. The use of crops in livestock feeding then varies cyclically with herd size. In a sense the livestock herd functions as a buffer stock of grains. In times of crop shortfall high grain prices trigger a herd liquidation thereby freeing up grain for more direct human consumption or exports The smallest component of domestic crop demand is industrial uses. Tobacco and fibers such as cotton and wool are industrial raw materials. There are also industrial uses of cereals such as in alcohol and starch production. Many livestock by-products such as hides and animal fats are also industrial raw materials. Part of this industrial demand is satisfied by imports including rubber wool and other fibers. Because there are many synthetic substitutes industrial demand for farm products tends to be quite sensitive to price changes Farm Exports The United States supplies almost percent of world agricultural trade and is the world 's largest agricultural exporter. In recent years we have supplied half of the world soybean and product shipments percent of the coarse grain to percent of the wheat percent of the cotton and percent of the rice that move in world trade In fiscal agricultural exports of $ billion represented about one-quarter of U.S. farm sales revenue and the output of about percent of the harvested cropland. Half of U.S. farm exports are for direct food use wheat rice fruits vegetables and meats while more than a third go for feed and other farm uses ; the remainder are raw materials used in industrial processes such as textile cigarette and shoe production. In we exported three-fifths of our wheat two-fifths of our rice soybeans and cotton one-third of our tobacco and one-fourth of our corn and sorghum. In contrast only percent of U.S. meat production and percent of fruit and vegetable output are exported During the 1970s the value of U.S. farm exports increased more than five-fold and the percentage of farm receipts coming from exports increased from less than percent to almost percent. This growth in farm exports represented a major internationalization of American agriculture. Chart provides a historical perspective to illustrate that after several decades of reduced importance U.S. farm exports recovered in the share they represented in farm marketings years earlier. U.S. farm exports were relatively strong during World War I and its aftermath. As European agriculture recovered after the war grain exports fell and U.S. agriculture went into depression in World trade in farm products shrank further as protectionism grew during the 1920s and the Great Depression U.S. farm exports fell from percent of farm sales revenue in to percent in Because U.S. agriculture had a larger export exposure than the manufacturing sector the collapse of world trade tended to have a relatively greater effect on farm than nonfarm incomes during the Depression In the 1920s and 1930s more than half of farm exports were industrial raw materials mainly cotton tobacco hides and tallow. Since World War II food rather than industrial raw materials has dominated our farm exports. In the 1960s as economic growth occurred consumption of livestock products grew in the industrialized countries and in some developing countries. This was reinforced by a major technological change in livestock feeding practices which dramatically increased demand for feed grains and high protein feeds The widespread adoption of hybrid seed by U.S. corn growers after Chart Agricultural Exports as Percent of Farm Cash Receipts Percent n M n n II Source : Department of Agriculture World War II which substantially increased the profitability and use of fertilizer greatly expanded corn output and depressed its price Corn Belt and Mississippi Delta farmers discovered that the soybean a novelty crop before World War II did well in their regions. With the postwar productivity growth production capacity grew faster than domestic consumption expanding U.S. agriculture 's export potential Corn and soybean products in particular became high-growth exports During the 1970s the volume of world agricultural trade grew percent while global farm production grew only percent. In the 1960s and 1970s world trade in feed grains soybeans high protein feeds and vegetable oils grew fastest. Sugar food grains tropical beverages and cotton experienced low rates of growth and meat was intermediate. Trade in other fibers declined The pattern of world grain trade shifted dramatically in the past years. The United States substantially increased its share of a rapidly growing market. As Table illustrates as recently as the 1930s Asia the U.S.S.R. Eastern Europe North Africa and the Middle East were net exporters of grains. All have become significant net importers. From the mid-1950s to the late 1970s world grain trade grew from about million to million tons per year. The largest increase in exports was from North America TABLE World net imports and exports of grain selected periods [ Millions of metric tons : annual averages ] Net imports ( ) or net exports * * Developed countries : United States Canada South Africa Oceania Western Europe Japan Centrally planned countries : USSR and Eastern Europe China Developing countries : Latin America North Africa and Middle East Asia Marketing years Note : Grain includes wheat milled rice corn rye barley oats sorghum and millet Source : Department of Agriculture The growth in world cereals imports in the last decade has been fueled mainly by growth in per capita income with growth in population being a significant but less important factor. The growth in imports occurred mainly in the centrally planned economies the middle-income developing countries Japan and the oil-exporting countries. The U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe alone accounted for percent of the increase. These like Japan and the middle-income developing countries experienced rapid growth in incomes and in meat consumption but they lacked a comparative advantage to increase feed production. This effect is reinforced in the centrally planned economies by their policy of subsidizing food so that consumers pay less than the world price for meat and other livestock products A small fraction of the growth in grain trade over the last decade has gone to meet food needs of low-income countries. These economies do not have the foreign exchange to pay for cereals imports and their food aid imports have risen Since the global recession began in growth in world trade has slowed. This together with record world production and third world debt problems has reduced the volume of agricultural trade The appreciation of the dollar has raised the cost of U.S. exports relative to other suppliers. Federal agricultural policies have also driven up the price of U.S. exports. This and the strength of the dollar contributed to a fall in the U.S. market share in world agricultural trade as well as the value of its exports The growth of exports in the last decade has radically changed the structure of demand for U.S. farm output. From World War II until about when exports were relatively unimportant overall demand was quite insensitive to price. However because there are other exporters and because most countries import farm products only after consuming their own domestic production export demand tends to be more responsive to price and income changes. This means for example that when supply grows faster than demand the market price may fall less than proportionately and total farm revenue may increase Growth in exports has also introduced greater instability in the markets for American farm products. Exports are affected by weather trade policy exchange rates population and income in the rest of the world. All but population tend to be unpredictable and therefore generate shocks to the U.S. farm sector through the variability they cause in export demand In the 19th century a country 's competitive position in agriculture was strongly influenced by its endowment of fertile land and favorable climatic conditions. Today our fertile abundantly rain-fed land base while still important accounts for only part of the competitiveness of U.S. agriculture. Other countries less well endowed with fertile land have followed the U.S. pattern of agricultural development by shifting to a more capital-intensive science-based agriculture. A relative scarcity of land is no longer as severe a constraint on agricultural growth as formerly. If U.S. agriculture is going to maintain its competitive position productivity growth must be sustained THE BROADER ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT American farmers responded strongly to the agricultural export boom of the mid-1970s. They substantially expanded their capacity by bringing previously retired land back into production and by buying more and larger machinery and equipment. The price of land was bid up to unprecedented levels. The boom attracted new entrants and encouraged many farmers to mortgage their present farms to buy more land. When the global recession hit in and the dollar appreciated substantially in foreign exchange markets U.S farm exports and in turn prices and incomes fell. This left U.S. agriculture with excess capacity relative to current demand. Many recent entrants and farmers who expanded in the 1970s suffered severe cash flow problems. These farmers have experienced capital losses as land prices have declined from their peak INTERNATIONAL TRADING ENVIRONMENT The current world trading environment is characterized by weak demand and keen export competition. In the early 1980s the global recession third world debt and the strong U.S. dollar have reduced export demand Farm exports are not expected to grow as fast in the 1980s as they did in the 1970s. A decline in the value of the dollar would help all export sectors. However in the past decade other major exporters have made large capital investments in agriculture and in marketing facilities to expand export capacity. They can be expected to compete aggressively for our share of the growth in world farm trade even when the dollar returns to a lower exchange rate Japan Europe and the U.S.S.R. are expected to continue to be large importers of U.S. agricultural products although further growth is likely to be slow. The EC will probably continue to be a protectionist slow-growth market even for those farm products that it imports. Eastern Europe which was a rapid growth market in the 1970s is experiencing such severe foreign debt problems that the outlook for rapid expansion in imports of farm products in the next few years is not bright The newly industrializing countries particularly of East Asia also expanded their imports rapidly in the 1970s. Resumption of this growth will depend upon their ability to generate foreign exchange earnings from exports. This will depend in part on the trade barriers erected against their exports by the developed countries. While the low-income countries are likely to need significant amounts of agricultural imports to feed their rapidly growing populations their limited foreign exchange earnings will severely constrain their effective demand in the world market U.S. agriculture has a large interest in economic development of the low-income countries and in growth in world trade. Until the debt problems and foreign exchange earnings of Eastern Europe and the low- and middle-income developing countries improve significantly the prospects for much growth in farm product imports by these countries are limited Competition is keen among exporters for the available markets in the current situation of depressed world farm trade. This has been reinforced by the increases in agricultural protectionism and in predatory export practices. In particular the U.S. Government has protested to the EC that its use of agricultural export subsidies to erode U.S. markets is a form of unfair competition. The internal price supports generally exceed world market prices by a substantial margin yet the EC has chosen not to build up large stocks of grains. Instead the EC subsidizes farm exports in order to sell the surplus on the world market. Unlike the United States the EC has not until recently required acreage or marketing reductions for farmers to qualify for price supports. The EC recognizes the problems with its agricultural policy which now absorbs two-thirds of the total EC budget and imposes substantial additional costs on its consumers. The EC like the United States now has excess capacity induced in part by high price supports and is exploring means of reforming its farm policy to reduce the cost to taxpayers. It is unclear how the necessary adjustment will occur in the EC but the United States has emphasized that other countries can not be expected to bear the major burden of European adjustments MACROECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT Modern American agriculture 's relative capital intensity reliance on purchased intermediate inputs and export earnings integrate it tightly into the rest of the U.S. economy. Cyclical changes in the level of economic activity now have larger effects on agriculture than formerly. The agricultural sector like other trading sectors of the U.S economy is strongly affected by interest rates and the value of the dollar. The agricultural sector therefore has a strong interest in reducing the Federal deficit to which recent farm programs have contributed significantly. Macroeconomic policy may have as great an absolute effect on agriculture today as do the direct effects of farm policy Prices of agricultural commodities tend to adjust to changes in the rate of money growth more quickly than do many other prices. This is true in part because contracts for raw materials tend to be written for shorter durations than for other goods and services. In addition because of biological lags agricultural supply tends to be very unresponsive to price changes in the short run. There are large differences among commodities in the degree to which demand responds to changes in consumer incomes. While demand for farm products tends to be less responsive than demand for many other goods there nevertheless is a positive response to income changes. Therefore agricultural prices tend to increase relative to other prices during the early phase of a monetary expansion and fall in relative terms at the start of periods of monetary stringency Because contemporary agricultural production requires a larger capital investment and uses more purchased inputs a modern farmer 's requirements for both mortgage credit and short-term operating credit are larger than in recent decades. Interest rates therefore have a greater effect on the cash operating costs of the modern farmer. Moreover because one could earn interest on the capital invested in commodity inventories the expected increase in agricultural commodity prices during the year must be at least as large as the forgone interest earnings if inventories are to be held Although the increasing overvaluation of the dollar impeded farm exports in the 1960s depreciation of the dollar in the 1970s encouraged larger exports. The move from fixed to floating exchange rates however subjected all traded goods sectors to a new source of shortrun instability. Because the present strong dollar has made imports cheaper to Americans and U.S. exports more expensive to foreigners all traded goods sectors including agriculture have suffered reductions in demand and lower incomes. Agriculture which earns around percent of its gross revenue from exports has a larger export exposure than most sectors of the American economy. Therefore it has been buffeted relatively more by the shifts in export demand that have accompanied the floating dollar over the last decade FEDERAL POLICIES AFFECTING AGRICULTURE The development of U.S. agriculture and the well-being of American farmers have been strongly influenced by Federal policies since the Civil War but particularly since During the Civil War a number of policy measures were taken to stimulate farm production This helped satisfy the growing export market for grains. When the export market shrank in the 1920s and 1930s * farm prices and land values fell ; bankruptcies became common. Several measures were taken in to support farm prices and incomes and save farmers from bankruptcy. When these together with rapid technological change caused production to grow faster than demand another set of policies was implemented to expand demand. All three types of policies exist today in forms not greatly different from their original structure despite the fact that conditions have changed markedly in the past years POLICIES THAT REDUCE PRODUCTION COSTS In the 19th century the construction of canals and later the transcontinental railroad opened up the fertile interior of the country to urban markets in the United States and Europe. Subsidized loans from the Rural Electrification Administration in the 20th century helped extend electric and telephone service to remote rural areas at low cost. Because farm production is so geographically dispersed these policies not only stimulated its expansion but also lowered its cost. Federal regulation of transport and communication until recently kept rates to remote rural communities at or below cost. The implicit subsidies paid by high-density routes in other parts of the country however have been reduced recently by deregulation The Homestead Act passed in provided a means of distributing public land in the unsettled regions of the Midwest and Great Plains free to settlers who would cultivate it for years. The Morrill Act also passed in established a land-grant college of agricultural and mechanic arts in every State. At first these were teaching institutions but they later took on important agricultural research and extension roles as well. The Hatch Act of provided annual Federal support for agricultural research in each State and the Smith-Lever Act of created the cooperative agricultural extension service. This land-grant system has developed and diffused higher productivity technologies adapted to the conditions of each State Research Policy Since passage of the Hatch Act a substantial portion of the cost of agricultural research in the United States has been directly borne by the Federal Government especially in the biological area. The private sector has developed more of the mechanical and chemical technologies. Government support for agricultural research was appropriate because it was difficult to protect biological research results such as wheat breeding. A private firm carrying on such research would not be able to control the dissemination of the results to capture enough of the payoff to recoup its investment costs. The research results have been an important source of growth in agricultural production and exports. The annual rate of return to taxpayers from investing in agricultural research has been about percent Farm Credit and Crop Insurance Historically the rural banking system was weakly integrated into the national financial markets. Between and an independent federally funded farm credit system was established. Although now autonomous from the Federal Government the close association of the system to the Federal Government means that it can borrow from the national financial markets at close to the same rate as the Federal Government. Because the Federal rate is always less than the prime rate this provides to farmers an interest rate advantage over what they could get at commercial banks. The system which is cooperatively owned by its member borrowers holds about one-third of all credit outstanding to farmers. The Commodity Credit Corporation of the Department of Agriculture also provides shorter-term credit at favorable interest rates to farmers who participate in price support programs The lending activities of the Farmers Home Administration another agency of the Department of Agriculture tend to involve a greater subsidy element and to incur a larger Federal budget cost The Farmers Home Administration makes real estate loans and other loans to farm borrowers who can not obtain credit from commercial sources. The borrowers are mainly new entrants small farmers and farmers who have lost their creditworthiness. Loans to these borrowers often result in higher risks and therefore larger losses than would be acceptable to private lenders The Farmers Home Administration also has made emergency loans at well under market interest rates in areas hit by natural disasters This program has been criticized for making subsidized credit available to farmers who already had access to credit from commercial sources. Despite very generous repayment terms this program has not been noted for restoring financially troubled farms to profitability. During the 1970s the government also made direct payments to farmers who suffered financial losses due to natural disasters. By shifting part of the risk of failure to the Federal Government these programs have encouraged larger crop production in areas of the country where the risk of crop failure is greatest The direct disaster payment program is being phased out as a result of the farm bill. It is being replaced by Farmers Home Administration lending and by a new and expanded Federal Crop Insurance program. Participation rates in the former crop insurance program were low in part because the premiums did not adequately reflect individual differences in risk or in individual farmers ' resources and management skills. The program was redesigned to encourage more commercial producers to participate than under the previous program and the government now subsidizes up to percent of the cost of crop insurance to farmers Together emergency loans disaster relief and subsidized crop insurance tend to induce excessive crop production in areas of the country that are subject to a wide range of weather-related yield variation. The programs do this by raising farmers ' expected returns from crop production in such areas by shifting part of the risk of failure to the Federal Government Income Tax Policy Several features of the income tax law some of them unique to farming may encourage greater investment in productive capacity and expanded production. First most farms use cash accounting rather than accrual accounting. Farmers enjoy some flexibility in reducing taxable income by paying for purchased materials in high revenue years and by delaying sales into years of lower revenue. Second under current tax laws depreciation schedules for many capital assets are considerably shorter than the economic life of the assets. Reducing near-term taxable income in effect gives the farmer interest-free funds during part of the productive life of an asset. Third use of the investment tax credit lowers the effective cost of capital items. Finally sales of breeding animals and dairy cattle held longer than year are treated as capital gains rather than ordinary income. This can substantially reduce the tax on such receipts for higher-income taxpayers especially those with high off-farm income Tax policy does not affect the profitability of all types of farms equally. The tax laws encourage the substitution of capital for labor Larger farms which generate higher incomes appear to gain proportionately greater benefits than smaller farms. People in higher marginal tax brackets can benefit more from the tax provisions. This creates an incentive for higher-income people to invest in farming. In practice losses from farm operations reduce taxes on other income by more than the total Federal tax revenue from farm profits implying that total farm income for tax purposes is negative Input Subsidies Some Federal policies raise agricultural output by stimulating the uneconomic use of certain inputs. For example the government often sets the price of water artificially low by granting public subsidies to construct and maintain irrigation projects. These low prices give farmers an incentive to use water in arid regions on crops that require a great deal of water. If the price of water were set higher farmers would tend to grow less water-intensive products leaving production of crops that use more water to humid regions. Without these public subsidies some products now produced in arid regions could not compete with the same goods from more humid regions of the country There are other input subsidies for U.S. agriculture. For example in the name of conservation the government has shared the cost of terracing and contouring the land applying lime and otherwise improving the soil. The United States ' relatively low energy prices have also encouraged mechanization and energy-intensive practices such as irrigation and grain drying Farm Labor Policy Farm labor policy mainly affects the labor-intensive agricultural activities principally fruit vegetable and sugar production. The extension of minimum wage legislation to agricultural labor in pro- vided an incentive for farmers to accelerate the pace of mechanization. Only about percent of farm workers belong to labor unions which formed in the farm sector in the 1960s compared with percent of all American workers The farm labor market has been greatly affected by the entrance of foreign workers into the United States. Until about workers per year mostly from Mexico were authorized to enter temporarily under the Bracero program. Since the passage of the Immigrant Nationality Act in migrant workers have been given temporary immigrant status under Section H2 if they do not compete with American workers. In recent years Section H2 has covered only about workers mostly for sugar and apple harvesting PRICE AND INCOME SUPPORT POLICIES The policies of the 19th century increased supply and helped the farm sector satisfy the growing domestic and export demand. The drop in export demand in the 1920s sent the farm sector into depression and the effect was reinforced in the 1930s when protectionism increased and demand fell further. Farm prices and cash flow fell so low that many farmers could not make their loan payments ; foreclosures became widespread. The Federal Government then turned to policies to support farm prices and to restrict the supply of agricultural products Origins of Price Supports Although the depression in agriculture continued through the 1920s it was viewed as a transitory problem resulting from excess capacity relative to demand. The Congress appropriated $ million for the Federal Farm Board created in to purchase cotton and wheat in order to bid up prices and thereby increase farm incomes The Board was expected to resell these products when the market strengthened. The Board exhausted its capital stock in years with no perceptible effect on prices After the Board 's failure to support farm prices the Agricultural Adjustment Act of created the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) The CCC was permitted to borrow funds directly from the U.S. Treasury to carry out its price support programs. These programs were viewed as a temporary expedient when they were initiated in but our present price support instruments are remarkably similar to those put in place years ago The CCC employs two measures for supporting farm prices direct commodity purchases and nonrecourse loans. Under the former the CCC stands ready to acquire any quantity of a supported commodity offered in the market at a guaranteed minimum price the support price. This technique is still used today to support the price of milk. ( Because of the perishability of fluid milk the CCC supports its price by purchasing butter cheese and nonfat dry milk. ) By authority of Section of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of as amended in the Agricultural Marketing Service an agency of the Department of Agriculture purchases commodities whose prices are depressed. Chicken pork fruits and vegetables are periodically purchased although no formal support price is involved The CCC 's other instrument is the nonrecourse loan. Under this program the CCC offers loans to farmers with their crops pledged as collateral. The size of the loan equals the support price ( the " loan rate " ) times the quantity of the farmer 's crop put under loan. Most loans are made for less than year. If the market price rises sufficiently during the period of the loan the farmer may pay off the loan plus interest and reacquire control of his crop. If the market price is not sufficiently above the loan rate when the loan comes due the farmer can then freely default. The CCC accepts the commodity as payment in full and cancels the loan and interest. Loan rates were originally established to support the prices of wheat corn and cotton Rice peanuts and tobacco were soon added to the program In principle both types of price support operations can be viewed as involving buffer stocks. A price support puts a floor under the market price in periods of slack demand thereby protecting farmers ' incomes. If the market price rises to a sufficiently high level the CCC can sell the commodity back into the market at a profit helping thereby to defray its cost of operation. It has to pay interest to the U.S. Treasury on its operating capital. A buffer stock is designed to protect farmers against abnormally low prices and consumers against unusually high prices. In practice however the support prices and loan rates have often been set above the long-run market-clearing level taking into account both domestic and international demand Although the loan rate has often been set above the market-clearing price for some commodities farmers often argue that government stocks " hang over the market " and depress the price. They therefore lobby to ensure that government stocks are released in a manner that does not depress the price Rise of Restrictions on Input Use and Marketing As government stocks of commodities accumulated under price support operations it quickly became apparent that the programs were treating a symptom not the root of the problem the excess capacity of the farm sector relative to market size at current prices Three approaches have been used to address that acreage allotments marketing restrictions and voluntary land retirement Acreage allotments are quantitative restrictions on the acreage a farmer may plant to a given crop. Although these have been used on wheat rice cotton tobacco and peanuts only the last two remain in effect. In practice farmers tend to retire their least productive land first. They also raise crop yields on the acreage planted by using more fertilizer and other inputs per acre. Production therefore falls by proportionately much less than the reduction in land area. Marketing quotas have also been imposed at times in conjunction with acreage allotments such as with tobacco. Quotas based on historical sales freeze the structure of the industry. Later entrants are forced to buy or lease marketing rights from present quota holders While marketing restrictions were authorized in the Agricultural Adjustment Act of another variant was authorized when the act was amended in This act authorized the creation of marketing orders to regulate the sale of milk and various fruits vegetables and specialty crops. Once an order is approved by two-thirds of all producers all regulated processors or handlers must comply with the regulations. While some marketing orders are only concerned with grading and packaging standards or collective support for research or advertising others regulate the flow of products to market and enforce price discrimination Allotments cause all producers to cut back jointly on marketing just as if they had formed a cartel with the government agreeing to police the members. Examples include the marketing orders for brewers hops and spearmint oil. These are now being phased out Other marketing orders permit price discrimination among markets with different demand characteristics. A higher price is charged in markets for certain fresh fruits and fluid milk where demand is less responsive to price and a lower price is charged for identical fruit used in canning or for milk that goes into butter cheese or other manufactured dairy products. This raises producers ' total revenue at the expense of consumers. There is nothing unique about the commodities regulated by such marketing orders that requires volumecontrol on sales of fresh produce. For example sales of California and Arizona oranges and lemons tart cherries and walnuts are controlled while Florida citrus sweet cherries and pecans are not While World War II and the Korean war provided a period of high prices for U.S. agriculture the lower farm prices and incomes which followed brought renewed attempts to restrict acreage or marketings A voluntary land retirement program known as the Soil Bank was established in in which the government paid farmers to take land out of production. By the late 1960s farmers had retired more than million acres under this program Nevertheless with rapid productivity increases surpluses continued to mount despite the downward drift of real support prices through the 1960s. Chart illustrates this trend for wheat. The in- creasing overvaluation of the dollar in the late 1960s made this price reduction less pronounced when viewed from the perspective of importing countries. Despite their downward drift the support prices appear to have exceeded market-clearing levels in most years through when the dollar was devalued and farm exports and prices increased dramatically. The effect of the dollar devaluation was reinforced by simultaneous crop failures in many parts of the world the ready availability of credit and a change in Soviet agricultural import policy that led to a large grain purchase from the United States Chart Real Wheat Prices dollars per bushel Source : Department of Agriculture The Last Decade As farm exports expanded government programs were adjusted to allow farmers to bring most of the retired land back into production In farm incomes exceeded those in the rest of the economy for the only time in history. The excess capacity of the 1950s and 1960s disappeared and farmers quickly expanded their production capacity to satisfy the export demand The moves toward an increasingly market-oriented farm policy begun in the late 1960s culminated in the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of Recognizing that loan rates by interfering with market prices may limit our ability to compete in world markets the act attempted to divorce the policy objective of farm income support from price supports. The act retained loan rates as a form of minimum price insurance but established a system of target prices and deficiency payments to provide farm income insurance Participating farmers can make production decisions based on the target price but unlike loan rates the entire crop is sold on the market for whatever it will bring. The difference between the target price and the average market price ( or the loan rate whichever is higher ) in the first months of the marketing year is paid to the farmer in the form of a deficiency payment per unit of production By this means the government avoids accumulating stocks unless the market price falls to the loan rate One disadvantage of target prices and deficiency payments is their large potential cost to the government particularly if there is a wide spread between the target price and loan rate. To overcome the cost disadvantage and the tendency for target prices to encourage larger production the program often requires a farmer to reduce the acreage planted as a condition for participating in the benefits of the program. The forgone production on this acreage is in effect the premium paid for the price insurance provided by the loan rate and the income insurance provided by the target price Because market prices were high during the export boom of the mid-1970s the then-existing farm policies had little effect. Concern arose however about the much larger price instability that had accompanied the export growth in the absence of government stocks. A 3-year CCC loan program known as the Farmer Owned Reserve was established by the Food and Agriculture Act of In exchange for a higher loan rate a farmer who satisfies any acreage reduction requirements can place commodities in the Farmer Owned Reserve for a 3-year period. After the first year the loan is interest free. The Department of Agriculture pays for the storage cost for all years of the loan. In exchange the farmer agrees not to sell the grain until the market price rises to a specified release price Although the Farmer Owned Reserve was designed as a buffer stock scheme for stabilizing market prices in practice the price bands have been altered frequently. In particular since the embargo of grain sales to the U.S.S.R. the Farmer Owned Reserve loan rate has at times been set high enough to provide incentives to produce for storage under the program. This is contrary to its objective of providing price insurance when the market price falls below its longrun equilibrium level With the onset of the global recession and the strengthening of the dollar years ago farm exports fell and farm prices dropped well below loan rates. There were bumper crops in and and stocks in the Farmer Owned Reserve and in CCC inventories burgeoned. With no imminent increase in exports foreseen a Federal policy decision was made early in to offer farmers payment-inkind if they would reduce their crop acreage in Farmers found this proposition so lucrative that they cut back their harvested acreage by million acres from the previous year. In addition a devastating drought struck drastically reducing production of corn soybean and cotton in particular. The payment-in-kind program is not viewed as a permanent addition to the instruments of Federal farm policy POLICIES THAT AUGMENT DEMAND Farm production has grown more rapidly than demand during most of the past years exerting downward pressure on farm prices. Several Federal policies have attempted to increase domestic and foreign demand in order to provide some price support to farmers Consumer Policies A number of Federal programs directly related to food have sought to aid low-income consumers who spend a larger fraction of their income on food. When the government began purchasing agricultural commodities to support farm prices and farm income in the 1930s certain commodities were distributed free to the urban poor and unemployed. Direct distribution of surplus commodities acquired by the CCC continues to this day for example the recent distribution of surplus cheese and other CCC-owned products. In addition the government subsidizes school lunches and donates commodities to schools. These include meats fruits vegetables eggs and poultry The largest program is the food stamp program which had a budget cost in fiscal of $ billion. This program distributes food stamps to low-income consumers to augment their purchasing power in a form that must be spent specifically on food. Nevertheless because food stamps substitute for cash within a household budget low-income consumers tend to spend only about cents more on food for each dollar 's worth of food stamps received. The food stamp program probably added less than percent to aggregate consumer expenditures on food in This program is mainly a welfare program for low-income consumers rather than a program to expand food demand Agricultural Trade Policy A country 's agricultural trade policy is generally a consequence of its domestic price support programs * Major changes in a country 's trade policy therefore generally require changes in that country 's domestic agricultural policy as well When price supports are set above the world market-clearing level they have particularly adverse side effects for internationally traded commodities. Unless trade is constrained a large trading country like the United States can not support the domestic price of a commodity without also supporting its price for farmers in all other trading countries. When the support price exceeds the world market price on export products the U.S. Government withdraws enough supplies from the market to raise the world price to the domestic support level. Exports fall raising the world price for the commodity. This higher price encourages farmers in other countries to expand their production capacity. This has occurred for tobacco cotton and wheat at various times among our most important export crops To support the domestic price of goods that we import the government must buy up domestic production and even imported supplies until the world market price is bid up to the support level. This appears to be happening today under the price support program for honey although this is not typical. Instead by authority of Section of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of as amended in quotas or fees can be imposed on imports of any product whose domestic program is threatened by imports because of price supports set above the market-clearing level. The United States currently has such import quotas on sugar dairy products cotton and peanuts The United States received a waiver for these quotas in the 1950s by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Although there is no price support program for beef the Meat Import Act of mandates annual quotas to limit imports when domestic supplies are large. Voluntary export restraints have been negotiated with the principal beef exporting countries to avoid triggering the beef import quota In Public Law created the Food for Peace program as a means of reducing the large CCC stocks acquired through price support purchases. This act and subsequent amendments provided for donations of commodities to poor countries and sales for local currencies. These funds are used for development projects or local expenses of the U.S. Government such as embassy operation. Almost percent of all U.S. grain exports in the 1960s were under Public Law While concessional sales have helped to reduce burden- some government inventories and to develop new markets for U.S farm products the years when government stocks have been largest have often failed to coincide with years of crop shortfalls in developing countries Government stocks also have been reduced through export subsidies. Export subsidies on agricultural products are permitted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade subject to certain conditions. In particular export subsidies must not be used to obtain more than an " equitable " share of world exports or to " materially undercut " other suppliers ' prices. Export subsidies were used by the United States to avoid accumulating larger CCC stocks from the 1960s until In recent years " blended credit " and special subsidized sales have been used to encourage other countries particularly the EC to reduce their farm export subsidies. " Blended credit " consists of a mixture of no-interest loans " blended " with guaranteed or nonguaranteed commercial credit Export subsidies set up a two-price system that permits producers collectively to charge a higher price in the domestic market where demand is less price responsive and a lower price in the export market where demand is more sensitive to price changes. By this means total revenue to producers is increased. Total revenue to producers is of course further enhanced by the fact that farmers receive the higher domestic price for all they sell but taxpayers pay the entire cost of the export subsidy The target price system can also act as an export subsidy under certain circumstances. Unless sufficient acreage reduction is required target prices tend to cause larger production and lower market prices than would otherwise occur. Such price reductions have the same effect when viewed from other countries ' perspective as export subsidies unless loan rates are set at or above the long-run world market-clearing prices. For example it appears that the wheat loan rates were sufficiently low in and that the target prices did depress market prices. Since however the wheat loan rates have been set at such high levels that exports have been reduced The United States generally endorses free trade. During the various rounds of multilateral trade negotiations the United States has regularly urged that trade in agricultural commodities be treated simultaneously with other goods only to see it split off for separate treatment. The various rounds of trade negotiations have significantly lowered tariffs but have been relatively unsuccessful at achieving similar reductions in nontariff barriers the principal barriers to trade in agricultural commodities On several occasions in the 1970s the U.S. Government embargoed exports of certain agricultural products either globally or to selected destinations. Exports of soybeans for example were embargoed in to hold down domestic prices to livestock producers who use soybean meal as an input and indirectly to protect domestic consumers from higher prices of livestock products. In a partial embargo was imposed on grain sales to the U.S.S.R. in response to the invasion of Afghanistan. As a result of these embargoes questions have been raised about the reliability of the United States as a supplier and about the sanctity of U.S. export contracts. This Administration has publicly stated that farm exports will not be selectively embargoed in the future and has entered into long-term sales agreements with China and the U.S.S.R Since the adverse trade effects of the strong dollar third world debt problems and high price supports have motivated legislative requests for special export assistance through price or credit subsidies and expanded export credit guarantees. Credit guarantees have become a major tool in the effort to maintain U.S. farm exports In addition public expenditures in support of U.S. agricultural export promotion and foreign market development activities have increased NET EFFECTS OF FARM PROGRAMS Table lists the major Federal farm programs for the most important American farm products. In fiscal the Federal price and income support programs cost the taxpayer more than $ billion but this number tells only part of the story. Price supports and restrictive marketing and import practices impose an additional cost on consumers by reducing their purchasing power Federal farm policies tend to have two opposing effects on consumer prices. Public support for agricultural research and development has produced a stream of productivity-increasing cost-reducing technological improvements which have lowered market prices. Food price reductions benefit the poor in particular because they spend a larger fraction of their income on food than do middle- and upperincome groups Offsetting this positive effect on consumer prices are public policies that artificially raise farm product prices above the market-clearing level through price supports and restrictive marketing and trade practices. By raising food prices these policies tend to reduce consumers ' purchasing power. Because the policies alter relative prices they also distort the mix of products consumed. They have stimulated the development of synthetic substitutes for natural products for example high-fructose corn sweeteners and low-calorie sweeteners TABLE Major Federal farm programs by commodity Billions of dollars Sates rank Commodity Farm sales value Nature of program Value of net exports Beef cattle and calves Dairy Feed grains Soybeans.. No effective program ( price supports ) Hogs Wheat Poultry and eggs Section purchases Vegetables Some products free market but some import restrictions and marketing orders Section purchases Fruits and tree nuts Some products free market but'some import restrictions and many marketing orders Section purchases Cotton Price supports Deficiency payments Acreage restrictions Import quotas Tobacco Price supports Acreage and marketing controls Hay Rice Sugar beets and cane Peanuts Price supports Deficiency payments Acreage restrictions Storage incentives for participants Section purchases Price supports Import quotas Classified pricing Price supports Deficiency payments Acreage restrictions Storage incentives for participants = Import restrictions No program Price supports Deficiency payments Acreage restrictions Price supports Import quotas fees and duties Price supports Acreage restrictions Import quotas Domestic marketing quotas Sources : Department of Agriculture and Council of Economic Advisers for sugar synthetic fibers for cotton and wool margarine for butter nondairy creamers for cream and artificial cheese for natural cheese on frozen pizzas. Such substitutions have offset part of the adverse effects of price-enhancing policies on consumer welfare. Finally lowincome consumers have realized some benefits through income-augmenting programs such as food stamps and commodity distribution Public policies also affect the farm sector 's export performance Past public investments in agricultural research account for part of the increase in farm exports. At least in the long run export demand is elastic so this export growth has increased agricultural export revenue. On the other hand policies that administratively set U.S. farm support prices above the world market-clearing level tend to reduce export revenue in the long run. This occurred in the 1960s and again for some commodities in the early 1980s. Such policies prevent agriculture from realizing its full potential as a trading sector What matters to producers is how government policy affects the net returns to their land labor and capital. For a given technology any public policy that raises the price of products or lowers the cost of purchased goods and services raises net returns. This has been the effect of price supports import quotas and export subsidies as well as of cheap water and cheap energy policies. On the other hand the price supports on grains have raised the price of feed to the livestock and poultry sectors. In this way public policy raises the net returns to one set of farmers while lowering those to another different rates of protection to different sectors tend to cause inefficient resource allocation. Resources tend to move to where they earn the highest returns. If public policy artificially raises the returns in one sector relative to another this will attract excessive investment and result in excess capacity. Inefficient resource allocation lowers the potential production of the economy as a whole and reduces per capita income. When public policy diverts say investment capital or water from more to less productive uses this lowers national income While farming has changed a great deal since the 1930s farm policy instruments have not been adapted to the changing structure of farming and the environment in which it operates. Average sales of commercial farmers have grown rapidly and the benefits from farm programs tend to be concentrated on the largest producers despite payment limitations for some programs. Moreover the benefits from the programs have tended to become capitalized into land values thereby increasing landowners ' wealth. Once this happens land values can fall unless the government continues to support the product price. The threat of reduced land values and reduced returns on past capital investments provides farmers with a strong incentive to lobby against reductions in price supports even when it has become obvious that existing price supports are well above marketclearing levels. The prospect of continued price supports thus creates false expectations and encourages investments that would be unprofitable if price supports fell. Farmers who act in good faith upon these expectations feel they have been cheated if price supports are later reduced or eliminated. Nevertheless short of paying farmers to retire resources from production the only way to induce the needed resource adjustment is to allow capital losses and attempt to ease the adjustment by reducing price supports gradually Public policy appears to have induced excessive investment in parts of U.S. agriculture at various times. The cost of these misallocations does not always show up in the Federal budget. For example sugar producers and processors enjoy substantial income transfers as a result of protection from imports. Because of the way the program operates the consumer bears all of the cost of these income transfers. Nevertheless the costs are no less real than if the prices were supported by direct Federal Government purchases GUIDELINES FOR FUTURE FARM POLICY Modern American agriculture has become well integrated into the world market and into the rest of the U.S. economy. As exports have grown total demand for American agricultural products has become more price responsive but the variability of that demand has also increased. This deepens the sector 's susceptibility to periodic excess capacity as at the present. When the Agriculture and Food Act of was passed most observers thought that real farm prices would rise through the 1980s. In less than a decade we have gone from fears of worldwide food shortages to such large stocks that we paid farmers to reduce harvested acreage by million acres in This experience illustrates the need for flexibility in setting farm support prices. The present U.S. farm policies support the price to farmers in countries that compete with us for export markets and impede our ability to export. We need to allow prices to reach market-clearing levels if we wish to compete in the export market. If this is not done a significant part of the resources in American agriculture will remain underemployed until the total quantity of these resources is significantly reduced Price supports do little to help farmers with below-average income because benefits are distributed in proportion to sales. A more efficient and equitable way to help low-income farmers would be to transfer income to them directly. While most commercial farmers do not have low average incomes their incomes are variable because variability in weather and in exports create instability in both supply and demand. The resulting instability in cash flow makes modern American farming a risky business There are better ways to reduce risk besides outright price supports. One is through insurance. Historically when farmers lacked insurance markets in which to insure against fluctuations in yield and prices the government provided price supports and various forms of subsidized crop insurance. Today farmers can ensure a specific price through forward contracting or selling futures contracts although relatively few avail themselves of this opportunity. Farmers generally prefer not to commit themselves early worried that they may lose the opportunity to sell at a higher price later if the market price rises This year trading in commodity futures options is scheduled to recommence on a trial basis for the first time in years. With a put option crop producers will be able to buy the right to sell their future production at a specified price without incurring the obligation to sell at that price. This may be more attractive to producers than selling on the futures market. In a similar manner livestock producers will be able to buy insurance against increases in the price of their feed by buying call options. Thus the resumption of trading in commodity futures options will allow farmers to insure against price risk. If the experiment is successful there will be less need for the Federal Government to provide price insurance through price supports Buffer stock programs such as the Farmer Owned Reserve are designed to reduce variability in agricultural commodity prices. If these programs are continued the acquisition price should be set below the expected long-run world market-clearing price. Setting the acquisition price too high would reduce exports and support the whole world market price structure. Stocks would become excessive as happened in and In addition the price band needs to be adjusted over time on the basis of world price movements as is now done with soybeans to reflect long-run trends in market conditions Agriculture like other trading sectors is strongly affected by interest rates and the value of the dollar. Therefore macroeconomic policy is as important to farmers as farm policy. Special measures to shield one sector from the adverse effects of macroeconomic policy draw resources away from other sectors and place a greater adjustment burden on them. It would be more efficient to alter the macroeconomic policies that are damaging the traded goods sectors Because the United States is a large agricultural trading country it has a large interest in further liberalization of agricultural trade and in securing more satisfactory rules concerning use of agricultural export subsidies. In past rounds of multilateral trade negotiations substantial progress was made in lowering tariff barriers to agricultural trade. However little progress on reducing nontariff barriers such as quotas and variable import levies has occurred. If we hope to persuade other countries to liberalize access to their markets for our exports we have to be ready to offer freer access to our market for their exports. Freer access would also tend to stimulate economic growth in developing countries and over the longer run increase their demand for our exports American agriculture has a long and remarkable record of producing abundant supplies of wholesome food for a growing Nation and for export around the world. But the budget cost of farm programs has reached a level that is not sustainable. We must adopt policies to encourage the necessary resource adjustment. National income would likely increase as a result of more efficient resource allocation consumers would pay an even smaller fraction of their income for food than they do now and farmers would benefit from greater economic health of their industry CHAPTER Financial Market Deregulation OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS financial markets have undergone sweeping changes of a magnitude not seen since the 1930s. Despite these changes the process of market restructuring and regulatory reform remains incomplete. Additional regulatory changes of historic dimensions are being debated. The shape and scope of these reforms will be important to the American economy for decades to come The issues in financial regulation are many and complex. They include the safety and soundness of financial institutions the problems of dealing constructively with changing technology and the reduction of regulatory burdens to the maximum extent possible. Similar concerns are important in other industries where regulatory reform is being debated. But the financial regulatory reform issues are in many respects far larger Financial regulation is not simply a matter of protecting poorly informed investors the usual focus of consumer protection regulation but of protecting everyone. In the financial crises experienced in and earlier in U.S. history well-informed prudent investors and depositors found themselves ruined financially. From painful experience we know that a failure of public policy with respect to financial markets can create damage that extends far beyond the financial services industry. Financial market failure can mean economywide failure recession widespread unemployment and bankruptcies The essential functions of financial regulation are to ensure the safety and soundness of the financial system and to foster efficient allocation of capital by promoting competition and limiting opportunities for fraud and self-dealing. The competitive capital markets in the United States long encouraged by public policy have provided highly efficient links between the providers of funds and the users of funds directing resources into the most productive investments in the economy. But instability in financial markets has been a continual concern and at times a highly disruptive fact throughout U.S. history. The challenge for regulatory policy is to maintain stability while realizing the benefits of competition MAJOR HISTORICAL FORCES SHAPING FINANCIAL REGULATION It is best to begin the analysis of the key financial regulatory issues by considering the major forces that have shaped the industry and led to the present regulatory environment. These forces have included public reaction to periods of financial instability that occurred in the 1930s and earlier public concerns over the credit powers of financial institutions and their ties with other institutions and strong competitive pressures coming from both within and among the various segments of the industry FINANCIAL INSTABILITY Much of our inherited regulatory structure involves extensive and far-ranging legislation enacted in response to crisis. Periods of acute financial instability have resulted in the disappearance of major institutions and the introduction of new governmental regulations. For example in the 1860s problems of Civil War finance and increasing currency disorders led the Congress to establish the national banking system and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The Congress also defined the arrangements under which national banks would issue a national currency. Later a series of banking panics periods of numerous bank failures and bank suspensions of payments culminating with the panic of created demands for a stronger Federal mechanism to prevent instability. This led to the establishment of the Federal Reserve System in In the 1930s the collapse of the banking system and the Great Depression led to major banking and securities acts that set the basic structure of our banking and financial regulation. The legislation among other things established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the Federal Home Loan Bank System and the Securities and Exchange Commission The basic problem of financial instability that existed before extensive Federal involvement to stabilize the system arose because banking is based on a fractional reserve system. Banks accept deposits payable on demand. To meet depositors ' demands banks maintain reserves of cash and liquid assets that are a fraction of total deposits In normal circumstances the net drain on a bank 's cash and liquid assets is small because some depositors are putting funds into the bank while others are taking funds out. Moreover if one bank is running short another bank ordinarily has surplus funds. Bank funds can be borrowed and lent in the interbank market known as the Federal funds market. This market is extremely large and well developed In the financial panics that occurred in the 1930s and earlier however depositors came to distrust banks ; they withdrew funds and held them in the form of currency. One bank 's deposit drain was not offset by another bank 's deposit inflow. Because bank assets consist partly of cash reserves but mostly of loans to households and businesses banks experiencing cash drains were forced to curtail lending and perhaps to liquidate outstanding loans. As a result borrowers were forced to scramble for funds. Business activity and employment fell and interest rates on business and consumer borrowing often rose As the business contractions continued previously sound firms found that they could not service their debt nor could unemployed workers pay theirs. Banks that had been unaffected by the developing crises found that their once sound loan portfolios had become shaky Fearing more bank failures depositors rushed to withdraw funds from those sound banks. As the downward pressures accumulated the financial crises deepened This brief description of the development of financial crises shows that a financial system based on fractional reserve banking is potentially unstable : given a big enough shock or disturbance rational and predictable responses by banks businesses and households will tend to make the problem worse. There need be no villains for a financial crisis to occur. A crisis could develop even though every participant acted responsibly Two types of governmental institutions now serve to prevent a financial panic from cascading into a collapse of the banking system First the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and the National Credit Union Administration provide deposit insurance so that the failure of one unhealthy institution will not produce panic runs on healthy institutions. Second the Federal Reserve System as the Nation 's central bank stands ready to provide extra liquidity to the banking system When a scramble for a relatively fixed amount of currency threatens to produce a crisis the Federal Reserve can increase the total amount available thus meeting extraordinary demands. A scramble for currency forces cumulative reductions in the total money stock but the Federal Reserve can prevent the process from starting in the first place by using its policy instruments to keep the money stock growing reasonably smoothly CREDIT POWERS OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS A major theme running through U.S. financial history is that of concern over the power of financial institutions primarily banks as lenders and not just as depositories. This concern is responsible for many banking and financial market regulations. Issues of competition and concentration of fair and reasonable interest rates and of equitable access to credit have long been controversial topics in the regulatory debates It is essential that monetary and credit issues be kept analytically separate. We have tended to extend regulation over the credit activities of financial firms because of incomplete understanding of the monetary functions of banks. For example although there is no evidence to support this proposition bank failures in the early 1930s were attributed in part to the role of banks in the securities business This belief led to provisions in the Banking Act of ( Glass-Steagall Act ) requiring the separation of banking and securities activities Similarly regulations setting minimum margin requirements for securities purchases prohibiting the payment of interest on demand deposits and limiting the interest paid on time and savings deposits were based on the view that regulation of the credit markets was necessary to ensure financial stability The evidence however indicates that banking abuses are not themselves the basic cause of financial instability. A steady stream of bank failures occurred in the 1920s without causing generalized financial stress. On the other hand in the absence of a proper governmental monetary framework there is a danger of banking system collapse even if all banks individually pursue sound and conservative banking policies THE FORCES OF COMPETITION Competitive pressures have been an important force in shaping the financial industry. Yet much of the legislation of the 1930s and in other periods as well has been designed to restrict competition particularly in banking so as to maintain financial stability. Much of this legislation rested on faulty analysis. Indeed restrictions on competition have not only led to costly inefficiencies in the provision of financial services and reduced consumer choice but also may have contributed to instability The forces of competition in financial markets are powerful. The organized exchanges and over-the-counter markets in standardized financial instruments are obviously highly competitive. What is less obvious is the competitive nature of transactions involving nonmarketable financial instruments. For example a bank 's loan to a small business or a household which is ordinarily not a marketable financial instrument is often negotiated in a competitive setting. In many areas of the country borrowers can choose among numerous possible lenders. By shopping around they can select the most favorable com- bination of interest rate terms and service. In doing so they constrain lenders to provide competitive loan rates and terms Although most financial markets are highly competitive for most participants there are exceptions. In some cases geographical restrictions reduce the competition in local markets because financial firms from other areas are denied entry. The loss of competition primarily affects smaller local businesses and households ; larger businesses can place deposits with and obtain credit from the larger financial firms competing in regional or national markets One measure of the depth of competition among financial firms in the United States is that there are more than independent banks mutual savings banks savings and loan associations and credit unions with approximately offices nationwide. To be sure some part of this large number may reflect unit banking and other restrictions but it is likely that even without such restrictions the number of depository institutions would be large. In addition insurance companies securities firms money market mutual funds finance companies and other types of financial institutions compete with * the depository institutions in providing many services Table provides data on the numbers and assets of these institutions. Finally many large borrowers can bypass financial intermediaries altogether by selling stocks bonds and commercial paper directly to the market TABLE Number and assets of selected financial institutions as of December Assets ( millions ) Type of institution Commercial banks Branches Savings and loan associations1.. Branches Mutual savings banks Branches Credit unions Money market mutual funds Life insurance companies SEC-registered broker-dealers Data are preliminary Excludes approximately nonfederally insured State credit unions Data as of December for funds reporting to Donoghue 's Money Fund Report Source : Compiled by Council of Economic Advisers There is an important consequence of this competitive environment. Many of the regulations put in place in the 1930s that were designed to prevent " excessive competition " have been eroded by pressure for efficiency and innovation. In many instances profitability can be improved by avoiding costly regulation. When firms find ways to avoid regulation other firms are attracted to similar strategies both to maintain their profitability and to protect their competitive positions Although the forces of competition usually prevail in the long run the costs of unnecessary regulation should not be ignored. The amount of unproductive labor devoted to regulatory compliance and avoidance is far from trivial. Moreover established firms can find their market positions expertise and capital eroded as they attempt to cope with outmoded regulatory constraints while competing against less constrained firms. Regulation more than restraining competition forces it into new channels. As a result resource allocation is distorted and unnecessary costs are imposed on consumers shareholders and taxpayers The importance of the competitive constraint on financial regulation can hardly be overemphasized. But neglect of it in the past has led to many of the regulatory problems the Nation has faced. Important recent examples include the market distortions engendered by ceilings on the interest rates financial institutions were permitted to pay to their depositors and the growing banking competition from nonbanking firms such as securities firms that are not subject to traditional banking regulations Many observers decry the effects of competition in breaking down regulation but it is not possible to obtain the benefits of competition the market constraint on interest rates the incentives for efficiency and innovation and the dispersion of economic power without having these same forces work toward the avoidance of regulation. Indeed competition may break down unwise regulation that never should have existed It is often the case that legislation designed to solve one problem creates others. Most observers agree that the danger of a financial crisis has been reduced to an extremely low level. However deposit insurance interest rate controls and other restrictions on bank activities introduced in the 1930s initiatives viewed at the time as contributing to financial stability have had unexpected side effects Recent legislation the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of and the Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of have begun to deal with these new issues Fortunately the new legislation has been enacted in a setting very different from the crisis atmosphere existing in the 1930s. To be sure recent years have seen major stresses on the financial system ; the failure rate of financial institutions has risen. But the driving force behind recent and newly proposed legislation has been an attempt to modernize the regulation of financial markets and institutions to retain what is essential in earlier legislation and sweep away what has proved unnecessary or counterproductive CEILINGS ON INTEREST RATES The market 's response to interest rate ceilings on time and savings deposit accounts provides an example of regulatory avoidance in a highly competitive market and the unnecessary costs incurred in the process. Interest rate ceilings evolved from the legislation of the 1930s. The intent was to restrain " excessive price competition/ ' then thought to have contributed to the banking collapse in It was also felt that the introduction of Federal insurance of bank deposits gave the government a special responsibility to protect the commercial banking industry from competitive pressures that might strain the resources of the insurance funds Until interest rate ceilings on commercial bank deposits were intermittently changed to remain above market interest rates. In however market interest rates rose significantly above the rates thrift institutions were earning on their long-term mortgage portfolios threatening their solvency. The ceilings on bank rates were allowed to become binding in an attempt to prevent commercial banks from bidding funds away from mortgage lending. To prevent thrift institutions from engaging in a self-destructive bidding war ceilings were also extended to federally chartered savings and loan institutions and mutual saving banks In the short run this emergency legislation may have helped to stave off the bankruptcy of some thrifts. However as the " emergency " ceilings were extended year by year the artificially low rate of interest on bank and thrift accounts encouraged savers to withdraw their funds from financial intermediaries in favor of other forms of saving. This phenomenon came to be known as disintermediation Chart shows savings deposit inflows at banks and thrifts against the interest rate gap between the ceiling on passbook accounts and market rates. It illustrates the volatility of deposit flows with binding interest rate ceilings in place In many ways the effects of the ceilings were the opposite of those intended. For example the ceilings were intended to ensure a stable flow of mortgage funds. However they actually led to widespread disintermediation whenever rising market interest rates made other savings vehicles more attractive so that they effectively destabilized the flow of mortgage money. The ceilings were supposed to make it easier for lower-income families to afford housing by lowering mortgage rates. In fact the interest rate ceilings advantaged wealthier investors who could meet minimum balance requirements on higher yielding accounts and who had access to unregulated investments As a result the greatest burden of the regulation was borne by small- Chart Savings Deposit Inflows versus the Interest Rate Gap Percentage points Billions of dollars Monthly Savings Deposit Inflows ^ ( left scale ) ; 'i n f A/ A I/'V i / ' V * II / V * I T ^ ^ ^ L % '.II ' / ^ \ " In i w ( V ; ; ; i ' i,i y / ' I rl if u * i \ \ i " > Interest Rate Gap- / ( right scale ) i ^ Change in savings deposits at commercial banks and thrift institutions ( seasonally adjusted averages of dally figures ) ^ Ceiling on passbook savings accounts at commercial banks less rate on 3-month Treasury bills ( both measured in percent per annum ) Sources : Department of the Treasury and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System er savers. Moreover there is little evidence to suggest that the rate ceilings were effective in keeping mortgage interest rates down Rate ceilings were often effectively circumvented through nonprice competition and through investment in unregulated instruments. Extensive branching free checking and financial services expensive promotions and " free " gifts were among the many forms of implicit interest that banks and saving institutions used to attract customers As market interest rates rose through the 1970s the diversion of funds into unregulated instruments led to attempts to " tune " the ceiling structure for different categories of deposits. The number of different accounts subject to ceilings went from in to by These attempts to restrain disintermediation were not very successful. A new ceiling-free investment vehicle the money market mutual fund became increasingly popular. Balances in these accounts jumped from $ billion in to $ billion by Unintended effects and widespread opportunities for avoiding the ceilings among other things led to the passage of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act in which mandated the gradual removal of ceilings by At the Administration 's request the Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee has accelerated the phaseout of rate ceilings. By the end of fewer than one-fourth of interest-bearing deposits were in rate-restricted accounts DEREGULATION AND MONETARY CONTROL Interest rate ceilings not only provoked bouts of disintermediation but also damaged the ability of the Federal Reserve to measure and control the money stock. The ceilings also reduced the stability of the link between changes in the monetary aggregates and changes in nominal income making the task of managing monetary policy more difficult When market interest rates rose significantly above ceiling rates funds flowed out of traditional financial intermediaries new deposit categories were defined by the regulators and money market mutual funds emerged to offer deposit-like accounts that were beyond the direct control of the monetary authorities. As a result market reaction to binding interest rate controls resulted not only in a less predictable environment for making monetary policy but also in conceptual changes in the definitions of the monetary aggregates The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act contained provisions that when full adjustment to them is completed will significantly improve the potential for accurate Federal Reserve control over the monetary aggregates. For one the act mandated a phaseout of interest rate ceilings on interest-bearing accounts. The Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of continued the process by authorizing a new ceiling-free account the money market deposit account. Both steps should prevent circumstances in which these components of the broader monetary aggregate M2 become suddenly less attractive than savings vehicles not included in M2. As a result new episodes of large-scale disintermediation are unlikely to occur A proposal currently being discussed that would go still further in the direction of decontrolling deposit interest rates would allow banks to pay interest on ordinary demand deposit accounts and would require the Federal Reserve to pay interest on required reserves held against deposits. The cost of paying interest on reserves could be offset by increasing taxes or charges on institutions subject to reserve requirements. There are good arguments for such a proposal. Paying interest on reserves would eliminate the disadvantage that deposit accounts subject to reserve requirements have in relation to nonreservable accounts such as money market mutual fund accounts. But perhaps the strongest is that once portfolio adjustments associated with the change are completed paying interest on deposits and reserves would tend to stabilize Ml velocity the ratio of gross national product ( GNP ) to the narrowly defined money stock Ml and therefore facilitate monetary policy One cause of fluctuations in velocity is changes in the opportunity cost of holding money the difference between market interest rates and interest rates on deposit accounts. Because ordinary demand deposits do not earn interest the willingness of individuals and businesses to hold deposit balances changes inversely with market interest rates. For example when market rates rise depositors may attempt to economize on their holdings of non-interest bearing deposits by acquiring interest-earning assets. In the process monetary velocity rises ; for any given level of GNP depositors hold less money Changes in the velocity of money complicate the job of stabilizing nominal incomes. If interest were paid on both demand deposits and reserves the spread between the rate that competition would force banks to pay on those deposits and the rate that could be earned on other assets would reflect the resource costs associated with providing transactions services to depositors. As a result the opportunity cost of holding money would be more stable and it is likely that this would tend to stabilize Ml velocity Another provision in the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act that has improved the climate for monetary control is the imposition of uniform reserve requirements for most types of accounts. Under the legislation the Federal Reserve is empowered to set reserve requirements not only for member banks but also for nonmember banks and nonbank depository institutions such as savings and loans mutual savings banks and credit unions. The reserve requirements cover all transaction accounts including negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) Super-NOW and other automatic transfer accounts. Uniform reserve requirements are being phased in gradually. The process will be complete in When uniform reserve requirements are fully phased in the link between reserves and transactions balances should be tighter than in the past. Transaction deposits at depository institutions have been subject to widely varying treatment. These institutions have faced dif- ferent reserve requirements depending on their size location and whether they were members of the Federal Reserve System. Some State-chartered institutions have not been subject to any reserve requirements. As deposits have shifted among accounts subject to different reserve requirements the lending and money-creating capacity of the banking system would change without any change in the supply of reserves. Thus the relationship between reserves and deposits has been subject to unexpected changes. Uniform reserve requirements will reduce this source of variability and enhance the ability of the Federal Reserve to control the money stock GEOGRAPHICAL AND LINE-OF-BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS ON DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS Depository institutions have historically been subject to a number of Federal and State laws that restrict their entry into new geographical markets and nonbanking lines of business. These laws were generally intended to prevent capital outflows from rural areas into financial centers and to stabilize the banking system. However there is little evidence that they have served either purpose. Instead they have impeded the development of integrated financial service companies and resulted in a financial services sector with smaller and more numerous firms than would have otherwise developed. They also have impeded the development of businesses that offer both financial and nonfinancial services despite possible economies from such a structure Technological changes limited deregulation and the introduction of bank-like services by securities firms and others have eroded the force of these legal prohibitions and encouraged some expansion and diversification by banking firms. These changes have intensified the debate over further loosening geographical and line-of-business restraints. At issue is whether further deregulation will lead to more efficient and competitive financial services markets or promote concentration instability and undesirable trade practices GEOGRAPHICAL MARKET REGULATION A complex set of Federal and State laws governs expansion of depository institutions into new geographical markets. In general the controlling law depends on the type of institution whether it is chartered under Federal or State law and the State in which it is located The most cumbersome restrictions are those imposed on commercial banks. With few exceptions interstate branching is prohibited for banks whether national or State chartered. Intrastate branching of both national and State banks is controlled by the law of the host State. Historically most States have restricted intrastate branching either by prohibiting it altogether or limiting the number or location of branches ( Table ) Some relaxation of these restrictions has occurred but approximately half the States still place some limitations on intrastate branching. Federal geographical restrictions generally conform to State policies TABLE State restrictions on intrastate branch banking selected years [ Number of States ] Classification Branching prohibited Branching permitted but geographically limited. Unlimited branching Sources : American Bankers Association and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The restrictions on geographical expansion by State savings and loan associations are similar to those on banks except that many fewer States limit intrastate branching. There are no statutory limitations intrastate or interstate on branching by Federal savings and loan associations. However the Federal Home Loan Bank Board limits interstate branching except where necessary to rescue failing institutions and it observes the limitations imposed by the few States that do restrict intrastate branching of State-chartered savings and loans States generally enacted geographical restrictions on bank expansion for two reasons. First it was thought that such restrictions would prevent the outflow of funds from localities into financial centers and thereby increase the availability of loans to farmers and small businesses. Second the laws were intended to preserve local ownership and management of banks There is no evidence that branching limitations do in fact constrain the flow of loanable funds. Interinstitutional and interregional capital markets are so well developed that local deposits are as easily loaned out across the country as across the neighborhood Even the effect of these laws in promoting local control is questionable. Depository institutions have been able to circumvent the prohibitions either by using holding companies or by offering only limited services in geographical areas where they can not establish regular branches. In all but five of the States that impose restrictions on intrastate bank branching for example bank holding companies may be used to create a statewide banking system by acquiring multiple charters. The growth in the use of multibank holding companies over the past years from approximately independent companies holding less than percent of total bank deposits to more than companies with over percent of total bank deposits is attrib- utable in substantial part to the ease with which they can be used to circumvent intrastate branching limitations Until the enactment of the Bank Holding Company Act of the holding company structure could be used to circumvent interstate as well as intrastate branching prohibitions. Provisions of the act however prevent a bank holding company from acquiring more than a small interest in a bank outside the States in which it is already engaged without the approval of the State to be entered In changes to the Bank Holding Company Act permitted most banking-related services to be offered interstate except for deposit-taking. The changes also narrowed the definition of " bank " to include only institutions that both accept demand deposits and make commercial loans. As a result bank holding companies and others have been able to establish interstate networks of " nonbank banks " consumer finance companies mortgage companies and the like that escape regulation by either not accepting deposits or not making commercial loans. More recently the Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of empowered bank regulatory authorities to permit acquisition of failing institutions across State lines These changes plus recent advances in communications and data processing technologies that appear to have reduced the costs of managing multi-office banks have led to a substantial increase in the level of interstate banking activity. Of approximately offices engaging in banking-related activities more than are now located outside the home State of the parent entity. Even these numbers understate the amount of interstate banking activity because they do not reflect the substantial use of shared interstate automated teller machine networks or the phenomenal growth in the provision of bank-like services by interstate securities firms The rapid pace at which de facto interstate banking is emerging despite seemingly substantial legal barriers is one obvious indication of the strength of the forces for change within the financial services industry. These forces are also manifest in the numerous proposals for changes in both Federal and State law. Three New England States have recently adopted laws that provide for entry by out-ofState banks headquartered in other New England States with similar laws and similar regional reciprocal entry arrangements are under active consideration in several other areas of the country. Other States have modified their banking laws to permit at least some entry from out-of-State and the evolutionary movement away from intrastate limitations continues. At the Federal level a number of legislative proposals are now pending that would reduce Federal restrictions on interstate banking ECONOMIC ISSUES IN GEOGRAPHICAL MARKET DEREGULATION If geographical restrictions are relaxed the number of independent banking entities would almost certainly be reduced. States with unitbanking laws presently have approximately independent banking entities per million residents compared with for limited branching States and only for States with unrestricted branching. The most credible explanation is that branching restrictions impede access by large banks to deposit accounts and small loan business outside their home territories. Deposit accounts have historically been the lowest cost source of funds for banks and full-service branches are important in marketing consumer and small business loans. Impeded access has therefore inhibited the growth of large firms and favored smaller firms However geographical market deregulation would probably increase the number of banking offices operating in most communities " Unit-banking * ' States those that prohibit all branching have approximately commercial bank offices per million residents compared with offices per million residents for other States. Although other factors may contribute to the difference branching prohibitions are probably a significant reason for the lower ratio of banking offices to population in unit-banking States On balance these two changes should increase competition and benefit consumers. The relevant market for retail deposits and small loan customers is compact the locality or even the neighborhood Although geographical market deregulation is likely to decrease the total number of depository institutions nationally each competitor will compete in more local markets. Moreover the number of potential entrants into each local market will also increase Nor would deregulation eliminate all smaller institutions. A recent study concluded that there are unlikely to be large if any economies of scale for most important banking services. The best existing data indicate that the costs of providing traditional banking services reach a minimum for institutions in the $ million to $ million asset range. Moreover it does not appear that most bank customers will pay a premium to bank with interstate firms. The experience in States without intrastate branching restrictions is that many small institutions survive and prosper. In fact smaller banks and thrifts not only coexist with larger ones but generally have higher profitability on bank assets. Although some institutions particularly less wellmanaged ones will disappear as separate entities they will most likely be acquired by more efficiently run organizations that will operate them as branches LINE-OF-BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS Federal law embodies a long-standing policy of separating banking from unrelated lines of commerce. Today as a general rule banks may not engage in nonfinancial businesses unrelated to banking either directly or through subsidiaries nor may bank holding companies or their affiliates. Similar though somewhat less stringent prohibitions apply to savings and loan associations and holding companies controlling two or more savings and loan charters. Holding companies that control a single savings and loan association or any number of " nonbank " banks however are not subject to Federal line-of-business limitations The line separating commercial banking from other financial services is much less distinct. Until the 1930s State and national banks regularly engaged in underwriting and dealing in securities often circumventing legal prohibitions by pursuing such activities through affiliated companies. Because of the popular belief that banks had contributed to the Great Crash by promoting speculative securities and unloading worthless issues into trust and customer accounts the Banking Act of ( the Glass-Steagall Act ) was passed. Provisions of the act attempted to divorce banking and the securities industry by barring banks from underwriting or dealing in nonbank securities whether debt or equity The Glass-Steagall separation is incomplete in a number of ways First the act 's prohibitions against the affiliation of banks with securities firms apply only to banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and not to the many State-chartered nonmembers. All banks however are prohibited from underwriting securities directly and securities firms may not take deposits. Second Glass-Steagall allows all banks to distribute and trade in general obligation government securities. Third the act authorizes banks to buy and sell any securities for the account of bank customers provided that such transactions are " without recourse " against the bank Until recently the gaps in the Glass-Steagall Act except those permitting trading in government securities were inconsequential Banks did not aggressively pursue brokerage business because regulatory restraints made it unprofitable. In January these restraints were relaxed and as a result thousands of depository institutions now engage in securities brokering ECONOMIC ISSUES IN LINE-OF-BUSINESS DEREGULATION Proposals to ease line-of-business restrictions on depository institutions have spurred much debate. Proponents argue that economic efficiency would be increased by permitting these institutions to underwrite and deal in securities and by expanding their power to engage in collateral lines of business such as insurance underwriting and sales real estate development and management consulting. Opponents argue that these changes would increase the riskiness of banking result in unacceptable concentrations of market power lead to self-dealing and conflict-of-interest abuses by banking firms and be unfair to bank competitors Product-line deregulation may promote economic efficiency in two ways. First it may reduce the total cost of providing multiple services by consolidating their provision within a firm. Such savings can result from spreading fixed costs over more activities improving communications and effecting synergies in production. Second customers may benefit from the extra convenience associated with conducting their business with a single firm The magnitude of the economic benefits from relaxing line-of-business restrictions is uncertain. Specific cost data for depository institutions and their customers are limited and reliable estimates of the cost savings from product line deregulation do not exist. Over the past several years however several large firms have integrated over a broad spectrum of businesses including insurance real estate and securities underwriting and brokering. Although it is too early to assess the economic success of these ventures their development is evidence that the market believes that substantial economies from the integration of these businesses are possible. Indeed much of the pressure for reconsidering line-of-business restrictions on banks has come from members of the banking community who argue that relaxation of these restrictions is necessary for them to meet competition from nonbanking firms offering integrated services Product line diversification does however raise issues of some concern regarding banking stability. The existence of Federal deposit insurance gives insured institutions an incentive to take undue risks in the hope of earning greater than normal returns. Accordingly much of the supervisory efforts of banking regulators is directed at preventing excessively risky banking practices. As a practical matter as the range of business activities increases it may become much more difficult for regulators to thwart excessive risk-taking The Administration 's proposed legislation the Financial Institutions Deregulation Act strikes a balance by easing restrictions on nonbanking activities but requiring that they be conducted only by separate corporate affiliates that are not bank subsidiaries. This approach has two significant advantages. First by removing nonbanking activities to affiliates the bank itself can be regulated and supervised on the basis of the traditional methods developed by the regulatory agencies over many years. Second because the affiliates are to be subsidiaries of the holding company rather than of the bank itself the bank would be insulated from any financial problems that occur in the subsidiary There is of course no way to guarantee that difficulties in an affiliate will not affect the bank. But with proper safeguards the problems can be minimized. Moreover it is important to recognize that attempts to seal off banking from collateral activities is a recipe for an endless expansion of regulation. Brokerage firms are now expanding bank-like activities rapidly. Extending regulation to these bank competitors would simply push regulatory avoidance to another channel There is in addition far more danger of financial instability from unregulated banking substitutes than from properly supervised banks permitted to expand their powers within well-designed corporate structures A similar point may be made with respect to predictions that increases in self-dealing and conflicts of interest will result from repeal of Glass-Steagall. The potential for these abuses is already present in both commercial and investment banking. For example broker-dealers already represent both purchasers and sellers deal for their own account provide investment advice manage mutual funds and act as fiduciaries with respect to trust or discretionary accounts. Bank trust departments may transact in the securities of bank customers In fact legal and market forces have limited self-dealing and conflict-of-interest abuses. Legal standards governing fiduciary behavior are strict and the conduct of fiduciaries is subject to regulation. In addition to legal mechanisms market forces are extremely important Systematic abuses by a bank 's trust department would for example reduce the return on the portfolios it manages causing it to lose business to competitors. Although one can not say that no such abuses will occur existing controls should keep them to a minimum Line-of-business deregulation also poses issues of fairness. Opponents of changes to existing law have argued that depository institutions could operate collateral lines of business with low-cost capital benefiting from access to the Federal Reserve 's discount window and an implicit subsidy from Federal deposit insurance. They charge for example that some industrial companies and retailers have acquired a deposit-taking " nonbank " bank or a single savings and loan association to finance their own activities or customer purchases of their products and services with low-cost capital This argument ignores the fact that the profitability of a consolidated enterprise can not be increased by charging an affiliated business or customer a submarket rate of interest. Any attempt to do so will reduce the profitability of the bank leaving the earnings of the enterprise unchanged. In other words if a bank has access to lowcost capital it will be profitable to its owner even if the bank pro- vides no financing whatsoever for the parent company or its customers. As long as the capital market is competitive the cost-of-funds differential between financing customers from bank deposits on the one hand and from selling commercial paper on the other will only be enough to cover the costs of operating the bank and to earn the going rate of return on the assets invested in the bank Another argument is that financial intermediaries would be able to compete unfairly by tying loans to the purchase of other services. It is not likely however that many financial intermediaries would find tying arrangements advantageous. Tying arrangements are a way in which a firm with market power can circumvent laws against price discrimination and increase its profits by selling different customers different quantities of tied-in products. It is unlikely that many banks have such market power but even if some do they could directly price discriminate by charging different interest rates to different customers Banking organizations however enjoy certain regulatory and tax advantages over nonbank competitors particularly securities firms Banks are largely exempt from regulation under Federal and State securities laws and therefore could enjoy a cost advantage in broker-dealer underwriting and investment management activities Moreover in determining taxable income depository firms may deduct interest paid on deposits even if they are used to finance holdings of tax-free securities. This provision of the tax law may give them an advantage in carrying inventories of securities relative to nonbank securities dealers The problem of asymmetrical tax and regulatory treatment could be solved either by modifying tax and securities laws or by allowing only affiliated entities to undertake such activities. The latter approach has been adopted in the Administration 's Financial Institutions Deregulation Act. Under this act affiliated entities would not be exempt from the securities laws nor be subject to favorable tax treatment DEPOSIT INSURANCE REFORM In today 's financial market the traditional depository institutions commercial banks and thrifts compete with money market mutual funds and brokerage firms in offering highly liquid deposit accounts that pay competitive rates of interest. Commercial banks and thrifts however retain a unique position relative to their newer competitors because their liabilities are federally insured. The system of Federal deposit insurance was created as part of the Banking Act of Under this law the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) in- sures deposit accounts for banks that are members of the corporation. A year later the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation ( FSLIC ) was established to provide a similar arrangement for the savings and loan industry The purpose of the FDIC was to eliminate the financial panics and bank runs that had long plagued the economy one of which culminated in the collapse of the banking system in Measured by that criterion deposit insurance has been tremendously successful There is wide agreement that earlier problems with financial market instability were not solved by creating a national currency nor by imposing reserve requirements on banks nor by the establishment of the Federal Reserve System but by deposit insurance. Chart illustrates the dramatic decline in bank failures after the FDIC was established Chart Bank Failures Number Number ( Enlarged Scale ) I A J I l l l l l l A / I t I Illlllll ~ H ~ ht44J I I I i I I I I I I I i I I I ] I I I I I I Note. Data for estimated Sources : Comptroller of the Currency and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation I I IIJO The volume of deposits insured by the FDIC and FSLIC has increased greatly in recent years as coverage limits have been raised and as new insured accounts have been introduced. Since the limits have increased at faster rates than inflation and now stand at $ per depositor. The introduction of money market deposit accounts in mid-December and ceiling-free Super-NOW accounts in January and the elimination of ceilings on most small time deposit accounts in October have also produced increases in the amount of insured deposits as many customers have switched out of the uninsured accounts issued by money market mutual funds into the insured deposit accounts issued by banks and thrifts Federal deposit insurance gives banks savings and loans and credit unions an advantage in the competition for funds and alters the structure of incentives in the industry. To some extent these advantages have been offset by competition-inhibiting restrictions on the amount of interest payable on deposit accounts on allowable activities and on opportunities for expansion into new markets. In recent years deregulation and private market innovation have eliminated or reduced the force of many of these restrictions on competition thereby increasing efficiency in the industry. However the FDIC and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board the parent of FSLIC have argued that their ability to control risk-taking by institutions offering insured accounts has been impaired in the new environment. As a result the deposit insurance system is currently being reassessed Because most of the expansion in the range of opportunities available to insured depository institutions has taken place only recently conclusive evidence on the effect of these changes on failure rates of insured institutions and the dollar magnitude of actual payouts is difficult to determine. There has been a large increase in the number of failures in recent years. But this increase can be attributed primarily to the depth of the recent recession which has exacerbated problems associated with insufficient diversification and mismatches between asset and liability maturity structures at some institutions that have long existed Nevertheless changes in the risk characteristics of financial institutions that are taking place now may have a significant effect on failure rates in the future. In addition financial institutions are still refining their strategies and tactics in the new financial environment and so further changes in market practices can be expected THE IMPACT OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE If deposit insurance were unavailable depositors would have incentives to evaluate the riskiness of a depository institution 's balance sheet and policies because their deposits would be at risk. The exist- ence of these incentives and competition among intermediaries for funds would impose strong discipline on managers to adopt sound portfolio policies. One obvious consequence of insuring deposits is that the incentives of insured depositors to evaluate risk are eliminated so that market discipline is greatly diminished. As a result it is up to the insurer either to design an insurance system that provides the correct incentives for the intermediaries or to impose restrictions on intermediaries that limit possibilities for excessive risk-taking Currently the premiums charged by the FDIC and FSLIC are proportional to the amount of assessable deposits regardless of the riskiness of the intermediary 's assets. Under this system insured institutions have an incentive to take on more risk than they would otherwise either by making riskier loans or by increasing leverage. Doing so does not subject them to higher premiums and they obtain the benefits of the higher yields that normally accompany the assumption of greater risk With premiums unrelated to risk therefore regulation of insured intermediaries is justified. It is not coincidental that many restrictions on competition accompanied the introduction of deposit insurance in the Banking Act of In fact the primary thrust of financial legislation through the 1930s much of which is still in place was to supplant or limit competition in the market for financial services both to prevent bank failures and to protect the assets of the insuring agencies The undesirable consequences associated with many of these restrictions have already been discussed. To some extent the restrictions have simply redirected competition into other areas some of which are socially wasteful and have caused the industry to evolve in a less efficient manner than it otherwise would have. Moreover to the extent that competition has been limited the restrictions have served to reduce incentives to lower costs and therefore prices Reform must focus on incentives for limiting risk rather than on restrictions on competition PROPOSALS FOR REFORM Many proposals have been advanced to strengthen private incentives to control risk-taking by institutions offering insured accounts The proposals can be grouped into the following categories : Tie insurance premiums to some measure of risk Strengthen capital requirements Increase the risk exposure of large depositors Strengthen disclosure requirements Privatize all or part of the deposit insurance system It appears that none of these proposals taken alone offers a completely satisfactory solution but a combination could accomplish the goal of strengthening private incentives to control risk-taking while preserving stability of the financial system Relate Insurance Premiums to Risk Charging insurance premiums that reflect the riskiness of an institution 's balance sheet and management capabilities is a solution with great theoretical appeal. If the premium paid to the insurer were actuarily fair in the sense of covering the expected losses of the insurer given the risk and capital of the firm and the terms of the insurance contract the incentive to take on additional risk at the expense of the insuring agency would disappear. This approach would seem to obviate the need for extensive regulatory constraints. Insured institutions would be free to structure their assets and liabilities and to compete in the financial marketplace on terms of their own choosing Those electing to adopt aggressive strategies with respect to risk and return would simply pay higher premiums to compensate the insurer for their higher expected claims There are problems with risk-related premiums however stemming from the difficulties associated with measuring risk properly and determining an appropriate schedule of premiums. One important measurement problem arises from the role that diversification plays in reducing risk. The riskiness of a portfolio can not be evaluated simply by examining the riskiness of individual assets. Portfolio risk depends more on the interrelationships among the assets and how they match up with the structure of liabilities Banks and thrifts have traditionally faced different types of portfolio risks. This is reflected in the experiences of failed or troubled institutions in these two industries. A major cause of bank problems and failures has been insufficient diversification. For example many of the banks that have recently failed or are now experiencing difficulties had heavily invested in real estate loans loans to the oil and gas industry or to foreign borrowers. For savings and loans the principal problem has been excessive exposure to interest rate risk the result of borrowing short by accepting deposits either payable on demand or with comparatively short duration and lending long by writing long-term fixed-rate mortgages. Until recently savings and loans were subject to regulatory and tax provisions that encouraged them to accept substantial interest rate risk since the provisions provided strong incentives to invest in long-term fixed-rate mortgages and since they were prohibited from reducing their exposure by other means In principle it is possible to quantify certain types of risk for example interest rate risk provided that complete enough balance sheet information is available. However other types of portfolio risks are more difficult to assess objectively. The bank examination process though important contains subjective elements that make it unsuitable as an exclusive basis for setting premiums For these reasons sole reliance on risk-based insurance premiums is impracticable. However risk-based premiums may play a useful role as part of a package of reforms designed to deter excessive risktaking. To implement a risk-based system the elements of risk that are measured must be clearly related to failure and the premium structure must not create perverse incentives for institutions to assume other risks that are not used as a basis for premiums. Given the limited present ability to meet these criteria premium differentials across risk categories should probably be kept small at least initially Strengthen Capital Requirements Ratios of deposits to bank capital for the banking .and thrift industries have increased steadily over the past years. Under the present policy for pricing insurance it may be advantageous for owners of insured intermediaries to drive these ratios to very high levels unless other restrictions are in place. Strengthening capital requirements would be advantageous for two reasons. First the additional capital would directly provide an extra margin of safety both for the insuring agencies and uninsured depositors. Second by placing more of an intermediary 's own capital at risk incentives to control risk-taking would be strengthened It may be desirable to allow strengthened capital requirements to be satisfied either through the issuance of new equity or subordinated debt bonds whose claim on bank assets is subordinate to the claims of depositors and the insuring agencies but prior to the claims of equity holders. Bondholders would be another class of investors with incentives to monitor an intermediary 's practices Proposals that rely solely on strengthened capital requirements without any other reforms have some serious drawbacks. For one the question of the appropriate level of capital should not be addressed apart from the riskiness of the rest of an institution 's portfolio two institutions with identical ratios of deposits to capital can represent very different risks to the insuring agency. There are also problems with properly measuring net worth. Large discrepancies can exist between true and accounting values of assets and liabilities. The measure of true net worth that many prefer the market 's estimate is generally not available since the majority of financial institutions are not publicly held. Further the market value of banks that are publicly traded may reflect the guarantees that are implicit in deposit insurance Increase the Risk Exposure of Large Depositors Many observers have argued that any reform of the deposit insurance system should include provisions that would increase the risk exposure of large depositors as a way of imposing greater market discipline. Insured depositors presently have little or no incentive to evaluate the soundness of an intermediary. If virtually all depositors are effectively insured the discipline of the market that would come from private sector scrutiny of the intermediary 's policies is lost. The existence of ceilings on the amount of insured deposits in any given account suggests that some large depositors are at risk so that intermediaries competing for their business would be subject to private sector scrutiny. However this discipline has not been important in recent years The reasons for the current lack of market discipline differ somewhat for savings and loans and commercial banks. Savings and loans have few uninsured deposits fewer than percent of total deposits at the end of In contrast many banks have sizable uninsured deposits. The FDIC has estimated that as of June approximately percent of all domestic deposits in commercial banks were uninsured. For large banks with more than $ billion in deposits the figure is approximately percent and for the largest money center banks the figure approaches percent. However particularly for medium- and large-sized banks the FDIC 's procedure for handling failures which involves arranging a merger with a sound bank while covering the failed bank 's losses has meant that few uninsured depositors have suffered losses. Since the establishment of the FDIC no depositor has ever incurred a loss as a result of a failure of a member bank with more than $ billion in total deposits A recent FDIC report submitted to the Congress on the subject of deposit insurance reform stresses the importance of restoring the perception that large depositors are at risk possibly by abandoning the policy of arranging mergers. However as recently as October the FDIC provided de facto insurance for uninsured depositors at a large bank by arranging a merger. The FDIC appears to face a classic problem in its management of bank failures : it would like to represent itself as being willing to permit uninsured depositors to suffer losses so as to restore private incentives to monitor risk but for any given failure the FDIC often finds it cheaper to assume the losses in the process of arranging a merger. Moreover under present arrangements doing otherwise might require a lengthy bankruptcy proceeding perhaps lasting years and tying up billions of dollars of assets and deposits. If the institution were large this could be highly disruptive One factor complicating the task of increasing the risk exposure of large depositors is the emergence of the deposit brokerage industry In recent years a network of brokers has emerged to parcel large deposits into insurable increments and place them in financial institutions nationwide. Deposit brokers perform the useful function of facilitating interregional flows of funds. However they also have been known to place insured funds in banks without any credit analysis or worse yet place them in known problem banks in order to collect higher fees. In an attempt to check this type of activity both the FDIC and FSLIC have recently announced that problem institutions would be subject to limitations on the amount of brokered deposits they could accept A common prescription for increasing market discipline is to lower the limits on insured accounts. However the emergence of the deposit brokerage industry suggests that unless the limits are lowered very substantially the impact may be slight. A more promising way to accomplish large reductions in the coverage levels and at the same time protect small depositors would be to return to the fractional coverage scheme that was a part of the original Federal deposit insurance legislation. The act President Roosevelt signed into law called for full coverage of the first $ of a deposit percent coverage of the amounts between $ and $ and percent coverage for amounts above $ This plan never took effect as a temporary plan adopted by the Congress was extended indefinitely. A partial coverage plan of this type is in effect in the United Kingdom where percent of deposits in failed banks are reimbursed up to a ceiling amount There is one significant advantage of a fractional coverage system When a failure takes place depositors maintaining funds above the ceiling amount for full coverage could receive immediate payment up to the amount of their coverage. Additional amounts could be paid later depending on what is realized from the failed institution 's portfolio. As a result the disruptive effects on the payments system that could be associated with the liquidation of a large institution 's portfolio would be minimized There is however an important tradeoff associated with implementing a fractional coverage system. In order for market discipline to be a credible deterrent to excessive risk-taking by financial intermediaries uninsured depositors must be prepared to move funds out of troubled institutions. Exposing large depositors to greater risk therefore increases the likelihood of deposit flight from those institutions. Because deposits can be moved quickly and cheaply to a new institution such a system might mean that an intermediary subject to moderate but well-reported problems would experience deposit out- flows that could prevent its recovery. The recent expansion of access to the Federal Reserve discount window to both nonmember banks and thrift institutions should be important in preventing unwarranted deposit flights from causing the failure of marginal institutions Improve Disclosure Any proposal that relies heavily on increased market discipline should be accompanied by improved disclosure and strengthened reporting requirements. Federal bank regulators have not required insured institutions to carry assets and liabilities on their balance sheets at market value or until recently to report financial information that would permit an assessment of the interest rate risk and credit risk to which an institution is exposed. However the Securities and Exchange Commission does now require bank holding companies to report some market value data and data that could lead to an assessment of interest rate and credit risk Privatize Deposit Insurance The provision of deposit insurance is now a virtual Federal monopoly. Consequently it is impossible to use market measures to assess the performance of the FDIC and FSLIC in setting premiums either under the current system or under a new system with variable premiums. Further if incorrect assessments were applied under a system of risk-related premiums the insured institutions might have few other sources of insurance. In principle a private market for deposit insurance would seem to avoid these problems ; market forces could be relied upon to guarantee that intermediaries were evaluated fairly. In addition private insurers would have an incentive to share many of the costs of monitoring their behavior. Privatizing deposit insurance might therefore be another means of bringing the discipline of the market to bear on financial institutions It may be possible to introduce some elements of a joint publicprivate deposit insurance system. There is already some private participation in the market for financial guarantees. For example at least one major money market mutual fund has obtained private insurance for its shareholders and private insurance of mortgages and credit union deposits is well established It is not likely however that responsibility for insuring deposits can be shifted to any great extent to the private sector. Some ultimate Federal guarantee may be necessary to maintain public confidence. In addition deposit insurance was established primarily to protect against the risk of a banking crisis the prospect of many bank failures occurring simultaneously. It is precisely this kind of risk that the private insurance industry is least equipped to handle SUMMARY The benefits of a credible deposit insurance system should be achievable in an environment with fewer restrictions than the present one provided certain basic reforms are implemented. A deposit insurance system tied to risk would be a significant reform. Strengthened capital requirements the introduction of fractional coverage for relatively large accounts and improved disclosure should also play roles. A deposit insurance system relying more heavily on incentives of this kind can be expected to involve significantly lower net costs than restrictions on entry activities and the pricing of financial services that serve either to limit competitive pressures in the marketplace or to redirect competition into other areas REFORM OF THE REGULATORY STRUCTURE Today the regulatory structure is characterized by considerable overlap and duplication of function among numerous Federal and State authorities. In December the Administration announced the creation of the Task Group on Regulation of Financial Services chaired by the Vice President to study Federal regulation of financial institutions and to develop proposals for comprehensive reform. A principal objective of the Task Group has been to address the overlap and duplication in Federal banking regulation The regulatory structure for depository institutions developed in a piecemeal fashion over many decades. Until the Civil War all banking activities with only minor exceptions were conducted by Statechartered institutions. Between and the Congress enacted legislation that was designed to force State banks to recharter under Federal law. State-chartered banks did not disappear however largely because State bank regulations were often less stringent than Federal regulations. Hence a dual banking system developed in which banks could operate with either a Federal or State charter under the jurisdiction of separate regulatory authorities. This aspect of the regulatory structure for banking and more recently thrifts has played an important role in shaping the industry. It has fostered innovation by permitting many possible paths of evolution instead of one. Two important examples of innovations first permitted by State regulators are branch banking and NOW accounts Successive layers of Federal regulation of commercial banks were applied in response to financial crises and the emergence of new institutions and forms of organization. A bank today can hold a national charter in which case it is supervised by the Comptroller of the Currency or a State charter. All nationally chartered banks are also members of the Federal Reserve System but State-chartered banks can be either members in which case they are regulated by the Federal Reserve Board or nonmembers in which case they are regulated by the FDIC. However holding companies of both national banks and State nonmember banks also fall under the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve. Because of tax regulatory and financing advantages the holding company form of organization has become dominant. As a result the Federal Reserve has at least some jurisdiction over the majority of commercial banking entities particularly the larger ones. Although Federal deposit insurance is not mandatory for State-chartered banks virtually all commercial banks are members of the FDIC and so come under its jurisdiction as well. Chart illustrates the complexity of current arrangements Chart Existing Regulation of Banks and Their Holding Companies December Regulatory Agencies Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Comptroller of the Currency Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation State Bank Departments I Securities and Exchange Commission Department of Justice J n f NATIONAL BANK j I ( STATE MEMBER BANK HOLDING COMPANY Types of Regulated Firms i HOLDING COMPANY r STATE NONMEMBER BANK HOLDING COMPANY ^ Antitrust enforcement only Source : Vice President 's Task Group on Regulation of Financial Services Because several agencies typically share responsibility for regulating a particular bank and because different banks are regulated by different agencies depending on their charter and form of organization gaps and overlaps of regulatory power among the many agencies have developed. In addition these agencies have sometimes had conflicting objectives and motivations in dealing with regulatory issues. For example the Federal Reserve has traditionally exerted a conservative influence while the chartering agencies at both the Federal and State levels have been more inclined to encourage growth and development An advantage of the regulatory structure for the savings and loan industry is that the problems of duplication of effort and gaps and overlaps of authority are much less pronounced since the FHLBB performs the functions that three separate Federal agencies the Federal Reserve the Comptroller of the Currency and the FDIC now perform for commercial banks. Of course if federally insured a State-chartered savings and loan association is regulated by both FSLIC and its State-chartering agency In the 1930s when separate regulatory structures were established for commercial banks thrifts and securities dealers those firms comprised distinct industries with little competition across industry lines Because of differences in the products and services offered ( for example between brokerage houses and commercial banks ) or between customer groups ( for example commercial borrowers using commercial banks and small savers and home buyers using savings and loan associations ) regulatory decisions applying to those industries could be made independently. Consequently there was at first little reason to consider reform of the regulatory structure In recent years the lending and investment powers of thrift institutions have been broadened as a result of both Federal and State legislation. As a result of these new powers thrift institutions may now engage with some limitations in virtually all the activities that are lawful for commercial banks. This new state of affairs has highlighted differences in their regulation and supervision. For example it is now legally possible for a thrift institution to become functionally equivalent to a commercial bank while remaining eligible for regulatory programs designed to create incentives for traditional thrift activities In addition banks and thrifts now face aggressive new competition from brokerage firms money market mutual funds and " nonbank " banks in their traditional markets. At the same time technological change notably computer-based accounting and communication has opened up opportunities for substantial increases in the scope of business across a broadening range of products and customer groups. As a result there has been renewed interest in reforms that would produce a level playing field on which the various providers of financial services could compete on equal terms and that would permit emerging economies in the provision of financial services to be exploited to the fullest extent possible The long-standing opportunities banks have had for selecting a charter and form of organization that places them under different primary regulators and the growing similarities in the legal powers of banks and thrifts have implications for the behavior of the regulatory agencies. The various regulatory agencies must offer sufficiently attractive terms to institutions operating under their charters to maintain their existing clientele bases and to attract new firms. There are different opinions as to whether this situation is desirable. One view is that the present scheme leads to " competition in laxity " and therefore insufficient restraints on unsound practices. Another view is that it tends to eliminate the most onerous regulatory strictures and fosters innovation and efficiency Because of the enormous changes that have occurred in financial markets in recent years the regulatory structure has become progressively out of date. As a result the case for regulatory reform is now very strong. The Administration 's Task Group on Regulation of Financial Services is expected to issue its report in early The report will focus debate and attention on a specific set of legislative proposals to streamline Federal regulation and reduce the overlap between Federal and State regulators CONCLUSIONS Of all the goals of financial regulation the goal of financial stability is paramount. In the 1930s financial instability was widely attributed to the natural operation of competitive markets and this view supported a very substantial extension of regulatory controls over financial markets. More recently however a renewed respect for the efficiency of competitive markets has developed as well as increased recognition of the costs of regulation. Regulation tends to spread in unproductive directions and often causes industries to evolve less efficiently than they otherwise would. For these reasons the promotion of efficiency by furthering competition is also an important regulatory goal. The purpose of regulation should not be to protect poorly managed individual firms from failure but rather to prevent such failures from shaking the stability of the financial system as a whole Regulations should be designed to achieve stability of the system while individual firms are afforded the maximum possible freedom to compete and innovate CHAPTER Review and Outlook IN THE U.S. ECONOMY experienced a year of vigorous cyclical recovery. As the economy snapped back from recession employment increased by million persons and the unemployment rate fell by percentage points. Real gross national product ( GNP ) the broadest measure of output rose by percent while industrial production rose by percent. These gains in employment and output were achieved in an environment in which the rate of inflation continued to decline the increase in the consumer price index of percent was the lowest in years. Both productivity and real wages rose continuing an advance that began in For both series the 2-year increase was the largest in years. Major stock price indexes rose significantly through the first half of the year and then leveled off while interest rates increased somewhat starting in the spring. The U.S. dollar appreciated in the foreign exchange market continuing a trend that began in late The performance of the economy involved much more than a simple reversal of the output declines experienced during the recession. The decline in inflation and resumption of productivity growth are expected to provide the base for a long continuing expansion in coming years. The Administration 's outlook for and economic assumptions through are described in the final section of this chapter following the review of the economy 's performance in REVIEW OF THE ECONOMY Gains in output were widespread across most sectors of the economy. By the end of the expansion was year old the quarterly dating of the business cycle trough is the fourth quarter of while the monthly dating is November In discussing the recovery a comparison with other recoveries is useful. Table provides summary information on the other recoveries since From Table it can be seen that in real GNP grew slightly less and employment considerably more than over the comparable period of a typical recovery. Indeed the employment gain was larger than experienced in any of the seven recoveries reported in Table with the exception of the recovery following the trough. Industrial production in rose somewhat more rapidly than over the first year of a typical recovery TABLE Growth in output and employment over first year of business cycle recoveries [ Percent change except as noted } First quarters after trough Quarter and month of business cycle trough Real GNP IV ( November ) First months after trough Industrial production Civilian employment Civilian unemployment rate ( percentage point change ) = = Average of seven recoveries ' Average of five recoveries IV ( October ) II ( May ) II ( April ) I ( February ) 1V ( November ) ( March ) III ( July ) = Excludes Excludes and Note. Business cycle troughs are as determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System In order to provide a reference standard for interpreting the growth of GNP and its components in a " typical * * recovery may be defined by averaging the first year of business expansion following the earlier cyclical troughs listed in Table excluding those in and The strength of the recovery from the trough was greatly distorted by the outbreak of the Korean war in mid-1950 and the accompanying expectation of a renewal of wartime production and price controls. The expansion from the trough lasted only months a recovery only half the length of any recovery in the last years A perspective on the composition of the expansion in real GNP is provided in Table The major categories of real GNP are reported in terms of percentage point contributions to the total change in GNP over the four quarters of For example real personal consumption expenditures accounted for percentage points of the total percent growth in real GNP ; by comparison during the first four quarters of the typical postwar recovery personal consumption accounted for percentage points out of the total percent increase in real GNP. The major conclusion to be drawn from Table is that the magnitude and composition of the expansion was similar in most respects to the typical first four quarters of business expansion following a cyclical trough TABLE Contribution ofGNP components to total GNP growth over first year of business cycle recoveries [ Percentage point change ] Typical postwar recovery2 Item Real GNP Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nonresidential fixed investment Producers ' durable equipment Structures Residential investment Change in business inventories Net exports of goods and services Exports Imports ( minus denotes increase ) Government purchases of goods and services Federal Federal excluding CCC3 State and local Final sales4 Preliminary Recoveries following business cycle troughs in II II I IV and I Memo item not usually reported in national income and product account tables Real GNP less change in business inventories Note. Business cycle troughs are as determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Fluctuations in output over the business cycle are ordinarily larger for durable consumption and investment goods than for other sectors. In despite apparently high real ( inflation adjusted ) interest rates durable consumption business fixed investment residential investment and inventories all experienced growth matching or exceeding that of the typical postwar recovery based on the accounting in Table Business investment in equipment was especially strong This strong performance can be attributed to several factors. Both disposable personal income and after-tax business profits recovered significantly from their levels. Relative prices for consumer durable goods and fixed investment goods fell. Tax policies especially accelerated depreciation allowances increased the after-tax return on business investment. The rising stock market probably also contributed both to the demand for durable goods and business fixed investment. The decline in mortgage rates that began in mid-1982 was important for the housing recovery Rising profits and incomes are likely to have a large effect on investment expenditures in the early stages of the recovery when the swing in output from contraction to expansion is relatively large and disposable personal income and business cash flow increase significantly. Later in the expansion output and income growth tend to slow relative to business investment as firms approach high utilization rates. At this stage interest rates become more important in determining the level of investment and subsequent growth in total output In addition business fixed investment may have been subject to " accelerator " effects. As final demand rises so too does the capital stock needed to produce the higher volume of goods and services efficiently. With a resumption of economic expansion even a relatively small increase in the desired capital stock may result in a substantial increase in the rate of investment spending. Inventory investment also tends to increase with rising final sales in order to keep the ratio of inventories to sales within the desired range. An expansion of inventories requires additional production further increasing the use of existing capacity. These types of effects are likely to play a significant role through Expenditures on consumer durables and housing may have been affected by a similar phenomenon. During recessions with real income growing slowly or falling desired stocks of housing and consumer durables rise slowly if at all. Most purchases reflect replacement demand. In the early recovery phase with rising employment and income purchases of consumer durables may expand rapidly as efforts to increase stocks of durables and housing create additional demand above normal replacement demand In total real domestic demand rose by percent and export demand added another percent. However of this percent increase of aggregate demand percentage points were satisfied by imports of goods and services. Thus U.S. real output and income rose by percent ; in an accounting sense net exports reduced real GNP growth by percentage points in compared to a reduction of percentage point for a typical recovery. As can be seen from Table the decline in net exports in was more a reflection of growing imports than of declining exports. However exports had declined significantly in ; thus the small growth in exports in was from a depressed base Government purchases of goods and services declined over the four quarters of by an amount sufficient to lower GNP by percentage point in the accounting reported in Table State and local government purchases grew more slowly than is typical of the first four quarters of recovery. Total real Federal purchases actually declined somewhat as a rise in Federal defense purchases was more than offset by a fall in nondefense purchases. It is important to note however that a comparison of real Federal purchases in the fourth quarter of with those in the fourth quarter of is distorted by a large shift from net purchases to net sales ( which include pay- ment-in-kind ) of agricultural commodities by the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) As shown in Table Federal expenditures excluding CCC contributed percentage point of GNP growth compared to a negative contribution of percentage point for the typical recovery In summary the major differences in the composition of GNP growth between the and the typical recovery are these : a ) nonresidential fixed investment rose more than usual in the recovery ; b ) net exports which fall somewhat in the typical recovery fell substantially in ; and c ) Federal purchases which are usually about unchanged fell in due to an atypical swing in CCC purchases PERSONAL INCOME AND CONSUMPTION Over the course of the year real personal income rose by percent while real disposable income grew somewhat more rapidly by percent reflecting the third stage of the Administration 's tax reduction program. These increases in both personal and disposable income continued advances that started in As shown in Table the percent rise in real personal income reflected a percent rise in real payroll disbursements and related fringe income. Higher employment and hours worked and an increase in real hourly earnings all contributed to this increase Other sources of income including interest and dividend income rental income and proprietors ' income recorded a percent increase. Real net transfer payments declined percent as unemployment payments dropped and as the surge in employment produced a large increase in contributions to social insurance. Federal personal income tax liabilities fell by percent while other taxes largely State and local rose by percent Increases in consumption expenditures were widespread across various product categories. As is typical of periods of cyclical recovery the expansion of real consumption expenditures was led by expenditures on durable goods. Real consumer durables expenditures which in were below their level rose substantially in Expenditures on automobiles representing about percent of total consumer durables expenditures rose by percent. Furniture and household equipment linked to the housing recovery grew by percent and other durables by percent In real terms the services component of personal consumption expenditures has grown every quarter since the first quarter of reflecting stable growth of services generally and especially of imputed services of owner-occupied dwellings which represent one-quarter of total services outlays. The nondurable goods sector of which TABLE Real household income consumption saving and residential investment [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item 5-year aver- * Income by type- Labor income3 Other income4 Net transfer payments5. Personal income Less : Federal tax payments Other tax and nontax payments6 Disposable personal income ^ Single family Multifamily Mobile ( manufactured ) home shipments8 Personal saving rate ( percent ) Personal saving Housing starts Personal consumption expenditures.. Residential investment Preliminary Based on annual data Wage and salary disbursements and other labor income Proprietors ' income rental income personal dividend income and personal interest income r >Transfer payments less personal contributions for social insurance State and local tax and nontax payments plus Federal nontax payments Annual average Units Based on data through November Note jncome items consumption and saving deflated by the personal consumption deflator ; residential investment deflated by the residential deflator Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers food represents about one-half and clothing about one-quarter fluctuates over the cycle but is dominated by trend. Real nondurable consumption rose percent over the year By the second quarter of the vigorous recovery had already lifted durable consumption expenditures above the prior peak quarter in The increase began in the fourth quarter of when special promotional efforts by the automobile industry and declining fuel prices increased auto sales and substantially reduced inventories The growth of consumer spending in exceeded that of disposable income. Hence the personal saving rate fell over the course of the year. The average rate for the year percent was below the percent rate in and substantially below the percent average for the period. In comparing to prior recoveries it is better to examine the average saving rate for the year because the personal saving rate can be rather volatile from quarter to quarter There has been no consistent pattern for the saving rate over the first year of business cycle recoveries. In this stage of the cycle sub- stantial declines on the order of the decline are certainly not unknown ; for example in the first year of recovery following the trough the saving rate averaged percent down from an average of percent over the preceding four quarters. The main issue concerning the personal saving rate is that it declined from a level that was already considerably below the average for the last three decades The decline in the saving rate in may reflect in part the effects of a vigorous stock market advance in encouraging rising consumer spending. After rising percent from its July low to December the Standard & Poor 's composite index rose by another percent over the months ending June The index ended the year at about its June level having increased the value of outstanding stock held by households by about $ billion from July This stock market advance was somewhat larger than the average over comparable phases of previous business cycles RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT In monthly housing starts fluctuated between an annual rate of million and million units averaging million units the highest level since the million units reached in The increase in starts from was the largest year-to-year advance in over years. In addition mobile homes not included in the starts figure averaged about units bringing total new dwelling units to about million. About two-thirds of the starts were singlefamily units and one-third were in structures with two units or more a split that was about typical of the average in the 1970s. Expenditures on residential housing construction increased percent in real terms from the fourth quarter of The recovery in new housing construction was accompanied by a rise in sales of existing homes which rose percent in the first months of Total gross mortgage originations for one- to fourfamily nonfarm housing in the first months of was over $ billion compared to $ billion in The proportion of mortgage loans devoted to refinancing was the highest ever recorded with a major portion devoted to refunding short-term financing which was widely used in when long-term mortgage money was scarce and rates high Over the first three quarters of thrift institutions provided about one-half of the net increase in mortgage borrowings including mortgages and mortgage-backed pool and agency securities. This marked a return to the market share that prevailed in the 1970s. In thrift institutions contributed less than percent of the increase in net mortgage borrowings as mortgages were swapped for agency securities in an attempt to increase liquidity. The rising share for the thrifts reflects a variety of factors including a lower average level of mortgage rates and the introduction of new more competitive savings instruments. There was a large flow of savings into the thrifts ; their total deposits were at a rate of $ billion over the first three quarters of compared to $ billion for the same period in Of even more significance perhaps has been the growth of mortgage-backed certificates. Unfortunately much of this growth reflects governmental activity that has probably stunted the growth of privately issued certificates. Federally sponsored mortgage-backed pool purchases of home mortgages that are used to back pass-through certificates exceeded $ billion at an annual rate over the first months of Combined with a total of $ billion of home mortgages acquired by Federal State and local government credit agencies government participation chiefly as a mortgage market intermediary exceeded two-thirds of the $ billion net dollar volume in the home mortgage market The increase in housing construction and mortgage lending was spurred by increases in disposable income and employment and by the decline in mortgage interest rates that occurred over the second half of Compared to mortgage rates in the middle of the average rate in reduced the monthly payment on a 20-year term $ mortgage by about $ BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT Real nonresidential fixed investment grew by percent over the four quarters of Strength was concentrated in business equipment while nonresidential structures investment declined percent Real expenditures on producers5 durable equipment rose percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of This rapid growth reflected the relatively short lead times on many equipment purchases a rising capital utilization rate as the recovery proceeded and the investment incentives in the and tax legislation. The growth was particularly strong in the office computing and accounting machinery category and in cars and trucks. Real outlays for office equipment have almost doubled since reflecting the high productivity of computers in many lines of activity Growth in business purchases of motor vehicles accounted for percent of the total rise in equipment expenditures The decline in real expenditures on structures reflects the depressing effects of high interest rates long lead times in large construction projects and excess capacity existing at the beginning of Office building had been especially strong before ; office construction peaked in late at a level three times greater than in A sharp drop in the relative price of business fixed investment was an important element in the rise in investment. The fixed-weight price index for nonresidential fixed investment rose by percent in By comparison the fixed-weight index for final sales rose by percent in INVENTORY INVESTMENT Inventory fluctuations are important in the business cycle process Inventories have a buffer stock role permitting a more constant rate of production in the face of transitory demand fluctuations. Under normal circumstances demand fluctuations for individual firms * products largely offset one another ; growth in aggregate demand and in aggregate inventories is relatively smooth. Over a business cycle however demand fluctuations are larger and more pervasive. Then inventories tend to be destabilizing as aggregate inventory adjustments move in the same direction as final demand. The impact on total output of a change in aggregate demand is then amplified by an inventory cycle. In inventory accumulation did not begin until the third quarter in contrast to the usual recovery pattern in which accumulation begins somewhat sooner. In each of the first two quarters of the decline in inventories was smaller than in the prior quarter. Consequently the swing in inventory investment from an unusually large liquidation of $ billion ( dollars ) in the last quarter of to an accumulation of $ billion in the last quarter of added significantly to the growth in production over the year With final sales rising and inventories declining in the first half of the year and rising only modestly in the second half the real business inventories/final sales ratio shown in Chart fell substantially over the course of By the fourth quarter of the year that ratio at was below the average of in the fourth quarter of previous recoveries. The lean inventory situation at the close of the year reflects the effects of high interest rates and conservative inventory management policies. It could also be a consequence of underestimating the growth of final demand. With inventories lean at the end of predicted future gains in final demand will likely be met by increases in production and employment rather than by reductions in inventories THE FARM ECONOMY Reflecting the combined effects of a severe drought and the payment-in-kind ( PIK ) program agricultural output fell in From Chart Real Business Inventories/Final Sales Ratio Ratio Seasonally Adjusted I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I I I I Source : Department of Commerce the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of real farm output fell percent to $ billion. Reflecting the decline in output real farm inventories excluding those under government loans fell $ billion. Real exports of agricultural products were roughly unchanged falling only $ billion. Nominal exports however rose percent to $ billion in the fourth quarter of as agricultural export prices rose percent over the year The cost of Federal programs to support farm incomes probably exceeded total net farm income in Farm production expenses fell in for only the third time since This was primarily due to the reductions in acreage under cultivation that farmers made in reponse to the PIK program. The decline had significant adverse effects on producers of farm inputs including fertilizers other chemicals and seeds. The farm situation is discussed in detail in Chapter of this Report THE INTERNATIONAL SECTOR Exports of goods and services in constant ( ) dollars rose slowly in but imports of goods and services grew at a much faster rate ( Table ) The result was a decline of net exports in constant dollars from a surplus of $ billion in the fourth quarter of to a surplus of only $ billion in the fourth quarter of In the national income and product accounts net exports measured in constant ( ) dollars registered a surplus while net exports in current dollars registered a deficit. The difference is due to a higher price deflator for imports than for exports. Further the current account deficit in the balance of payments accounts which is widely discussed is considerably larger than the net exports deficit in the national income accounts. Most of that difference is accounted for by the fact that the balance of payments accounts include and the national income accounts exclude transfer payments and government interest payments to foreigners. However the interpretation of major trends in the foreign sector is little affected by alternative accounting systems. By either measure the deficit has been rising in current dollars and the surplus has been declining in constant dollars The merchandise trade balance which has been in deficit since further deteriorated in However the United States has a substantial surplus from investment income and a smaller surplus in the " other services " component of net exports One cause of the decline in net exports in was the strong dollar which made imported goods and services relatively less expensive to American buyers and exported goods and services relatively more expensive to foreign buyers. U.S. exports also were limited by the problems of financially troubled debtor nations particularly those in Latin America. Another cause was the earlier recovery in the United States relative to that abroad. In the rate of increase of real GNP in the United States was three times that expected for the other industrialized countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) As output and income in the United States grew rapidly over the course of the year imports of goods and services also grew. However with the expansions in the economies of major trading partners lagging behind that in the United States growth in demand for U.S. exports of goods and services was restrained These events demonstrated an important result of the growing integration of the world economy. In countries outside the United States had a substantial influence on U.S. output and the vigorous recovery in the United States was a source of stimulus to the world economy. These matters are discussed in more detail in Chapter of this Report GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES Growth in government purchases of goods and services was not a major element propelling the expansion of output in the economy in Over the year Federal purchases of goods and services in dollars fell by $ billion. The decline was a consequence of a special factor not likely to recur in namely a swing in CCC purchases of $ billion. CCC purchases in the fourth quarter of were unusually large while the PIK program and the drought led to net sales of commodities in the fourth quarter of Excluding the CCC component real Federal purchases rose by percent over the four quarters of the year. In dollars national defense purchases rose from $ to $ billion while the nondefense purchases other than CCC rose from $ to $ billion The growth in State and local government purchases of goods and services was small in real terms. Over the four quarters of the year expenditures rose by only percent. The small growth in purchases continues a pattern that has been apparent for several years Indeed in real terms purchases for the entire year of are slightly below their level in The fixed-weight price index for Federal purchases increased percent over while the State and local price index rose percent EMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTIVITY Employment as measured by the household survey rose by million persons over the months of As shown in Chart the civilian unemployment rate after reaching a peak in November and December of dropped by percentage points over the next months the largest 12-month decline in years Changes in the unemployment rate are the result of conditions determining labor force growth growth in the working-age population and changes in the fraction of that population participating in the labor force and changes in employment. Labor force participation rates and employment details are reported in Table The increase in employment was by far the largest determinant of the decline in the unemployment rate. Civilian employment as measured by the household survey grew by percent over the months following the cycle trough in November an above-average increase compared to previous postwar recoveries Chart Civilian Unemployment Rate Percentage point change Trough = __ ( I / j f \ Ji \ A \ ' \ i A // ~ / ; L K/V \ \ / -.WA / / " V ^ ^ v \ \ \ Cycle ' ] \ / i i If Average of Preceding Cycles1 ' ^ Trough I I i i i i i Months from Trough ^ Excludes and cycles Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers Lower growth in working-age population taken alone reduced the unemployment rate by percentage point compared to what it would have been with average population growth. The number of to year olds the population group that provides many of the new additions to the labor force actually declined over the year. The labor force participation rate was essentially unchanged over the year. Thus the slower-than-average labor force growth in this recovery is a demographic phenomenon ; it is not an unusual economic response of participation rates to labor market conditions Above-average growth in employment raised the employment to population ratio the ratio of civilian employment to working-age population by percentage points. At the end of percent of the population was employed compared to postwar peaks of percent in February and December All demographic groups have shared in the recovery. Employment gains were strong among blacks particularly among black men over years of age who experienced an percent employment gain TABLE Labor market developments [ Fourth quarter of indicated year ] Component Percent change from year earlier > Change in civilian employment White Black and other = Mates years and over Females years and over Both sexes years ' Percent l Males years and over Females years and over Both sexes years White Black and other Civilian unemployment rate Participation rate Males years and over Females years and over Both sexes years White Black and other 7R4 S Seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Note. Data relate to persons years and over Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics over the year. However the employment picture for black teenagers ( aged to ) remains bleak. Compared to white teenagers black teenagers have lower participation rates. In addition the unemployment rate for black teenagers was twice as high as that for white teenagers. Consequently fewer than percent of black teenagers are employed compared with almost percent of white teenagers Job opportunities for Hispanics improved markedly during Employment among Hispanics grew by percent more than twice the increase in the working-age Hispanic population. The Hispanic unemployment rate fell from percent in December to percent in December Following a period of little growth from to early labor productivity began to rise in the third quarter of Productivity trends in the economy are most reliably measured for the nonfarm business sector which accounts for about percent of total GNP Nonfarm business output and related measures are shown on Table Productivity began to rise before the end of the last recession as employment continued to drop after output leveled off. Productivity in the nonfarm business sector rose at a percent annual rate in TABLE Output productivity costs and prices in the nonfarm business sector [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item Output * Implicit price deflator... Unit labor cost Compensation per hour. Output per hour 5-year aver1.0 Preliminary Based on annual data Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics the last two quarters of and at a percent rate over In the recovery unemployment fell without a lag. Consequently the unemployment rate fell more rapidly than usual for the increase in output PRICES WAGES COMPENSATION AND PROFITS Over the months from December to December consumer prices rose by percent and producer prices by percent For consumer prices the increase was the smallest since ; for producer prices the 12-month increase was the lowest for any calendar year since Table provides detail for major components of the price indexes and also a comparison of the past year 's inflation with the average rate over the last years T A B L E Price changes [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Item i 5-year average12 GNP price measures : Fixed-weighted index. Implicit deflator Consumer prices : s All items All items less food and energy. Producer prices finished goods : Total. Consumer goods Capital equipment. Preliminary Based on annual data All urban consumers Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor { Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Inflation as measured by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) was somewhat higher over the second half than over the first half of ( Chart ) Over the months ending June the CPI-U rose at a percent annual rate ; over the months ending December the annual rate was percent. To some extent the slight increase in inflation over the course of the year reflected the timing of changes in energy prices which fell in the first quarter due to reductions in crude petroleum prices Chart Change in the Consumer Price Index 12-Month Change in the CPI-U Percent change A \ / V i t I I i I t I I I I I Source : Department of Labor Reflecting the drought and unexpectedly large acreage reductions for the PIK program food prices rose more rapidly in the second half of the year than they had in the first. The tendency toward slightly higher inflation as the year progressed is indicated by the fact that the CPI-U excluding food energy and shelter rose at a percent rate over the first months and at a percent rate over the months ending in December The tendency toward a slight increase in inflation over the year was also registered by the producer price index. Over the months ending June the index for total finished goods fell at an annual rate of percent but over the second half of the year this index rose at a percent annual rate. Even so inflation by this measure was lower than that in the recession phase of the cycle. The GNP implicit price deflator the broadest measure of inflation rose by percent over the four quarters of the year The rate of increase of money wages declined in An important contributor to this decline was the slack in labor markets. However the reduction in the rate of inflation was also important as many wage increases are tied formally or informally to the rate of price inflation. Collective bargaining agreements with escalator clauses ordinarily tie wages to the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( CPI-W ) which differs from the CPI-U primarily with respect to the method used to measure housing costs. Over the months ending December the CPI-W rose percent slightly less than the CPI-U increase of percent Based on the first three quarters of it appears that for the second consecutive year both union and nonunion wage increases were less than the previous year as contracts and wage patterns established in the highly inflationary environment represented a diminishing portion of wage agreements. Major collective bargaining agreements negotiated in the first three quarters of have resulted in wage adjustments that are the lowest for the entire 15-year period over which these data have been collected and less than half the rate of increase when the parties last negotiated Because price increases in were lower than wage increases real hourly wages rose as they had in As shown in Table the adjusted hourly earnings index for the private nonagricultural sector ( production or nonsupervisory workers ) rose by percent over the four quarters of compared to percent for the previous four quarters. In constant ( ) dollars the increase in the hourly earnings index was percent in compared to percent in These gains in real hourly earnings may be compared to declines averaging percent per year from to In addition to the higher real hourly earnings an increase in average weekly hours worked raised average weekly earnings. Average weekly hours in the nonagricultural sector rose from in December to in December The net result of higher hours and higher real hourly earnings was an increase of percent in average real weekly earnings over the months ending in December TABLE Changes in wages and compensation [ Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter and 5-year average ] Measure Adjusted hourly earnings index3 5-year average I * Real adjusted hourly earnings index.. Employment cost index4 " Union workers Nonunion workers. * Nonfarm business sector : Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour. Preliminary Based on annual data Private nonfarm employees Wages and salaries private Third quarter to third nonfarm industry workers quarter All persons Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Overall was an excellent year for real incomes. With a higher real hourly wage higher average hours worked by those employed rising employment and the third stage of the Administration 's tax reduction program real per capita disposable personal income rose percent over the year. This increase was the highest since The combination of restrained increases in money wages and continued productivity growth served to hold the increase in unit labor costs to only percent. This increase was the lowest since Corporate profits before tax totaled about $ billion in Corporate profits after tax were about $ billion a level well above but still below FINANCIAL MARKETS Most market interest rates rose somewhat over the months of In December the 3-month Treasury bill rate averaged percent ; in December it averaged percent. Over this same period 30-year Treasury bonds rose from percent to percent and Aaa corporate bonds rose from percent to percent. The effective new home mortgage closing rate fell over the course of the year from percent in December to percent in December The Standard 8c Poor 's composite stock price index rose sharply over the year with all of the gains coming in the first half. In December the average was percent above its level months earlier. This rise was on top of the percent increase in the second half of As shown in Table the credit markets absorbed a very large flow of financing in Reflecting record U.S. Government deficits Treasury debt in the hands of the public rose by $ billion over the year. As noted above the markets also financed a very large flow of mortgages TABLE Funds raised in credit markets by the nonfinancial sector of the economy [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Sector Total funds raised Households Business Federal Government State and local government.. Foreign Funds raised as percent of GNP.. Average of first three quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate Note. Detail may not add to total due to rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The nonfinancial corporate sector did not place significant demands on the credit markets in As cash flow rose markedly due to the strength of the recovery corporations obtained most of their funds from internal sources. Despite increases in business fixed investment outlays and a move from inventory liquidation to accumulation within the year the nonfinancial corporate sector is estimated to have borrowed about $ billion in the first three quarters of well below the amount borrowed over the same period in The borrowing was also considerably less than the amount borrowed in the second half of The strong stock market led to a significant increase in common stock offerings. Over the first three quarters of the year gross proceeds from primary public offerings of common stock totaled $ billion compared to $ billion over the entire year of As reported in Table funds raised by nonfinancial business through debt and equity issues together have been falling since Growth in the monetary aggregates in the first half of was high. Ml grew at a percent annual rate up somewhat from the percent annual rate over the last months of The two other monetary aggregates reported by the Federal Reserve M2 and M3 grew at rates of percent and percent respectively over the same period. These two aggregates had grown at rates of percent and percent respectively over the last months of The high rates of money growth in the first half of the year were the result of an accommodative monetary policy stance that had the effect of avoiding sizable changes in interest rates during a period in which the Federal Reserve was uncertain about the significance of the large deposit flows associated with new deposit instruments The new money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) first offered by depository institutions in mid-December attracted $ billion by March Funds in MMDAs which are included in M2 and M3 but not in Ml grew to about $ billion at the end of the year Another significant innovation was the introduction in early January of Super-NOW Accounts which have unlimited checkwriting privileges and are not subject to interest rate ceilings. Funds in these accounts which are included in Ml grew to about $ billion by the end of March and to $ billion by the end of the year Most of the adjustment to the new accounts appears to have taken place early in the year. In addition most of the funds flowing into MMDAs seem to have come from other components of M2. Between December and March while MMDAs were attracting $ billion general purpose and broker/dealer money market mutual funds lost $ billion and conventional time and savings accounts lost $ billion. The components of Ml and M2 are shown in Table TABLE Components of Ml and M2t [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] December Item J Currency Plus : Demand deposits2 Equals : M l Plus * Savings deposits Other checkable deposits o Money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) Small time deposits o o Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) and overnight Eurodollars4 Money market mutual fund balances ( excluding institution accounts ) Equals : M2 Preliminary Includes travelers checks Introduced December Not seasonally adjusted M2 will differ from the sum of components by a consolidation adjustment that represents the estimated amount of demand deposits and vault cash held by thrift institutions to service time and savings deposits Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System In the middle of the Federal Reserve became less accommodative in its provision of reserves. As a result interest rates rose moderately. Also the greatest part of the portfolio adjustment to the introduction of the new deposit accounts was probably complete by that time. Growth of the monetary aggregates slowed ; over the months ending in December Ml M2 and M3 grew at annual rates of percent percent and percent respectively In February the Federal Reserve announced target growth ranges for M2 and M3. But because of the uncertainty it felt over the effect of the new accounts on the demand for money the Federal Reserve announced only a " monitoring " range for Ml which was set at to percent from its average level in the fourth quarter of The M2 target growth range was set at to percent from its average level in February and March. The M3 range was set at to percent from its average level in the fourth quarter of Following rapid growth in Ml over the first half of in July the Federal Reserve revised the Ml growth range to to percent from its average level in the second quarter. Chart shows Ml and its target ranges in THE OUTLOOK FOR Table summarizes the basic elements in the Administration 's economic projections for and corresponding data for The rate of growth in real GNP is expected to decline as is typical in the second year of expansion. Real GNP is projected to grow at percent over The unemployment rate is expected to fall to an average of percent in the fourth quarter of the year The inflation rate as measured by the GNP implicit price deflator is expected to rise slightly in to percent over the four quarters of the year. The slight increase in projected inflation reflects the view that inflation was depressed to some degree by cyclical factors and two special factors that seem unlikely to recur in The two special factors were the decline in energy prices early in and the continuing appreciation of the foreign exchange value of the dollar over the year. These cyclical and special factors should be viewed as transitory disturbances to the underlying rate of inflation determined by money growth and trends in the income velocity of money The Administration 's economic outlook is based on an analysis of business cycle regularities and other information including forecasts obtained from the private sector. The projections for real GNP and inflation in are close to the median of private sector forecasts Chart M1 : Actual versus Target Range Billions of dollars * 2Q83to4Q83 J ^ ^ ^ 4Q to 4Q 4Q to 4Q ' % % _ I J I M A I I F M I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S I I O N D M Monthly averages of daily figures seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for those variables. Further details on the Administration 's outlook are reported in Table THE OUTLOOK FOR The Administration 's economic assumptions for are reported in Table These economic assumptions reflect the Administration 's view on probable basic economic trends under the assumption that the Federal budget deficit and the rate of money growth decline over time. A different set of economic assumptions would of course be appropriate if different policies were pursued Because economic outcomes are dependent on numerous conditions other than the assumed economic policies it is appropriate that the long-run economic assumptions reflect underlying trends. Moreover because the primary use of the long-term economic assump- TABLE Economic outlook for forecast Item Percent change ( fourth quarter to fourth quarter ) : Personal consumption expenditures. Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases State and local purchases Real gross national product GNP implicit price deflator Compensation per hour Output per hour Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Level in fourth quarter : Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons Seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of total labor force including persons in the Armed Forces stationed in the United States Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE Administration economic assumptions [ Calendar years except as noted ] Item Level Employment ( millions ) l Unemployment rate ( percent ) Percent change Consumer prices Real GNP Real compensation per hour Output per hour Employment series includes persons in the Armed Forces stationed in the United States Unemployed as percent of total labor force. See footnote Wage earners and clerical workers Nonfarm business all persons Source-. Council of Economic Advisers tions is program and budget planning no issue of Federal policy depends on precise predictions of year-to-year fluctuations in GNP The Administration 's economic assumptions for involve higher real growth and lower inflation than many private forecasters are predicting ; Administration and private sector nominal GNP growth rates are similar. Compared to many private forecasts the Administration 's higher real growth assumption probably reflects a different fiscal policy assumption and a different analysis of the growth prospects for the U.S. economy. The underlying fiscal assumption is that reduced growth in Federal spending and lower budget deficits will enhance the economy 's long-run growth. The Administration 's real growth assumptions are based on the assumption that labor productivity growth will be higher than that over the last decade reflecting an environment of lower inflation and higher rates of saving and capital formation. In contrast many private forecasters seem to be anticipating a continuation of the low productivity growth that characterized the 1970s GROWTH IN REAL GNP Administration policies are designed to achieve a long sustainable economic expansion that takes the economy back to full employment with declining inflation. The assumption of percent growth in real GNP for the period is a trend or average growth rate projection ; the economy may grow somewhat more or less rapidly in any given year. In the Administration 's view any attempt to induce a substantially higher real growth rate by monetary stimulus might be temporarily successful but growth accelerated in this way would not be sustainable. The result would soon be rising inflation and another recession The Administration 's real growth assumption falls to percent by the fourth quarter of This assumption for does not reflect a " forecast " as that term is normally used but rather the recognition that the economy 's long-run growth potential most likely is below percent. For example over the 33-year period between the business cycle troughs in and real growth averaged percent per year The Administration 's economic assumption of percent real growth for the period therefore assumes a gradual increase in the utilization of the economy 's labor and capital resources. For a number of reasons however it is impossible to determine the specific year in which real GNP growth will slow. One of the principal reasons for this indeterminacy is that the sustainable level of resource utilization is not known with precision ; moreover that level can be altered through changes in microeconomic policies. The underlying rate of growth of the economy is not known with precision either The importance of this factor is well illustrated by a simple calculation. A difference of only percentage point in the underlying growth rate accumulates to percentage point in years sufficient in one direction to permit percent real GNP growth to continue after or in the other direction to cause growth to slow in instead of The year-to-year variations in real GNP growth rates require an allowance for errors several times the size of the one in this illustration Another perspective on the Administration 's real growth assumptions may be obtained by comparing them with real growth following prior business cycle troughs. Under the Administration 's economic assumptions average annual real GNP growth over the years from the cycle trough in the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of is percent. Real growth over comparable periods following prior business cycle troughs excluding the ones in and averaged percent. The highest of these 7-year growth rates followed the trough ; the rate for that period was percent The lowest was percent following the and troughs A visual perspective on the Administration 's real GNP assumptions through can be obtained from Chart This chart shows actual quarterly real GNP from through and projected real GNP from through Superimposed on the chart is a trend line fit to the data from the business cycle peak in the fourth quarter of to the business cycle peak in the third quarter of and then projected forward From the chart it can be seen that the Administration 's economic assumptions take real GNP back to the indicated trend line by Differences in the way the trend is fit would affect the relationship between the trend and assumed levels of real GNP INFLATION As seen in Table the Administration has assumed a gradually declining rate of inflation over the period. This assumption reflects the view that the goal of stability in the general price level is appropriate because inflation not only is costly and inequitable in and of itself but also is disruptive of economic growth and employment stability. Also eliminating inflation can be expected to reduce volatile changes in inflationary expectations which are a major contributing factor to business cycle fluctuations The gradual reduction in inflation assumed by the Administration does not depend on a policy assumption that such a result will be " forced " by deliberate actions to choke off economic growth whenever there is any sign of a rise in inflation. Rather the decline in inflation is the anticipated outcome of the assumed steady and predictable monetary and fiscal policies. As with real growth it is expected that inflation may sometimes be higher and sometimes lower than the Administration 's assumption but that the trend will be downward as indicated Chart Real Gross National Product Forecast and Trend Billions of dollars Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates Trend X / \ / Forecast I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Note. Trend fitted from data for fourth quarter through third quarter Sources : Department of Commerce and Administration Forecast INTEREST RATES Given the assumed decline in the inflation rate it is reasonable to assume that the expected rate of inflation will also decline thereby reducing the inflation premium in nominal interest rates. In addition under the assumptions of a declining budget deficit and a more stable economic environment the real rate of interest should decline ultimately reaching a level approximating the real rate prior to the onset of the inflationary 1970s Interest rates of course have been quite variable historically and very difficult to forecast. Although the Administration 's economic policies are designed to produce a more stable economy than in the 1970s interest rate fluctuations around the declining trend should be anticipated THE FULL EMPLOYMENT AND BALANCED GROWTH ACT OF The Full Employment and Balanced Growth ( Humphrey-Hawkins ) Act of sets certain national economic goals and requires that the Economic Report of the President together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers provide an analysis of the Nation 's progress toward meeting those goals. This section contains such an analysis. In addition as required by the act it contains an Investment Policy Report. The requirement for such a report reflects the finding of the Congress stated in this act that " high rates of capital formation are necessary to ensure adequate rates of capacity expansion and productivity growth compliance with governmental health safety and environmental standards and the replacement of obsolete production equipment. ' * ECONOMIC GOALS In setting goals for the unemployment and inflation rates in the Balanced Growth Act the Congress was mindful of the fact that " aggregate monetary and fiscal policies alone have been unable to achieve full employment and production and reasonable price stability. " In the act the Congress made clear that exclusive concentration on any one goal could impede progress in achieving other goals A central economic goal of the Congress as indicated by the title " Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act,' ' was and is the achievement of full employment. That goal is also a high priority for this Administration A key observation from experience over the last two decades is that rising inflation has been associated with rising unemployment. Each time inflation accelerated as measured by the change in the consumer price index to percent over the months of to percent in and to percent in a temporary boost in employment was achieved at the cost of a subsequent recession Moreover the recessions became more serious. The unemployment rate rose from a monthly low of percent in May to a monthly peak of percent in December ; from percent in October to percent in May ; from percent in May to percent in July ; and from percent in April to percent in November As interest rates rose to new peaks the monthly 3-month Treasury bill rate reached percent in percent in percent in and percent in strains accumulated in the financial system. Few accurately forecasted the severity of these recessions and consequently it was difficult for both the private sector and the Federal Government to deal with them. During each recession some businesses were forced into bankruptcy and unemployment rose sharply From this experience it is clear that rising unemployment and rising inflation can occur together. Indeed each time prices accelerated substantially it proved impossible to avoid higher unemployment. Moreover economic expansion and essentially stable or declining inflation can also occur together as they did in the early 1960s and most especially The tradeoff from inflationary economic policies is between lower unemployment temporarily and higher unemployment a short time later The Administration is committed to macroeconomic policy designed to avoid this boom-bust cycle and to achieve long-run balanced growth through steady and sustainable policies. Stable and predictable policies offer the greatest promise of achieving a high rate of employment over an extended period of years with the smallest risk that the economy will experience severe recession The Balanced Growth Act set a goal that unemployment not exceed percent among individuals aged and over and percent among individuals aged and over by The act also set an inflation goal of percent by and zero by provided that achieving the inflation goal did not impede achieving the unemployment goal. Finally the act provided that the President could if he deemed necessary recommend modification of the timetables for reaching these goals Given the experience of the last two decades recounted very briefly above it is clear that the essential ingredient of Federal policies to further the employment and inflation goals of the Balanced Growth Act must be sustainability. Table above which reports the Administration 's economic assumptions for provides a timetable for progress toward the employment and inflation goals of the act. This table is pursuant to the act 's requirement that this Annual Report contain numerical goals. Reflecting the situation inherited by the Administration when it assumed office and the severity of the recession the table does not project complete realization of the act 's unemployment and inflation rate goals but substantial progress toward them INVESTMENT POLICY REPORT The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers contained in Chapter an extensive analysis of capital formation issues. That analysis serves as the foundation for this much briefer report Updating the information published a year ago and as discussed in more detail earlier in this chapter was a year of rising invest- ment spending from the recession trough. Nevertheless for the full year real gross business fixed investment rose by only percent over and'real net investment fell by percent however rising equipment investment over the course of suggests that the investment incentives in the tax acts of and are now having the desired effect In addition to the investment incentives in the tax law a higher rate of investment is being encouraged by the lower rate of inflation Lower inflation increases the real value of capital depreciation allowances. Lower inflation also helps to provide the more stable economic environment needed to reduce risks and make business planning easier The Administration 's efforts to provide a stable and more productive business environment conducive to rising investment also include a number of microeconomic policies. Deregulation reduces costs and promotes efficient use of the economy 's resources. A general policy of relying on the market reduces the risks to the profitability of investment from future extensions of regulation. Financial deregulation discussed in Chapter of this Annual Report can be expected to improve the efficiency with which financial capital is allocated. Expanding international trade by resisting protectionism as discussed in Chapter will also assist in raising real growth Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely MARTIN FELDSTEIN Chairman WILLIAM A. NISKANEN WILLIAM POOLE Council Members and their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulmer Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Walhch Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken HendrikS. Houthakker Herbert Stem Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum Jerry L Jordan William A. Ntskanen Martin Feldstetn William Poole Oath of office date Position Chairman. Vice Chairman.. Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member.. Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member. Member Chairman. Member Memhpr Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Separation date November August August November January May August February May August June January September December March February September April December April January December October May December January January November January May November January July January December January August February November August May February September November January February June February January February January July December February July February February August January March September August March April July February October January September November June January July January January March February March Mav June January January August February August July July June October December Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of ( P.L. 304-79th Congress ) as amended provides the statutory base for the activities of the Council of Economic Advisers. The Council through the Chairman provides advice to the President on a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues assists in the preparation of the President 's Economic Report to the Congress and conducts analyses and studies on a wide range of economic issues in support of its primary mission Martin Feldstein William A. Niskanen and William Poole continued to serve as Council Members in with Mr. Feldstein as Chairman. Mr. Feldstein is on leave from Harvard University where he is a Professor of Economics. Mr. Niskanen is on leave from the University of California at Los Angeles where he is a Professor of Business Administration. Mr. Poole is on leave from Brown University where he is a Professor of Economics MACROECONOMIC POLICIES As is its tradition during the Council devoted much of its time to assisting the President in the formulation of broad economic policy objectives and the programs to carry them out. The development of economic assumptions and monitoring of current developments under Mr. Poole were areas of major interest. Monetary policy developments received especially close attention Mr. Poole chaired the interagency subcabinet forecasting group consisting of representatives from the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget with participation by the Department of Commerce. The Chairman of the Council continued his responsibility for presenting to the President the economic assumptions developed with the Office of Management and Budget and the Department of the Treasury MICROECONOMIC POLICIES A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during the year. Council Members chaired or participated in numerous Cabinet level groups dealing with such issues as international trade economic statistics Federal credit programs alternatives to Federal regulation Federal housing programs and fuel economy standards. Mr. Niskanen chaired Cabinet Council working groups dealing with employee pension legislation The Chairman actively participated during the early months of the year and then during the late fall budget cycle in Cabinet level reviews of the Federal budget PUBLIC INFORMATION The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators a publication prepared by the Council 's Statistical Office under the supervision of Catherine H. Furlong. The Joint Economic Committee issues the Indicators which has a distribution of approximately copies. Information is also provided to members of the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Council Members ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This duty is performed through discussions with the President and written reports on economic developments The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal and informal meetings of government officials He exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The two Council Members are responsible for all subject matter covered by the Council including direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention In practice the small size of the Council permits the Chairman and Council Members to work as a team on most policy issues. There was however an informal division of subject matter among them in Mr. Poole assumed primary responsibility for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis economic projections and monetary and financial issues. Mr. Niskanen is primarily responsible for mieroeconomic and sectoral analysis international trade questions and regulatory issues PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of the Special Assistant to the Chairman the Senior Statistician nine senior staff economists five junior staff economists and three research assistants The professional staff and their special fields at the end of were : Geoffrey O. Carliner Special Assistant to the Chairman Senior Staff Economists Lincoln F. Anderson Jeffrey A. Frankel Stephen K. Halpert William S. Haraf David R. Henderson Lawrence B. Lindsey Robert L. Thompson Kathleen P. Utgoff Robert S. Villanueva Macroeconomic Analysis International Finance Legal and Regulatory Policy Macroeconomic Analysis and Financial Regulation Health and Energy Public Finance and Taxation Food and Agriculture Labor and Employment Macroeconomic Analysis and Housing Policy Statistician Catherine H. Furlong. Senior Statistician Junior Staff Economists Kenneth A. Froot Gail G. Ifshin William S. Milberg John F. Navratil Charles N. Schorin International Trade and Finance Transportation and Regulation International Trade Taxation Macroeconomic Analysis and Labor Research Assistants Andrew G. Berg Suzanne G. Greenspun Andrew R. Myers Fiscal Policy Current Economic Conditions Macroeconomic Analysis Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician continued to be in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary responsibility for managing the Council 's statistical information system. She supervises the publication Economic Indicators and the preparation of all statistical matter in the Economic Report. She also oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Barbara L. Sibel assist Mrs. Furlong In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial services of Joseph Foote. Donald Uttrich worked at the Council during the fall as an intern SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers provides general support for the Council 's activities. Serving in the Administrative Office were Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council Members during were Patricia A. Lee Susan A. Lindsey Georgia A. O'Connor and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were Carolyn L Bazarnick Bessie M. Lafakis Rosemary M. Rogers Margaret L. Synder and Lillie M. Sturniolo DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff are in most cases on leave of absence from universities other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year and their subsequent affiliations were Daniel J. Frisch ( Department of the Treasury ) Thomas J. Kniesner ( University of North Carolina ) Paul R. Krugman ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Evan R. Kwerel ( Federal Communications Commission ) Thomas S. McCaleb ( Florida State University ) Stephen K. McNees ( Federal Reserve Bank of Boston ) Glenn L. Nelson ( University of Minnesota ) Lawrence H Summers ( Harvard University ) Adrian W. Throop ( Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco ) and Benjamin Zycher ( California Institute of Technology ) Eric I. Hemel Special Assistant to the Chairman joined the Federal Home Loan Bank Board Staff economists who resigned during the year were N. Gregory Mankiw ( Harvard Law School and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) and Robert H. Meyer ( The Brookings Institution ) Junior staff economists who resigned in were Christopher B Ballinger ( University of California Berkeley ) John H. Cochrane ( University of California Berkeley ) John S. Earle ( Stanford University ) Thomas W. Gilligan ( Washington University St. Louis ) David S Reitman ( Stanford University ) and Dan C. Roberts ( Chase Manhattan Bank ) Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION C O N T E N T S NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : Page B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights B-5 Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures B-6 Gross national product by major type of product B-7 Gross national product by major type of product in dollars B-8 Gross national product by sector B-9 Gross national product by sector in dollars B-10. Gross national product by industry B-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business B-l Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business B-14. Personal consumption expenditures B-15. Gross and net private domestic investment B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars B-17. Inventories and final sales of business B-18. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars B-19. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income B-20. Relation of national income and personal income B-21. National income by type of income B-22. Sources of personal income B-23. Disposition of personal income B-24. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars B-25. Gross saving and investment B-26. Saving by individuals B-27. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-28. Population by age groups B-29. Population and the labor force B-30. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-31. Unemployment by duration and reason B-32 B-33 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-4L Civilian labor force participation rate and civilian employment/ population ratio Unemployment rate Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment insurance programs selected data Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 B-49 B-50 B-51 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups Changes in consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 B-59 B-60 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-61 B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 Money stock measures and liquid assets Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Commercial bank loans and investments Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Federal Reserve Bank credit and reserves of depository institutions Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base B-67 B-68 B-69 B-70 B-71 Bond yields and interest rates Consumer credit outstanding Net change in consumer credit outstanding Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-72. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-73. Federal budget receipts and outlays off-budget outlays and debt fiscal years B-74. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget fiscal years B-75. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-76. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-77. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-78. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-79. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation B-80. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors B-81. Estimated ownership of public debt securities CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-82. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-83. Corporate profits by industry B-84. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-85. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-86. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-87. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-88. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-89. State and municipal and business securities offered B-90. Common stock prices and yields B-91. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-92. Farm income B-93. Farm output and productivity indexes B-94. Farm input use selected inputs B-95. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers B-96. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities B-97. Balance sheet of the farming sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-98. Exchange rates B-99. U.S. international transactions B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-103. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years B-104. World trade : Exports and imports and B-105. World trade balance and current account balances and B-106. International reserves selected years B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-109. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries General Votes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Nonresidential Total NonDura- durable ble goods goods Serv- Total Total StrucTotal tures Change Residential Producers durable Total equipment ProNonducers farm Farm durstruc- struc- able tures tures equipment " m : \ \ ZZZZ Ill IV : HI IV : \ \ ZZ'Z'Z in IV * See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-l. Cross national product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Federal Net exports Exports m ports Total Total Nation- Nondeal defense fense Gross national product Final sales l.S l.t _5 : I | | Ill tv : I | | | | f IV Final sales : | | | Ill p IV State and local p Percent change from preceding periodl Government purchases of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Total Total Total " Residential Nonresidential Producers ' Strucdurable tures equipment Total Nonfarm structures : II III... IV... : I III IV : I II Ill Producers ' Farm struc- durable tures equipment See next page for continuation of table Change in business inventories TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Percent change from preceding periodl Government purchases of goods and services Net exports of goods and services Totat National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales Gross national product Final sales ? ~ 3A ^ " : | II HI IV. ^ : I II Ill I V : II HI IV P " is Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investmentL Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter * : I II Ill IV : ll " ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Ill IV : | in iv * Gross national product Fixed investment Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Total Total Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures Residential Producers ' durStructures able equipment See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services ' Year or quarter Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final sales Percent change from prf seeding perk ) d Final GNP sales implicit implicit price price deflator deflator Exports Imports " p : | II III. I V : | | Ill I V : | | Ill IV P IIII iob'o iob ! d Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here. Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Exports and imports of goods and services1 Government purchases of goods and services Federal Percent change from Fixed investment Year or quarter Personal conGross national sumption product expenditures Total Total Presidential Residential Exports Total Imports National defense Non- State and local gross national product weighted price index * P : \ CZZZZZ III IV : \ \ ZZZZZZ III IV : I II Ill iv p.ZZZ " Z Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter P : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV P Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Personal consumption expenditures Chain price index Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Chain price index Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) -J Note. Changes are based on unrounded data and may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown elsewhere in these tables Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type ofproduct [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures " '.3 = = ~ \ l -l ! = = ~ 2l8 = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = p : nZ Ill iv : li'.'.ZZ III IV : IIZZ " ~ 1J -is III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis l ! TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Total Durable goods Total Final sates Inventory change Final sates Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales * : I II Ill IV : t H til [ V : t II Illp IV Services Structures Auto output = : Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory change TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business1 Total Total * Nonfarm l Farm Statistical discrepancy Households and institutions Government2 Total Federal State and local l ! ' : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV * ~ U Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] < iross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business * Total Total * Nonfarm1 Farm Statists pal cat discrepancy Households and institutions Government2 Total Federal State and local * > : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV Rest of the world : I II Ill IV Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year GovernFiGross Manufacturing ment Tranc Ufhnlo Baef nation- Agriculiransmeni Qtaticti of the ture portation wnoie- nance sale insurand dlallSII- nesi Pnn at Cdl nn \ conance Services governand and prod- forestry Mining Dura- Nonworld struction Total ment discrepretail and uct ble durable public and fisheries goods goods utilities trade real enterancy estate prises 2X -i \ 14L8 Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year AgriGross national culture forestproduct ry and fisheries FiTranspor- Whole- nance tation sale insur- Servand Dura- Nonand ance ices ble durable public retail and goods goods util- trade real ities estate Manufacturing Mining Construction Total Government and government enterprises StaRest tistical Resid- of the world dis- ual crepancy 7S ? Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Met domestic product Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Domestic income Total Indirect business tax Corporate profits with inventory vatuatior and capital consumption adjustments Total cTC CompenProfit > Inven- Capital Net sation tory consump- interof Profits after tax Profest valuaemploy- Trttat Prnfitc tion iion lOldl rroiiis its tion ees before tax Divi- Undis- adjust- adjustment tax liabili- Total Honrle tributed ment oenas profits ty U.4 = Ill I V ^ * * l ] l79J ^ : I II Ill IV U94.1 ^ ^ 4X6 = * -15J ^ ! Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis \ \ ZZ1 III IV = : : * C 6L9 T A B L E B-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc. * Compensation of employees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Net interest Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax4 Output per hour of all employees ( dollars ) Compensation per hour of all employees ( dollars ) " IV : I I I Il l IV : I : Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goods Durable good ; Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Motor vehicles and parts Furniture and household equipment Other Food Clothing and shoes I960 " 119.C : II III I V : I II Ill I V : | | til IV P See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-14 Personal consumption expenditures Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goods cont 'd Year or quarter Gasoline and oil Fuel oit and coal Services Household operation Other Housing Total Electricity and gas Other Transportation Other Total Medical care P : | II Ill " IV : I II III IV : I II Ill IV ' Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment ^ U9.4 Year or quarter " : \ \ ZZZZ III IV : | II ill IV : I tl til IV Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Presidential Total Total Total Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Structures Residential Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm structures Farm structures ~ ^ ! o ! ~ '. \ -'.9 Producers ' durable equipment \ \ TABLE B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Equals : Net private domestic investment Less : Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Net fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total Total Producers ' durable equipment Total Nonfarm structures Change Farm structures Producers ' durable equipment in business inventories = = ^ 221J ^ = V8A * 24Z5 17L5 7i ! o = = = = " : I if ! " Z " HI iv : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV Structures Residemtial P = _ = = = A = = = = = = ~ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-17. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Inventor Minal sales Jonfarm Quarter Total Farm Total Fourth quarter : Manufacturing Wholesale trade Final sales Retail trade Total Other Nonfarm3 20.S " ii Ill IV : | | | III IV : | | III IV : End of quarter Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories Inventor Minal sales Yonfarm Quarter Fourth quarter : Total Farm Totat Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Retail trade Final sales Other Total Nonfarm3 I960 p : II HI IV. : | II til IV.. : | II HI IV End of quarter Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sates equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Less : Equals : Net national product Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises = " : I I I Ill IV : I I I Ill IV : I I I Ill IV " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysts l.A -L2 '.B TABLE B-20. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Equals : Plus : Corporate profits with Year or quarter National income GovernWage ment Contribu- accruals valuation transfer Personal Personal Business Personal tions for Net and less transfer payments interest dividend payments income social interest capital income income insurance disburseto consumpments persons tion adjustments inventory _.l I960... ! o * : It Ill IV : I II... : III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter National income1 Total Wages and salaries Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Supplements to wages and salaries Total Total Capital Propri- consumpetors ' tion income3 adjustment Total Inven- Capital Propri- tory consumpetors ' valuation intion come4 adjust- adjustment ment = = = " I l l I V : | | Il l IV : I II Nonfarm Farm ~ '.S ~ '.B -il = ! = = = _ i -'.2 = = = = -LI : II. Ill IV National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-19 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; workers ' compensation ; directors ' fees ; and a few other minor items See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-21. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments adjustment Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Rental Capital Total conTotal income sumption of adjustpersons ment Capital Net Invencontory sumption interest Profits after tax valua- adjustProfits Profits tion ment before tax Divi- Undistaxes liability Total dends tributed adjustment profits Profits Total _8 _ * _3 _2 ' II III IV : | U Ill IV : ) | | " IV : ! " With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements1 Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total GovernDistrib- Service ment and utive indus- indus- government tries Manutries enterfacturing prises Other labor Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm 57J : I II III... IV... : I II III... IV... : I II III... IV The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-21 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-22. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Rental income of persons Personal Personal with dividend interest capital income income Total conadjustment Transfer payments Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployand ployment Veterans ees health insur- benefits retireinsurance ment ance benefits benefits benefits " ! '.5 LO '.3 ! \ \ .ZZZ III p IV Less : Persona ! contribu- Nonfarm tions for personal income2 social insurance : II llj IV : I IJ lit IV : Aid to families with depend- Other ent children ( AFDC ) Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and farm net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-25. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Equals : Personal Dispostax and able nontax personal payments income Total Personal Interest paid by consumption consumexpendi- ers to busitures ness LO 19G6 : I II : I IV P... Personal consumption expenditures : I Total * Personal outlays : : : : : ; Percent of disposable personal income Personal transfer Equals : payPersonal ments saving to foreigners ( net ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ! TABLE B-24. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Population ( thousands ) Current dollars 1S72 dollars 2t127.9 dollars Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are averages for the period. Data beginning reflect results of the census of population Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-25. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross investment Government surplus or Capital deficit ( ) national income grants received and product accounts by the Gross Personal business State United saving saving * States Total and Federal local ( net ) Gross private saving Year or quarter : I II Ill IV : I IV... : III IV. Total Total A = = Gross Net private domestic foreign investinvest- ment ment Total ~ '.Q ~ A ~ ! o -ill Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-26. Saving by individuals * [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net investment i n Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Checkable deposTotal its and currency Securities Time and Money sav- market ings fund deshares posits Government securities Corporate equities NonInsurcorOther ance Owner- Conporate finanand occu- sumer cial busiOther pension pied duraasness securiresets homes bles asties serves5 sets Less : Net increase in debt Mortgage debt ConOther on sumer debt89 non- credit farm homes ; : : : I IV : I II Ill IV ? J : ii " Z Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares * Corporate and foreign bonds and open market paper Private life insurance reserves private insured and nonjnsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nontife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-27. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years Families l Persons below Year Number ( millions ) Female householder Total Median income Number ( millions ) Rate Number ( millions ) Median income of persons years old and nup.r with income poverty level Below poverty level Rate Females Males Number ( millions ) Rate Alt persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround fulltime workers ALL RACES * * $ $ $ $ $ WHITE BLACK ^ h e term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted To primary families b e g i n n i n g data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY T A B L E B-28. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-29- Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Labor force EmployCivilian Resi- includ- ment noninsti- dent ing tutional Armed resi- including popula- Forces * dent resident Total Armed tion Armed Forces Forces Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Employment Total Agri- Nonagricultural cultural Unemployment Labor force participation rate CivilAll ian work- work- Total3 ers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Thousands of persons years of age and over 108,6/0 * 1.9G5 I960'. ^ See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-29. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Civilian noninstitutional population Resident Armed Forces * Labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Employment including resident Armed Forces Employment Total Total Nonagricultural cuttural Unemployment All Civilian work- work- Total2 ers ers Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar.. Labor force participation rate Civilian Percent May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov... Dec.. Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional population including resident Armed Forces Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and about to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population about to labor force and about to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by about Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and about to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-29 through B-35 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-30. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age { Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total years Unemployment Females years and over Total years Females Males years and over Total Total years years and over Total = years ! See footnote Table B-29 Note. See Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Duration of unemployment Year or month Total unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks and over Reason for unemployment Average Median ( mean ) duradura- tion in tion in weeks weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over Job losers Job leavers Reentrants entrants Thousands of persons years of age and over ^ : Jan Feb Mar May. ; ; ; ; June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ; ; ; June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec US 15.S Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Civilian labor force participation rate and civilian employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment/population ratio2 Civilian labor force participation rate1 Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr /ay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Both sexes over over FeBoth Males males sexes Total years years and and years over over " 5R7 FeMales males White Black and other Black and other fi Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics White : 5fi ? 5fi ? R 5R0 55.C s ? n ? ? TABLE B-33. Unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment rate all workers * Year or month Unemployment rate all workers l All civilian workers Males Total years Females years and years Total years and Both sexes years White Black and other Experienced wage and salary workers Married men spouse present : Jan... Feb... Mar... Jan... Feb. Mar ADr May June July. Aug. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec... wfay " June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total years Black and other Males Females years Total and over years Males Total and over Total years Females years and Totat over years June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other Females Males Total Total years years and over Males Total years Total Total and over years I960. Total years Females years and over : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. June. fczz Sfczzi Nov Dec Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-29 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered employment State programs Total Insured unemploy- benefits Insured paid ment unem ( millions ployment { weekly averdolfars ) * age ) " 42J51 : Jan... Feb... Mar.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. S3 ! Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fcz June... July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov Dec Exhaustions Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) o Weekly average ; thousands Thousands Initial claims Insured unemployment as percent of covered * U.973 * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal Supplemental Compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-37. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers " 41f652 : Jan Feb Mar... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov p Dec " May ! ! ! ! June.. July... Aug... Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services Federal Note. Data in Tables B-37 through B-39 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month. Not comparabje with labor force data ( Tables B-29 through B-35 ) which include proprietors setf-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month Total private nonagricultural Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Construction Wholesale and retail trade Total private nonagricultural1 Manufacturing * $ $ 38> * * I960 P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Manufacturing * * ! ! " : : Construction $ Wholesale and retail trade $ ^ ^ ^ ^ &01 ^ * * * * ^ Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-37 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry 6'81 ^ Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Index Current dollars dollars3 * * * * * * Percent change from a year earlier4 Current dollars dollars S.l = Id = -L0 ! l8 * i employment shifts Current-dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a base Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places and are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-39. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ for production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average gross weekly earnings Year or month dollars " Manufacturing ( current dollars ) Construction ( current dollars ) $ $ $ $ $ Current dollars I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr IVfay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov Dec Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-37 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index on a = base Based on data not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table B-37 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural3 Wholesale and retail Total private nonagricultural1 traHa ( current dollars ) Current dollars dollars TABLE B-40. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Hours of 2all persons Output l Compensation per Real compensation hour per hour Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector ness sector Nonfarm business sector " if " " ! " ; Ill IV II Ill IV Unit labor cost Implicit price deflator Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Busi- : Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided By constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-41. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Nonfarm Business business sector sector sector Compensation per hour Hours of 2all persons Output Nonfarm Nonfarm business Business business sector sector sector sector Unit labor cost per hour * Nonfarm Nonfarm business Business lusiness sector sector sector sector Nonfarm lusiness sector Nonfarm business sector * * : I II Ill IV Implicit price deflator * : \ \ " " Z ' " Z III IV : I Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Data relate to all persons engaged in the sector. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-40 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-42. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month proportion I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May. June ' ' July Aug Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e : Jan Feb Mr a Ar p My a June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov Dec Manufacturing Total industrial production Total Durable Nondurable Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Mining Utilities TABLE B-43. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Materials Final products Year or month proportion Total industrial production Consumer goods Total Total Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total Busi- Defense and space Intermediate products Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Also includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-44. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Primary metals Year or month Total Iron and Fabricated metal products Nonelectrical machinery Electrical machinery Transportation equipment Total Motor vehicles and parts Lumber and products Apparel products Printing and publishing Chemicals and products Foods proportion U3.3 P May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec U2.3 May June U3.9 July Aug Sept Oct Nov P Dec " : Jan Feb Mar Apr : Jan Feb Mar Apr Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-45. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing [ Percent ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] FRB series1 Year or quarter Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Commerce series2 Primary processing Advanced processing Primary- Advancedprocessed processed goods goods Nondurable goods Durable goods Total manufacturing " III I V : I II Ill IV I V : II Ill IV : I I f : II Ill : II Ill IV For description of the series see " New Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization " Federal Reserve Bulletin July Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes except for ( December index ) and ( averages of June and December indexes ) For description of the series see " Survey of Current Business " July Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B-46. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction new construction Year or month Nonresidential buildings and other construction1 Residential buildings1 Total Total2 New housing units Total Total Commercial3 Industrial Federal State and local ' Other4 i New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-46. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction * Residential buildings1 Total Public construction New Total housing units Total Commercial Industrial Total Other * Federal State and local : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. S0.4 July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov. : Beginning I960 farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-47. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized2 New housing units started Private and public Year or month Total ( farm and Nonfarm nonfarm ) Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Total unit to4 units lunit to units units " Total units or more Type of structure Type of structure Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Jan... Feb.. Mar.. May ' " June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec " : no Units in structures built by private developers for sate upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-48. Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Plant and equipment Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Plant Equipment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Mining Transportation Public utilities Trade and services Communication and other ? I960 : I Ill IV 313J6 : It Ill IV3 : | | | Wholesale and retail trade ; finance insurance and real estate ; and personal business and professional services " Other " consists of construction ; social services and membership organizations ; and forestry fisheries and agricultural services Planned capital expenditures reported by business in late October-December corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-49- Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Year or month Sales : : Jan Feh Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May July Aug Sept. Oct Nov P Inventories Manufacturing Retail trade Merchant wholesalers Inventories Ratio ' Sales1 Inventories Ratio3 Ratio3 Sates1 Sales Inventories2 Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual pew average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than allijusiness and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-50. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories2 Shipments ' Durable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies Nondurable goods industries Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods 57r541 Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Work in proc- TABLE B-51. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders1 Unfilled orders shipments ratio Unfilled orders2 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total : Jan Feb Mar ( Jayi ; June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar ft : : : : June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Capital goods industries nondefense Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-52. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Food and Year or month All items Total l Food Housing Total Shelter Fuel and other utilities HouseOther hold Apparel TransEntergoods Medical furnishand portation care tainment and ings upkeep services and operation ^ : Jan. Feb. Mar.. May " May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Energy3 : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Series beginning not comparable with series for earlier years See tables B-53 and B-54 Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures. See Economic Report of the President February for homeownership costs as measured prior to Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ ] Food and beverages Shelter Food Year or month : Jan Mar.. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July A8 Sept Oct Nov Dec Total l Total home S6.3 : Away from home Total Total Household fuels Home- MainteRent owners ' nance and residential Total Fuel oil coal and bottled gas Total S2.7 See next page for continuation of table Fuel and other utilities Renters ' costs ( piN ) and electricity TABLE B-53. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = ] Medical care Transportation Private transportatiofl Year or month Total Total2 New cars Medical care services My a June... : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug Sept oct ! : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ; : : : Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July HUE Sept Ot c Nov Dec Medical care commodities " Total Other Public transportation : Jan Feb Mar Apr Motor fuel Used cars Automobile maintenance and repair ' Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Includes direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September * Not available Note. Data beginning id78 are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures. See Economic Report of the President February for homeownership costs as measured prior to Source : Department of Labor 8ureau of labor Statistics TABLE B-54. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ = ] Commodities Year or month All items Ail commodities Food All Special indexes Services Commodities less food Durable Nondurable All services Medical care services Services less medical care All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy Energy 282.C : Jan Feb Mar... Apr Api Ma lay... June,. July... Aug... Sept. Oct Nov.. Dec... : Jan Feb Mar.. J&jZ June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures. See Economic Report of the President February for homeownership costs as measured prior to Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-55. Changes in consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items less food All items Year or month Dec to Dec Dec to Dec Year to Year All items less energy Year to Year Year to Year Dec to Dec All items less food energy and shelter All items fess food and energy Dec to Dec Year to Year Dec to Dec Year to Year li2 Change from preceding month Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Ayg Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec -il -A i2 Unadjusted o " ie io Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Unadjusted -'.2 i4 is i6 is i4 il i8 i3 '.6 Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted * i2 A Seasonally adjusted i6 i8 i4 .S i5 '.2 A '.6 '.6 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures. See Economic Report of the President February for homeownership costs as measured prior to Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] Alt items Year or mnn+h Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Commodities Commodities less food Food Total Dec to Dec1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec1 Year to year = Energy2 Services ? Medical care services Total Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec Year to Year Dec to Dec.1 = Year to year Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures. See Economic Report of the President February for homeownership costs as measured prior to Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Total finished goods Year or month Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Dec : i Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ' : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept. Ot c Nv o July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Durable Capital Nonequipment durable finished consumer goods '232.0 See next page for continuation of table Total * * * " TABLE B-57. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Crude materials for further processing Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds ' Materials and components Other For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other > fezz.. June July Aug Sept Ocf Nov Dec June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec z " : Jan Feb Mar : * Jan Feb Mar dfayiZZ Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-58. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods exclud- Total Foods and feeds Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other and energy June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar SE Nov Dec Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-59. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power * Chemicals and allied products1 a : Jan Feb Mar Apr Nfay June ~ zz July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept oct Nov Dec : ; ; See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-59. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products Rubber and plastic products : : Lumber and wood products Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr IVfay June July Aug Sept oct Nv o Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Mv a June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Metals and metal products Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment Pulp paper and allied products m i Miscellaneous products mi mi Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60 Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Finished consumer foods Total finished goods Consumer goods Total Year or month Dec to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec * Year to year _4 Year to year Capital equipment Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year ~ Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Year to year Dec to Dec ^ U.4 Dec to Dec Finished goods excluding foods and energy Dec to Dec.1 Dec to Dec. * H.5 Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Year to year Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar z- June July Aus Sept Oct Nov Dec : * Jan Feb Mar zJune July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted * '. $ ~ '.Q I'.S ^ Unadjusted Unadjusted Season- a Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted ~ L4 l5 justed i ! o -'.3 LI ! ~ '.S Seasonally adjusted -'.I '.B ~ '.S ! o ~ A = 'l -L0 Seasonally adjusted * A i A ! o Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT A N D FINANCE TABLE B-61. Money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml M M L M1 nine Ml piUS Year and month December : I960... " Sum of currency demand deposits travelers ' checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) overnight RPs and Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and small time deposits M2 plus large time deposits term RPs and M3 plus other institution-only liquid assets July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec Ml M M balances : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Percent change from year or months earlier4 12.C 9.C ll.S : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec.. 10.S 10.C 8.S 8./ Net of demand deposits due to foreign commercial banks and official institutions M2 will differ from the sum of components shown in Table B-62 by a consolidation adjustment that represents the estimated amount of demand deposits and vault cash held by thrift institutions to service time and savings deposits M3 will differ from the sum of components shown in Table B-62 by a consolidation adjustment that represents the estimated amount of overnight RPs held by institution-only money market mutual funds Monthly percent changes are from months earlier at a compound annual rate Note. See Table B-62 for components except travelers checks not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-62. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances Overnight Pferiod Currency Demand deposits i Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) chase Ss ( RPs ) net plus overnight Eurodollars NA S General pur- B Institution only broker/ dealer NA S NA S Money market Savdeposit ings accounts ( MMOAs ) Small denomination ination time time dedeposits * posits iSr Term repurchase Term Eurodollars ( net ) ments ( RPs ) bonds Shortterm BankTreas- ers ' ury secu- ances rities Commercial paper NA S NA S NA S Sav- December ; I960... p. June fez July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec J07.3 Nov Dec ^ : Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar rfay " I June July B : 'Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic banks the U.S. Government and foreign banks and official institutions less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Travelers checks are a component of money stock but are not shown here See also Table B-61 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-63. Commercial bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Total loans and investments Year and month End of month l Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec L Investments Loans Commercial and industrial Total U.S Treasury securities Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates Seasonally adjusteti : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec I960 : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Average for month2 : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Dec : Dec : Dec Dec Dec Dec p Dec : Jan Feb Mr a Ar p May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P Data are for December call dates Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of current and previous month-end data for foreign-related institutions. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Note. Beginning December levels have been reduced because of shifts from U.S. banking offices to International Banking Facilities ( IBFs ) Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-64. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors. U.S. Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages. Private domestic nonfinancial sectors.. Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations. Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential. Commercial Farm Other debt instrumentsConsumer credit. Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper By borrowing sector : Total. State and local governments. Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate. Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States. Bonds Bank loans n.e.c.. Open-market paper U.S. Government loans. Total domestic plus foreign. A3 = 2.S Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors. Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency. Checkable deposits and currency. Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements.. Foreign deposits Credit market instrumentsForeign funds At banks Credit market instuments U.S. Government and related loans net.. U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves.. Other sources ' $ * See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-64. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates } Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business By borrowing sector : Total Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments 31J Debt capital instruments Foreign net borrowing in United States Treasury issues U.S. Government Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S. Government loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase ageements Foreign deposits 9J Credit market instruments Foreign funds At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Deposits and currency Private domestic nonfinancial sectors TABLE B-65. Federal Reserve Bank credit and reserves of depository institutions [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total Borrowings of depository institutions U.S Government and Federal securities Total Reserves of depository institutions1 Other : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : 6t035 Jan Feb Mar fez June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec Total Required Excess * Seasonal Beginning December part of currency and cash held by member banks allowed as reserves ; beginning November all such currency and cash allowed Beginning November includes reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November Transition period ended after second quarter Effective November includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember bank merges into an existing member bank or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System Data are for licensed banks only Includes all reserve balances of depository institutions plus vault cash at institutions with required reserve balances plus vault cash equal to required reserves at other institutions Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks plus vault cash used to satisfy reserve requirements less required reserves. ( This measure of excess reserves is comparable to the old excess reserves concept published historically. ) Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-66. A \ regate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars ] Adjusted -for changes in reserve requirements1 Not seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Year and month Reserves of depository institutions Total2 Nonborrowed Required Monetary base Reserves of depository institutions Total2 Nonborrowed Required Monetary base : Dec I960- Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec Dec Ot c Nov Dc e : Jan Feb Mar Ar p May June Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec Dec : Dec D e c : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec : Reserve aggregates include required reserves of member banks and Edge Act corporations and other depository institutions Discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act the inclusion of Edge Act corporation reserves and other changes in Regulation D have been removed. Beginning with the week ended December reserves aggregates have been reduced by shifts of reservable liabilities to international banking facilities ( IBFs ) On the basis of reports of liabilities transferred to IBFs by U.S. commercial banks and U.S. agencies and branches of foreign banks it is estimated that required reserves were lowered on average by $ to $ million in December and $ to $ million in January Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks ( which exclude required clearing balances ) plus vault cash at institutions with required reserve balances plus vault cash equal to required reserves at other instititions Includes reserve balances and required clearing balances at Federal Reserve Banks in the current week plus vault cash held two weeks earlier used to satisfy reserve requirements at all depository institutions plus currency outside the U.S. Treasury Federal Reserve Banks the vaults of depository institutions and surplus vault cash at depository institutions Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-67 Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year Bills ( new issues ) l 3-month 6-month Constant maturities years years Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Aaa NewComhome mercial mortgage paper yields months4 ( FHLBB ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal funds rate U.00 See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-67. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and Bills ( new issues ) Constant maturities2 month 3-month : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... t- June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... zJune.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. 6-month years years Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Highgrade NewComPrime rate municihome charged by mercial pal mortgage paper banks ( highbonds yields months4 low ) ( Stand- ( FHLBB ) ard & Poor 's ) Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve rate Bank of New York ( high-low ) Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department " Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates Bank discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted bv the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-68. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month December : ' Total consumer credit Installment c r e d i t Total Automobile Revolving2 Mobile h o m e Other Noninstaliment credit4 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstaliment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstaliment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-69. Net change in consumer credit outstanding [ Change from preceding period ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month Total consumer credit Installment c r e d i t Total Automobile Revolving * Mobile home Other Noninstallment credit4 December : : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate generally excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Note. See also Table B-68 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-70. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multifamily properties Commercial properties1 to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : I II Il l IV : I I I Ill IV : I Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-71. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Other holders Commercial banks Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others : I II Ill IV : I. IV : I... II.. Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-72. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions. Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions... Total surplus or deficit ( ) _ ^ Federal funds Trust funds OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other BUDGET RECEIPTS.. Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other National defense l International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Social security and medicare Social security Medicare Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts x Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts : Employer share employee retirement x Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf. BUDGET OUTLAYS. Starting in military retired pay will be financed from a trust fund in the income security function. The national defense function will include accrual charges to pay for retirement benefits earned by currently active duty personnel and these will be offset in the undistributed offsetting receipts ( employer share employee retirement ) The data for the earlier years have been adjusted to be comparable to this new usage The Social Security Amendments of require that social security and medicare show in the budget as a separate function. In previous budgets social security was in the income security function and medicare was in the health function. The data in this table nave been reconstructed to be comparable for all years shown See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-72. Federal budget receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimates Description BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Federal funds.. Trust funds Total surplus or deficit ( ) Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions... Total outlays Federal funds Trust funds Interfund transactions... OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies. Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts- Deposits of earnings by Federal System All other Reserve BUDGET OUTLAYS National defense x International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Social security and medicare Social security Medicare Income security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts1 Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts- Employer share employee retirement l Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget receipts and outlays TABLE B-7'3. Federal off-budget outlays and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ] Budget Fiscal year Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Off-budget outlays Budget and offbudget surplus or deficit Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Total Held by the public Transition quarter Not strictly comparable with later data Estimates Note. Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Data for are according to the administrative budget and those beginning according to the unified budget Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-74. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the unified budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Total budget receipts.. Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Geographic exclusions Othlr Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts. EXPENDITURES Total budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Geographic exclusions Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures.. Note. See Note Table B-73 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-75. Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Federal Government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts State and loca government Expenditures national income and product accounts ( ) Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts ^ " : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV P _ j Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-76. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Surplus Subsior dies Grantsdeficit less in-aid to PurNet current ( ) State chases inter- surplus national and of goods income est of To local and To and paid governforeigngovernservices persons product ment ers ments enter- accounts Transfer payments Year or quarter Total CorpoPersonal rate tax and profits nontax tax receipts accruals ContriIndirect butions business for tax and social nontax insuraccruals ance Total prises Fiscal year : Calendar year : : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV * ; Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal year Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September / is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-77. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Calendar year or quarter Total Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-insocial nontax nontax tax aid receipts accruals accruals insurance Total Purchases of goods and services Subsi- Surplus or dies deficit Trans- Net iess fer interest current ( ) national paid payments less surplus income of divi- govern- and to per- dends ment product sons received enter- accounts prises _4 _ P : | | III I V : I II III IV : | | III IV P Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-78. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes Corporation net income taxes General expenditures by function Revenue from All Federal other Government Total Education Highways Public welfare All other4 Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for hospitals health social insurance administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and urban renewal sanitation other than sewerage general control financial administration general public buildings interest on general debt and unallocable items Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years which ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-79. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] Nonmarketabfe Marketable End of year or month Total interestbearing public debt securities Fiscal year : Total Treasury bills Treasury notes Treasury bonds * Total U.S savings bonds Foreign government and public series3 Government account series Other May " ! ; " ! ! ! ! ! ; ; ; ! ; June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ; July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar : Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source-. Department of the Treasury TABLE B-80. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Months Years : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-81. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values ; * billions of dollars ] Held by private investors End of month Total Held public Held by debt Govern- Federal Comment securi- accounts Reserve Total mercial banks ^ Total ties Banks Nonbank investors Individuals Total Savbonds State Foreign Insur- Money and ance and Other com- mar- Corpora- local internaket secur- panies funds tions govern- tional7 ments rities Other investors : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec " " : Mar June Sept Dec " '107.3 " '113.4 : Mar June Sept " " " " " " " " " " " " " U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and3 Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investment of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored agencies Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-82. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate Year or quarter profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total I960 " : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-83. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Financial1 Total Total Total " : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill Nonfinancial Federal serve banks Other Total Manufacturing Transportation and public utilities Rest of the world Wholesale and retail trade Other Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-84 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-84. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products Machinery except electrical f Other Total Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Other Electric Motor and vehicles elecand tronic equipequipment ment : I : I II... : I II Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-85. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Profits Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders ' equity2 Sales ( net ) Profits Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders ' equity2 Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders ' equity : IV New series : : IV : I I I Il l IV : I I I Il l IV : I I I Il l IV : I In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations, ' Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-86. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Year or quarter manufacturing Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries I960 : IV New series : IV : II Ill IV | | III IV : I II Ill I V : | II Ill : Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-85 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-87. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses External Year or quarter Credit market funds Total Internal Total Total Securities and mortgages Loans and shortterm paper Other2 Total Capital expenditures Increase in financial assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) : I II Ill IV I II Ill IV : I II Undistributed profits ( after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments ) capital consumption allowances and foreign branch profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad Consists of tax liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-88. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars except as noted ] Current assets End of period Total Cash1 U.S Government securities Current liabilities Notes and accounts receivable Inventories Other current assets Total Notes and accounts payable Other current liabilities Net working capitaf Current ratio All corporations4 SEC series : Nonfinancial corporations6 SEC series : QFR-FRB series : : I II III IV : I II Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Total current assets divided by total current liabilities Excludes banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Based on data from " Statistics of Income " Department of the Treasury Excludes banks savings and loan associations insurance companies investment companies finance companies ( personal and commercial ) real estate companies and security and commodity brokers dealers and exchanges Based on data from " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Federal Trade Commission. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " July for details regarding the series. Effective mid-1982 responsibility for the Quarterly Financial Report was transferred to the Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Note. SEC series not available after Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Trade Commission Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-89. State and municipal and business securities offered ) [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Business securities offered for cash Type of security Total offerings Common stock Bonds and notes Preferred stock Industry of issuer Manufacturing Electric gas and water Transportation Communication Other : First three quarters : I II Ill IV : I II Ill Business securities offered include securities offered by corporate and non-corporate business enterprises such as limited partnerships. Beginning excludes private placements Common stock combines the conventional ownership shares of corporate business and securities issued by non-corporate business e.g. limited partnership interests voting trust certificates and condominium securities Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Beginning business security offerings exclude private placements Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and business securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " T A B L E B-90. Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices Common stock yields ( percent ) New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec = ) Year or month Composite Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Dow Jones industrial average3 Standard & Poor 's composite index ( = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio : Jan Feb Mar Apr My a June 7L44 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources-. New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-91. Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rate Liability size class Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Total Under $ $ and over P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Seasonally adjusted Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-92. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Net farm income Gross farm income Cash marketing receipts Year or quarter Total Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 Production expenses Current dollars dollars3 P : I | | III I V : II Ill IV 197G : \ p llp Ill " IV Cash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index ( Department of Labor ) Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-93. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Productivity indicators Farm output Crops2 Year Feed grains Food grains Oil crops Crop production per acre4 Farm output per lour of farm work Total Crops Livestock and products O O CM C o Total3 Farm output per unit of total input o Total Livestock and products2 cr " COCM COCO oooo cooo i CC I960 co Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-94. Farm input use selected inputs Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm population April Total Family workers Hired workers Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) I960... Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population Year 1983'.. Feed seed and livestock purchases6 Farm labor Mechanical power and machinery Farm real estate J Total cultural chemicals } Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and and respectively Previous basis for farm employment series has been discontinued. Employment after is estimated Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-95. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " June.. July... Aug... S All farm products Crops Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest taxes and wage rates Production items Total Tractors and selfpropelled machinery Fertilizer Fuels and energy Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre3 Nov Dec Includes items used for family living not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through for February for through and for April for and Monthly data are for first of month Source-. Department of Agriculture TABLE B-96. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Exports Year Total Feed grains Food grains Oilseeds and products Imports Cotton Tobacco Animals and products Total Crops fruits and vegetables Animals and products Coffee Cocoa beans and products Agricultural trade balance ( ) ! J " Jan-Nov : PI ( ) '.S ( ) '.S '.S Total includes items not shown separately Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Less than $ million Total includes major animal products Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-97. Balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Financial assets Other physical assets Beginning of year Total Real estate Livestock Machinery and Crops motor vehicles Investments in cooperatives Total Deposits U.S and savings curbonds rency Household equipment and furnishings estate debt Other debt Proprietors ' equities Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Forecast Note. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-98. Exchange rates [ Cents per unit of foreign currency except as noted ] Year and month Belgian franc Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen March : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Netherlands guilder Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real1 March II Ill IV : II III... IV : Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-99. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Investment income3 Merchandise1 Year or quarter Exports Imports Net Receipts Payments Net Net Net travel Other Balance serv- on goods military and and transac- transpor- ices net services tions tation receipts RemitBalance tances on pensions current and other ac- unilateral transfers l count : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV : I II Ill " Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts ( and the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts ) although the series differ because of different handling of certain items ( gold extraordinary military shipments etc. ) revisions etc See next page for continuation of table 3S2 TABLE B-99. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars,- quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter U.S official reserve assets Total Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy U.S private assets Statistical discrepancy Other U.S Government assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) II III IV II III IV II Ill P Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Millions of dollars,- quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonagricultural Nonpetroleum Year or quarter Total Agricultural Total Capital goods except automotive Total Other goods Petroleum and products Total Industrial supplies and materials Other goods : I Ill IV : I II III... IV... : I II... Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa OPEC Other Eastern Europe Imports * Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Eastern Europe.. except OPEC Other Industrial countries.. Other countries Eastern Europe Exports Other countries Eastern Europe first quarters at annual rate Item l except Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Trade with international organizations is included in totals for but not in area detail. This includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund in ; an export of tin to International Tin Council ( ITC ) in ; and an import of tin from ITC in Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise exports Year or month Total domestic and foreign Total exports Food beverages and tobacco Merchandise trade balance Merchandise imports General imports Domestic exports Crude Manumaterifactured als and goods fuels Total F.a.s. value Food beverages and tobacco Crude Manumaterifactured als and goods fuels Total c.i.f value Exports less imports customs value Exports less imports f.a.s Exports less imports c.i.f Customs value F.a.s. v a l u e * * * * * * Customs value Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar... y JuneJuly.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Beginning I960 data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments through and exclude them thereafter Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data for and include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands except that for Virgin Islands exports are reflected only in the figures for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports and trade balance * Data for for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports total general imports and trade balance include trade of the Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration Office of Trade Information and Analysis Trade Performance Division ) TABLE B-103. International investment position of the United States at year-end selected years [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States.. U.S. assets abroad U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Foreign currency reserves Other U.S. Government assets. U.S. loans and other long-term assets U.S. short-term assets other than reserves U.S. private assets Direct investments abroad ( book value ) Foreign securities Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks Foreign assets in the United States. Foreign official assets U.S. Government securities1 Other U.S. Government liabilities Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other official assets Other foreign assets Direct investments in the United States ( book value ) Liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere U.S. Treasury securities Other U.S. securities2 Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-104. World trade : Exports and imports and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country > Exports f.o.b. Developed countries United States. Canada Japan European Community France West Germany... Italy United Kingdom- Other developed countries Developing countries OPEC5 Other. Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL Imports c.i.f Developed countries United States... Canada Japan European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom... Other developed countries. Developing countries OPEC5 Other Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL Preliminary estimates Free-on-board ship value Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Cost insurance and freight value except Eastern Europe ( except Hungary ) and U.S.S.R. which are f.o.b ( free on board ) Sources.- International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-105. World trade balance and current account balances and [ Billions of U.S. dollars ] Area and country l World trade balance2 Developed countries United States. Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countriesDeveloping countries OPEC5 Other _ ^ Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern Europe. China TOTAL7. Current account balances8 Developed countries3. United States Canada Japan European Community4 France West Germany... Italy United Kingdom. Other developed countries. Developing countries Communist countries TOTAL. OPEC5 Other U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China Preliminary estimates Exports f.o.b. ( free-on-board ship value ) less imports c.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage classification timing and valuation in the recording of transactions by the countries involved and because freight charges are attributed to the cost of imports OECD basis Includes only countries listed Sources.- International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-106. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country November All countries... Industrial countries- in United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium.. Denmark. Finland France Germany Iceland Ireland Italy NetherlandsNorway Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom. Oil-exporting countries... Algeria Indonesia. Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia... United Arab EmiratesVenezuela Non-oil developing countries.. Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere. Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-107. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] Area and country annual average annual average annual average annual average * Communist countries U.S.S.R Eastern EuropeChina _ g Developed countries United States Canada Japan European Community3 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Other developed countries Developing countries OPEC5 Other TOTAL Preliminary estimates Includes the OECD countries South Africa and non-OECD Europe Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Not available Includes Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Includes North Korea Vietnam Albania Cuba Mongolia and Yugoslavia not shown separately Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries [ = ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan European Community1 France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production2 P I V : I II IlP l I V I960 : | | III Consumer prices : I II Ill I V : I I III I V Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom and West Germany. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Data for and are for Paris only Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade Information and Analysis Trade Performance Division ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-109. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( percent ) : I II Ill IV : I III IV ifZI Hourly compensation ( = ) Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland. Quarterly data for France West Germany and United Kingdom should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Beginning changes in the Italian survey resulted in a large increase in persons enumerated as unemployed. However many also reported tnat they had not actively sought work in the past days. Such persons have been provisionally excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts ; their inclusion would more than double the rates shown for Italy Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : : QL