Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office D.C. ( C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER GROWTH AND ADJUSTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES ECONOMY CHAPTER BUDGET CONTROL AND TAX REFORM CHAPTER GROWTH COMPETITIVENESS AND THE TRADE DEFICIT CHAPTER OPENING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS CHAPTER TOWARD AGRICULTURAL POLICY REFORM CHAPTER RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY CHAPTER WOMEN IN THE LABOR FORCE APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION RELATING TO INCOME * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page Ill ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES : For years my Administration has pursued policies to promote sustained noninflationary growth and greater opportunity for all Americans. We have put in place policies that are in the long-term best interest of the Nation policies that rely on the inherent vigor of our economy and its ability to allocate resources efficiently and generate economic growth. Taming the Federal Government 's propensity to overtax overspend and overregulate has been a major element of these policies THE CURRENT EXPANSION Our market-oriented policies have paid off. The economic expansion is now in its fifth year and the growth rate of the gross national product adjusted for inflation should accelerate to percent in By October the current expansion will become the longest peacetime expansion of the postwar era Since the beginning of this expansion the economy has created more than million new jobs. In each of the past years the percentage of the working-age population with jobs was the highest on record. Although I am encouraged by the fall in the overall unemployment rate to percent in December I will not be satisfied until all Americans who want to work can find a job Our efforts to reduce taxes and inflation and to eliminate excessive regulation have created a favorable climate for investing in new plant and equipment. Business fixed investment set records as a share of real gross national product in and and remains high by historical standards Despite the economy 's tremendous gains in employment and production inflation has remained below or near percent for the past years and in declined to its lowest rate in years. Although last year 's low inflation rate in part reflected the substantial decline in energy prices during we expect inflation in to continue at the moderate pace experienced during the first years of the expansion. The financial markets have acknowledged our progress in reducing inflation from its double-digit levels and interest rates declined during reaching their lowest levels in years. To sustain these developments the Federal Reserve should continue to pursue monetary and credit policies that serve the joint goals of growth and price stability In short since we have avoided the economic problems that plagued our recent past accelerating inflation rising interest rates and severe recessions. Production and employment have grown significantly while inflation has remained low and interest rates have declined. This expansion already has achieved substantial progress toward our long-term goals of sustainable economic growth and price stability THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF GOVERNMENT Government should play a limited role in the economy. The Federal Government should encourage a stable economy in which people can make informed decisions. It should not make those decisions for them nor should it arbitrarily distort economic choices by the way it taxes or regulates productive activity. It should not and can not continue to spend excessively abuse its power to tax and borrow to live beyond its means The Federal Government should provide certain goods and services public in nature and national in scope that private firms can not effectively provide but it should not try to provide public goods and services that State or local governments can provide more efficiently When government removes decisions from individuals and private firms incentives to produce become dulled and distorted ; growth productivity and employment suffer. Therefore to the greatest extent possible the Federal Government should foster responsible individual action and should rely on the initiative of the private sector TAX REFORM My State of the Union Message set tax reform as a national priority. After more than years of bipartisan effort we achieved our goal last fall when I signed into law the Tax Reform Act of Tax reform broadens the personal and corporate income tax bases and substantially reduces tax rates. These changes benefit Americans in at least three ways First by reducing marginal tax rates tax reform enhances incentives to work save and invest. Second by reducing disparities in tax rates on income from alternative capital investments tax reform encourages more efficient deployment of investment funds. Investment decisions will now reflect the productive merits of an activity more than its tax consequences leading to a more efficient allocation of resources higher growth and more jobs. Finally tax reform makes the tax system more equitable. The simpler lower rate structure will make compliance easier and tax avoidance less attractive. Americans will know that everyone is now paying his or her fair share and is not hiding income behind loopholes or in unproductive shelters. Tax reform will especially benefit millions of working poor by removing them from the Federal income tax rolls REMAINING CHALLENGES OF ECONOMIC POLICY We have successfully reformed the tax code controlled inflation and reduced government intervention in the economy. The result has been an expansion of production and employment now in its fifth year which we fully expect will continue with greater strength in Although much has been accomplished we must and will address the remaining challenges confronting the economy. We must continue to reduce the Federal budget deficit through spending restraint. We must reduce the trade deficit while avoiding protectionism. We must strengthen America 's productivity and competitiveness in the world economy. And we must reform our costly inefficient and unfair agricultural programs Control Federal Spending For the first time since Federal spending in will fall in real terms. As a result the Federal budget deficit will decline from its level by nearly $ billion. My budget for continues this process by meeting the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit target of $ billion Deficit reduction must continue and must be achieved by restraining the growth of Federal spending not by raising taxes which would reduce growth and opportunity. Large and persistent Federal deficits shift the burden of paying for current government spending to future generations. Deficit reduction achieved through spending restraint is essential if we are to preserve the substantial benefits of tax rate reduction and tax code reform ; it is also essential for reducing our international payments imbalances. Finally spending on many programs exceeds the amounts necessary to provide essential Federal services in a cost-effective manner Besides exercising spending restraint we must reform the budget process to build a check on the Federal Government 's power to overtax and overspend. I support a constitutional amendment providing for a balanced peacetime budget and I ask the Congress to give the President the same power that Governors have the power to veto individual line items in appropriations measures Maintain Free and Fair Trade One of the principal challenges remaining for the U.S. economy is to reduce our trade deficit. However we can not accomplish this or make American firms more competitive by resorting to protectionism. Protectionism is antigrowth. It would make us less competitive not more. It would not create jobs. It would hurt most Americans in the interest of helping a few. It would invite retaliation by our trading partners. In the long run protectionism would trap us in those areas of our economy where we are relatively weak instead of allowing growth in areas where we are relatively strong We can not gain from protectionism. But we can gain by working steadfastly to eliminate unfair trading practices and to open markets around the world. This year I will continue to press to open foreign markets and to oppose vigorously unfair trading practices wherever they may exist. In addition I will ask the Congress to renew the President 's negotiating authority for the Uruguay Round under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. These talks offer an important and promising opportunity to liberalize trade in areas critical to the United States ; trade in services protection of intellectual property rights fair rules governing international investment and world trade in agricultural products More remains to be done to end our trade deficit. We must sustain world economic growth increase productivity and restrain government spending. For U.S. exports to grow the economies of our trading partners must grow. Therefore it is essential that our trading partners enact policies that will promote internally generated economic growth. At the Tokyo Economic Summit last year the leaders of the seven largest industrial countries continued efforts begun at the Versailles Economic Summit in to increase international coordination of economic policies. We must also continue to encourage developing countries to adopt policy reforms to promote growth and restore creditworthiness Here in the United States we must restrain government spending Our trade deficit in goods and services reflects that over the past several years we have spent more than we have produced and we have spent too much because of the profligacy of the Federal Government. As the Congress reviews my proposed budget it should remember that a vote for more government spending is a vote against correcting our trade deficit Strengthen Productivity and Competitiveness We must work to improve our international competitiveness through greater productivity growth. The depreciation of the dollar since early has done much to restore our competitiveness However we do not want to rely on exchange-rate movements alone Productivity growth provides the means by which we can strengthen our competitiveness while increasing income and opportunity. Since U.S. manufacturing productivity has grown at a rate percent faster than the postwar average. This is a solid accomplishment but still more remains to be done. We must encourage continued productivity growth in manufacturing and in other sectors of our economy One way to strengthen our global competitiveness is to free American producers from unnecessary regulation. My Administration has sought to deregulate industries in which increased competition will provide greater benefits to consumers and producers. It has also streamlined the Federal Government 's regulatory structure. Americans have benefited significantly from the deregulation of airlines financial services railroads and trucking. I will resist any attempt to reregulate these industries. Our economy will benefit further if we eliminate natural gas price controls remaining trucking regulations and unnecessary labor market restrictions. Also without compromising the Nation 's air quality we should eliminate the bias that exists in current air pollution regulations against cleaner and more efficient new factories and power facilities. Where regulation is necessary its costs should be balanced against its benefits to ensure that regulatory efforts are applied where they do the most good and to avoid placing American firms at a competitive disadvantage in the world marketplace Privatization shifts the production of goods and services from government ownership to the private sector. Privatization can also improve American competitiveness because private firms can produce better quality goods and services and deliver them to consumers at lower cost than can government. For these reasons Americans benefit when government steps aside. Like deregulation and federalism privatization embodies my Administration 's belief that the Federal Government should minimize its interference in the marketplace and in local governance. We must return more government activities to the competitive marketplace by selling or transferring governmentowned businesses. In the Congress authorized the Department of Transportation to sell Conrail in a public offering which we hope will take place this year. Other businesses suitable for privatization include the Naval Petroleum Reserves the Alaska Power Administration and Amtrak Reform Agricultural Policies Another high priority in must be to reform our agricultural programs. Besides costing taxpayers $ billion this year alone these programs divert land labor and other resources from their most productive uses. Most farm programs are costly and unfair because they give literally millions of dollars to relatively few individuals and corporations while many family farmers who are those most often in need receive little. In the process farm programs raise the prices of many food items for all Americans rich and poor Farm income support should not be linked to production through direct subsidies or propped-up prices for agricultural products. My Administration will seek a market-oriented reform package with two goals : gradually separating farm income support from farm production and focusing that income support on those family farmers who need it most CONCLUSION The economic policies of my Administration have created greater economic freedom and opportunity for men and women private firms and State and local governments to pursue their own interests and make their own decisions. These policies have produced a sustained economic expansion with low inflation lower tax rates and a simpler tax code the unshackling of industries from regulation a surge in investment spending and more than million new jobs The American people demand a sound productive growing economy. Therefore I shall continue to pursue policies to encourage growth reduce the Federal budget deficit correct the trade deficit and strengthen the competitiveness of American producers. The American people will not tolerate a replay of the failed economic policies of the past. Therefore I shall resist proposals to adopt any economic policy that abandons the accomplishments of tax reform stymies growth fuels inflation perpetuates needless government interference in the marketplace or fosters protectionism. With the help and cooperation of the Congress we can sustain and strengthen the current economic expansion and preserve and extend the economic achievements of the past years ( j \ cnAJ ^ aA. \ CjL-tKjQ ^ -v January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C.January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Beryl W. Sprinkel Chairman Thomas Gale Moore Member Michael L. Mussa Member C O N T E N T S Page CHAPTER GROWTH AND ADJUSTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES ECONOMY Overview of the Report The Macroeconomic Setting Fiscal Policy International Imbalances Free and Fair Trade Reform of Agricultural Policies Risk Regulation and Safety Women in the Labor Force The U.S. Economy in Components of Demand The Oil Price Decline Sectoral Performance Regional Developments This Expansion in the Postwar Context Relative Prices and Structural Change Relative Farm Product Prices Relative Import and Export Prices Relative Capital Goods Prices Effects of Relative Price Changes Real Interest Rates Net Worth and Saving The Behavior of Real Interest Rates Real Asset Values and Net Worth Debt and Saving Productivity Growth and Real Per Capita GNP Labor Productivity Growth Sectoral Productivity Performance Prospects and Policies for Productivity Growth Economic Policies and Outlook Financial Deregulation Velocity and Monetary Policy The Macroeconomic Effects of Deficit Reduction Economic Forecast for Economic Projections Underlying Trends in Economic Growth Conclusion Page CHAPTER BUDGET CONTROL AND TAX REFORM Spending Restraint and Deficit Reduction Reasons for Deficit Reduction Growth of the Federal Budget Deficit Prospects for Deficit Reduction Proposals for Spending Reductions Other Revenue Measures Budget Concepts and Fiscal Authority Tax Reform Overview The Conditions Leading to Tax Reform Marginal Tax Rates and Economic Efficiency A Microeconomic Analysis of the Tax Reform Act TRA 's Effect on Long-Run Economic Growth The Short-Run Macroeconomic Effects of TRA Summary Conclusion CHAPTER GROWTH COMPETITIVENESS AND THE TRADE DEFICIT The Macroeconomic Character of the U.S. Payments Position Economic Growth and the Trade Deficit Foreign Industrial Countries Developing Countries Growth and the Trade Deficit The Saving-Investment Balance The Private Saving-Investment Balance The Government Deficit International Capital Flows Exchange Rates and Competitiveness Sources of Real Exchange-Rate Movements Productivity and Competitiveness Policy Coordination and Exchange-Rate Stability Current Requirements for Policy Coordination CHAPTER OPENING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS The Case for Free Trade Sectoral Market Opening Initiatives Section Actions Market-Oriented Sector-Selective Talks Reciprocal Market Opening Initiatives Free-Trade Area Negotiations The New GATT Round Administration Aims in the New GAIT Round Conclusion Ill Page CHAPTER TOWARD AGRICULTURAL POLICY REFORM Changes in U.S. Agriculture Market Government and Resource Risk The Structure of American Farms Current Agricultural Policy : Problems and Outlook Financial Stress and Economic Waste Promising Developments Global Distortions in Agriculture International Costs of Agricultural Policies Export-Market Responsiveness Reform of U.S. Agricultural Policy Supply Management Bias A Coherent Long-Term Agricultural Policy Conclusion CHAPTER RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY Protection Against Risk Government Management of Risk Personal Responsibility Smoking : The Greatest Avoidable Risk Automobile Safety The Tort System The " Liability Crisis " Tort Reform Consumer Products and the Workplace Consumer Product Safety The Regulation of New Drugs Occupational Safety Environmental Risk Control of Air and Water Pollution Control of Environmental Risks Conclusion CHAPTER WOMEN IN THE LABOR FORCE Employment Unemployment Home Work Versus Market Work Occupational Choice Occupational Distributions Earnings Differential Trends in the Pay Gap Conclusion APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Real Household Assets and Liabilities GNP Productivity and Employment Measures Labor Productivity Growth Rates by Sector Economic Outlook for Administration Economic Assumptions Accounting for Growth in Real GNP Marginal Personal Income Tax Rates for Four-Person Families Selected Years Effects of the Tax Reform Act of on Federal Tax Liabilities and Average Federal Tax Rates by Income Class Percent Change in Cost of Capital under the Tax Reform Act of Within-Sector and Between-Sector Variation in the Cost of Capital The Cost of Capital under the Tax Reform Act of for an 8-Percent Inflation Rate : Percent Change from Case of 3-Percent Inflation Average Marginal Tax Rates on Labor Income Capital Income and Output The Long-Run Simulated Effect of the Tax Reform Act of U.S. Trade in Manufactures and U.S. Exports and Imports of Goods and Services Growth in Real Domestic Demand and Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries Real GNP Growth in Developing Countries Private Saving and Investment National Saving Investment and Net Capital Inflow U.S. and Foreign Unit Labor Costs Summary of Cases under Section Direct Government Payments for Agricultural Programs Annual Gains and Losses from Income-Support Programs under the Food Security Act and Trade Restrictions Sources of Producer Support Equivalents for Selected Countries and Major Commodities Who Bore the Cost of Support to Producers Estimated Risks of Various Activities List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Labor Force Participation Rates of Women by Age Labor Force Participation Rates of Women by Age of Youngest Child March of Selected Years Young Women 's Work Expectations for Age : Trends and Current Participation Rates Percent Female in Selected Occupations and Earnings of Females as Percent of Earnings of Males by Age and Charts Manufacturing Shares in Real GDP and Employment Nonfarm Payroll Employment by State Relative Price Movements Proxy Measure of Real Long-Term Interest Rates Ex Ante Real Long-Term Interest Rates Velocity of Ml Federal Outlays and Receipts as Percent of GNP Federal Outlays as Percent of GNP U.S. Trade and Current Account Balances Real Domestic Demand in Selected Industrial Countries Private Saving-Investment Balance Government Deficit and Current Account Balance Real Exchange Rate and Relative Price of Imports Corn : Target Price Loan Rate and Market Price Average Direct Government Payments per Farm by Sales Class Distribution of Financially Distressed Farms by Sales Class Carryover Stocks of Coarse Grains and Wheat Shares of Total U.S. Consumption of Sweeteners Rates of Accidental Deaths by Cause Rates of Home and Work Deaths Due to Accidents Motor Vehicle Deaths as Percent of Total Work Deaths Women 's Real Annual Earnings Percent of Earned Degrees Received by Women Ratio of Female to Male Earnings for Full-time Workers Ratio of Black and Other Women 's Earnings to White Women 's Earnings CHAPTER Growth and Adjustment in the United States Economy THE UNITED STATES ECONOMY is in the fifth year of the current expansion and an acceleration of real growth with continued moderate inflation is projected for and beyond. While the pace of economic growth remained moderate in expansion proceeded on a broad front. Real gross national product ( GNP ) rose by percent during the year with output expanding in most sectors. Due in large part to a sharp decline in energy prices inflation fell to the lowest rate in more than two decades. Rising real personal income and significantly lower interest rates contributed to strong growth of consumption and of residential investment. Despite a decline in business fixed investment and further deterioration of the trade balance the unemployment rate fell to percent and total employment grew by more than 2Va million persons. In each year of this expansion more jobs were created in the United States than in the combined economies of the next six largest industrial democracies More than years of economic expansion with the inflation rate remaining near or below percent and interest rates declining to their lowest levels in years have laid the foundation for sustainable real growth with moderate inflation. The problems that remain in the U.S. economy are primarily sectoral and structural : the Federal Government controls too much of the Nation 's resources ; a large trade deficit adversely affects many trade-sensitive industries and encourages protectionist sentiment ; the domestic oil and gas industry and local areas heavily dependent on it are suffering the consequences of the decline in world oil prices ; conditions remain depressed in much of American agriculture ; and excessive and inappropriate regulation continues to burden business and consumers OVERVIEW OF THE REPORT This Report analyzes the structural and sectoral problems that remain in the U.S. economy. It assesses policies to deal with these problems while maintaining a sustainable rate of overall growth and making continued progress in moderating inflation. This chapter begins with a summary of the Report THE MACROECONOMIC SETTING The broad economic forces that shape the overall performance of the U.S. economy and of its major sectors are the focus of Chapter This chapter first reviews the main economic developments of in the context of the current expansion and in comparison with past expansions and with economic performance in other countries. This leads to an examination of the main forces that have influenced the performance and current problems of important sectors of the U.S economy Wide swings in relative product prices are among these forces. The oil and gas industry and agriculture benefited from increases in the relative prices of their products in the 1970s and have suffered as these relative prices declined in the 1980s. The problems of many trade-sensitive industries are directly related to the percent decline in the relative price of imports between and and to the downward pressure of a strong dollar on the relative price of U.S. exports. On the positive side lower relative prices of oil agricultural products and imports have benefited consumers. Also a declining relative price of capital goods during this expansion has permitted strong growth of real investment without a corresponding drain on national saving Another critical factor influencing sectoral problems and structural change is the wide swing in real interest rates and real asset values that occurred in the 1970s and 1980s. During the period of rising inflation in the 1970s real interest rates the difference between nominal interest rates and anticipated inflation rates were low and sometimes even negative. Borrowers benefited from low real borrowing costs and real values of tangible assets rose while holders of fixedinterest rate instruments and equities experienced real capital losses As often happens during periods of disinflation during the 1980s real interest rates have been high by postwar standards. Borrowers have often suffered while holders of financial assets including equities have enjoyed large gains that have contributed to substantial increases in real household net worth Differential productivity growth also drives important structural changes. Since productivity growth in manufacturing has accelerated above the postwar trend while productivity growth in the service sector has remained sluggish. These differential rates of productivity growth together with the relative constancy of the share of manufacturing output in real GNP have induced a decline in the share of manufacturing in total employment a development that might be less decried if its underlying causes were better understood Advancing technology and wide swings in interest rates and inflation rates together with financial deregulation have contributed to structural change in the banking and financial services industry and to instability in the relationship between money growth and nominal income growth. This instability has complicated the conduct of monetary policy in its dual tasks of restraining inflation and avoiding disruption of real economic growth The prospect of gradual resolution of the economy 's structural and sectoral problems contributes to the forecast of stronger economic growth discussed at the end of this chapter. The growth rate of real GNP is projected to increase to percent in and somewhat higher in Because of the wearing off of the temporary inflation-reducing effects of the decline in oil prices and the delayed effects of dollar depreciation on import prices the inflation rate is projected to rise moderately in Subsequently the inflation rate should resume its decline provided that the Federal Reserve continues to manage monetary policy in a manner consistent with sustainable real economic growth and with gradual reduction of the inflation rate toward the long-run goal of price stability FISCAL POLICY Chapter examines two elements of fiscal policy budget control and tax reform that influence both the sectoral and overall performance of the U.S. economy. Better control of the Federal budget is required to reduce the Federal deficit primarily by reducing the share of Federal spending in GNP. Realization of the long-run benefits of the Tax Reform Act of is one of the many important reasons for pursuing this approach to deficit reduction. This Act improves overall incentives for economic activity and reduces disparities in rates of taxation on different forms of economic activity. In the long run after the transition problems of some sectors are resolved this Act is estimated to increase net national product by approximately percent. Evaluated at current levels of national income and product this implies approximately a $ gain in the annual income of the average American family without any loss of Federal revenue INTERNATIONAL IMBALANCES Chapter demonstrates that the large U.S. trade deficit is primarily a macroeconomic phenomenon. This phenomenon is fundamentally related to the rapid growth of domestic demand in the United States relative to the growth of U.S. output and relative to demand and output growth in the rest of the world. It is also related to the appreciation of the U.S. dollar between and which reduced the international competitiveness of U.S.-produced goods and services. And it is related to the deterioration of the U.S. national saving-investment balance which reflects not abnormal behavior of the private saving-investment balance but rather the persistence of a large Federal deficit late into the current expansion Stronger internally generated growth in other industrial countries reduction of the Federal deficit through spending restraint and policy reforms that encourage growth and restore credit worthiness in developing countries are critical elements in the global strategy to reduce international trade imbalances. Stronger internally generated growth in foreign countries is essential to maintain satisfactory rates of real growth in the world economy. This is especially important during a period when the growth of domestic demand is slowing in the United States and when improvements in the relative competitive position of U.S. tradable goods industries are shifting world demand toward U.S. products. International coordination of economic policies especially among the leading industrial countries can help to ensure that payments imbalances decline in an environment of greater exchange-rate stability and sustainable noninflationary growth in the world economy FREE AND FAIR TRADE Protectionism is a false solution to the U.S. trade imbalance. However justified are the claims of unfair trade practices by other countries the massive deterioration of the U.S. trade balance clearly has not occurred primarily because foreign trade practices have become vastly more unfair. Moreover starting a world trade war by resorting to protectionism would be especially imprudent at a time when the improving competitiveness of U.S. industries appears likely to bring significant expansion of U.S. exports As is discussed in Chapter the Administration 's policy of free and fair trade is to avoid protectionism at home while opening markets to U.S. products abroad. This policy fits well with the broader strategy of reversing the tide of macroeconomic forces principally responsible for the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance. Administration efforts to improve market access have brought significant results in bilateral negotiations with Japan on sector-specific trade problems and in cases initiated by the Administration against unfair foreign trade practices under Section of the Trade Act of Major initiatives to extend the Administration 's trade policy include bilateral discussions with Canada to move toward a free-trade area and the new round of multilateral trade negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) The agreed pur- pose of the new GATT round is to secure a standstill or rollback of existing protectionist policies to improve GATT procedures for enforcing fair rules of international trade and most importantly to enhance or extend GATT rules in areas of critical interest to the United States : trade in services protection of intellectual property rights rules governing international investment and trade in agricultural products REFORM OF AGRICULTURAL POLICIES The problems of U.S. agriculture are the focus of Chapter Government policies have directly or indirectly subsidized agricultural production in the United States and in many other industrial countries. These policies have stimulated excess production that has depressed agricultural product prices in world markets. Government intervention has wasted resources by encouraging farmers to incur costs in order to produce commodities for which only the government provides a market. Much of the money spent on agricultural support programs has been dissipated in outright waste or delivered to owners of large farms that invariably receive the largest subsidy payments The solution is to reform agricultural programs by gradually decoupling farm income support from farm production and linking it to financial need. Simultaneous reform of agricultural policies in the United States the European Community and Japan would reduce the economic waste and budgetary cost of agricultural support programs for all countries RISK REGULATION AND SAFETY Regulation is another mechanism through which the government influences the performance of different sectors of the economy and broader aspects of individual behavior. Chapter discusses examples of excessive and inappropriate regulations that unduly limit individual choice raise costs and discourage economic activity. In some cases regulations even work against their intended purposes. Rigid rules such as some designed to reduce workplace hazards can reduce production and employment opportunities without a corresponding gain in occupational safety. In this and other areas where government intervention may be indicated the costs of regulations should be weighed against their likely benefits. Reliance on personal responsibility and market incentives often provides the best methods for reducing risk WOMEN IN THE LABOR FORCE The final chapter of this Report examines one of the most important structural changes in the U.S. economy increasing participation of women in the labor force. Over the past decade women have accounted for percent of total labor force growth. Increasing labor force participation of women has not led to large increases in unemployment rates for either men or women and has made an important contribution to growth of real per capita income. Because many women now plan longer careers and acquire the requisite education experience and skills wages of women relative to those of men have been rising in the 1980s. These developments testify to the flexibility of U.S. labor markets and to the capacity of the market-oriented U.S economy to generate productive and rewarding jobs for an expanding labor force THE U.S. ECONOMY IN Economic growth proceeded at a moderate pace in while significant declines were recorded in both the inflation rate and interest rates. Between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of ( preliminary estimate ) real GNP rose by percent. While the unemployment rate declined by only of a percentage point during the year and remained relatively high by postwar standards the employment-population ratio for persons over years of age reached a new postwar peak of percent at the end of Given the impact of declining oil prices the inflation rate measured by the consumer price index ( CPI ) turned negative in the first quarter. Over the entire year the CPI rose by only percent the lowest inflation rate in more than years. Nominal interest rates fell sharply early in the year and by yearend were near their lowest levels for the year and since COMPONENTS OF DEMAND On the demand side real GNP may be decomposed into real consumption spending real investment spending real government spending and real net exports. Strong growth of real consumption spending was the driving force behind demand growth for most of Real consumption spending rose at a percent annual rate in fourth quarter to fourth quarter After rising nearly $ billion in the fourth quarter of real nonresidential fixed investment declined by $ billion in the first quarter of and then fell an additional $ billion in the next three quarters. Real residential investment grew strongly recording a percent increase during the year. The continuing congressional debate over tax reform and final passage of the Tax Reform Act of together with the effect of lower oil prices on the domestic energy industry apparently affected the pace and pattern of invest- ment spending in Anticipated repeal of the investment tax credit with an effective date of January may have contributed to the sharp rise in real nonresidential fixed investment in the fourth quarter of and to its decline in the first quarter of The likelihood of an increase in business taxes and uncertainty about the final shape of tax reform may have helped to depress this category of real investment spending for the remainder of Lower mortgage interest rates contributed to strong growth of residential investment during Real purchases by State and local governments grew percent during Real Federal purchases followed a somewhat erratic path primarily because of fluctuations in defense purchases and purchases by the Commodity Credit Corporation and ended the year percent above their level in the fourth quarter of Overall growth of real government purchases contributed percent to real GNP growth in Real net exports of goods and services improved by $ billion in the first quarter of and then declined by $ billion in the second quarter and by a further $ billion in the third quarter before recovering by $ billion in the fourth quarter. Net exports in nominal terms showed much less deterioration during than real net exports. Specifically between the fourth quarter of and the third quarter of real net exports declined by $ billion of dollars while nominal net exports declined by only $ billion of current dollars. The reason for this difference is the low relative price of imports and the further decline in this relative price during attributable primarily to the decline in the price of imported oil THE OIL PRICE DECLINE Probably the most important special factor affecting the U.S. economy in was the sharp drop in world oil prices which was promptly reflected in domestic oil prices. Between November and April the spot price of West Texas Crude fell from $ to $ per barrel. A further $ per barrel decline in domestic oil prices occurred between April and July before prices recovered to $ per barrel in December. The sharp decline in oil prices had pronounced adverse effects on the domestic oil and gas industry Real investment in this industry declined by more than $ billion in the first half of accounting for more than half of the decline in real business fixed investment. Employment in the domestic oil and gas industry fell by nearly mainly in the first half. Further employment losses occurred in regions heavily dependent on the oil and gas industry For the rest of the economy the decline in oil and gas prices had important beneficial effects. The CPI fell at an annual rate of percent between January and April the first significant decline in this index since The decline in consumer prices was clearly attributable to lower oil and gas prices because the CPI excluding energy rose at an annual rate of percent between January and April. The decline in consumer prices contributed to strong gains in real disposable personal income that in turn fueled the strong growth of consumer spending which was the mainstay of overall economic growth The fall in oil prices inflation and inflationary expectations also played a critical role in the sharp decline in nominal interest rates Interest rates on 10-year Treasury securities fell from percent in December to percent in April and declined a further basis points by yearend. Interest rates on 91-day Treasury bills fell somewhat less moving down from percent in December to percent by April and to percent by yearend The sharp decline of interest rates spread rapidly to mortgage interest rates Assuming no further substantial change in domestic oil prices most of the negative effects of lower oil prices have probably been absorbed while the beneficial effects are yet to be fully realized Lower energy costs will contribute to lower production costs in many important domestic industries. Productivity growth may be enhanced in the long run as firms adopt more efficient energy-using technologies partially reversing the adverse productivity effects of higher energy prices in the 1970s SECTORAL PERFORMANCE The effects of economic advance were widespread across industries and regions. Output expanded at about the same rate in goods-producing and service-producing industries. Industrial production data show increases in output in of the major industries for which results are reported. Because of strong productivity gains in manufacturing industries however employment increases were concentrated primarily in service-producing industries The relative constancy of the share of manufacturing in total output combined with a declining share of manufacturing in total employment is a longstanding phenomenon. It does not reflect a long-term weakness in the growth of output of manufacturing industries relative to the total economy. Rather it reflects the general tendency ( discussed later in this chapter ) for labor productivity growth in manufacturing to exceed labor productivity growth for the rest of nonfarm business For analytical purposes this phenomenon is most appropriately assessed by comparing the behavior of the ratio of value added in manufacturing to real nonagricultural gross domestic product ( GDP ) with the ratio of manufacturing employment to nonfarm employment as illustrated in Chart Data for value added by industry which are available annually through were used to construct the chart Data on final expenditure by sector which are available quarterly through confirm the general relationship illustrated in Chart Specifically in when labor productivity growth in manufacturing remained substantially above that in total nonfarm business the share of final expenditures on goods output ( which are dominated by manufacturing ) remained essentially constant while the share of manufacturing in nonfarm employment continued to decline Chart Manufacturing Shares rn Real GDP and Employment Percent Employment Share ^ Real GDP Share & n< I i i I I I i I i i -is Manufacturing as percent of nonfarm payroll employment ^ Manufacturing as percent of real gross domestic product less agriculture forestry and fisheries Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor REGIONAL DEVELOPMENTS While GNP data are not available on a regional basis data on employment by State provide a reasonably good impression of the regional economic performance of nonagricultural business. The re- gional pattern of employment gains for is illustrated in Chart The chart is constructed using data from the establishment survey on employment in nonfarm business by State. The change in employment from the same month a year ago is used to control for seasonal factors and the results for the most recent months for which data are available ( September October and November ) are averaged in order to limit the effects of sampling error Chart Nonfarm Payroll Employment by State Percent Change September-November to September-November Percent Change jj ] and above ^ Oto2 Q ] Less than to-1 ill and below Source : Department of Labor In States and the District of Columbia increases in employment were recorded for the period covered by Chart In States employment increased by at least percent and in States employment increased by at least percent. In States employment fell and in States the decline in employment exceeded percent. Not surprisingly States where the oil and gas industry is important Alaska Louisiana Oklahoma Texas and Wyoming are among those that recorded significant employment losses. If Chart were extended to cover the period since the last cyclical peak ( July to November ) employment gains would be shown in all but States. Employment gains of percent or more would be shown in States and gains exceeding percent would be shown in States Widespread employment gains across most of the country do not imply an absence of economic problems in some industries and regions. Agriculture mining the oil and gas industry and other tradesensitive industries have experienced problems for some time and particularly for the oil and gas industry these problems have recently deepened. In areas heavily dependent on declining firms and industries economic problems have spread to the support and service industries. However assertions that the United States is becoming a " bicoastal economy " with broad areas of economic depression across the Nation 's midsection are greatly exaggerated. Economic progress has been widespread. Remaining economic problems tend to be concentrated in particular industries and in specific areas of the country THIS EXPANSION IN THE POSTWAR CONTEXT The performance of the U.S. economy in should be assessed in the broader context of the current expansion in comparison with economic performance in other industrial countries and with earlier postwar expansions in the United States. Viewed in this context it is important to note that despite a moderate pace of overall growth since mid-1984 and continuing problems in some sectors steady progress has been made in reducing inflation and interest rates. The foundation for sustainable real economic growth with continued moderate inflation has been strengthened In other leading industrial countries substantial progress has also been made in reducing the rate of inflation during the 1980s. As is discussed in Chapter however other industrial countries have generally recovered less strongly from the worldwide recession of the early 1980s than has the United States. This is especially the case when recovery is calibrated in terms of growth of real domestic demand which measures total real spending by the residents and government of a country. Moreover the deterioration of U.S. real net exports during the current expansion contributed significantly to economic growth in other countries while limiting real GNP growth in the United States. In contrast during earlier postwar expansions growth rates of real GNP in most other industrial and in many developing countries typically exceeded the U.S. growth rate Comparison of unemployment rates in the United States and Western Europe dramatically illustrates the relative strength of U.S. economic performance during the current expansion. At percent the total U.S. unemployment rate remains relatively high by postwar standards but is well down from its cyclical peak of percent in December In Western Europe unemployment rates typically ran well below U.S. rates during the 1960s and 1970s. During the 1980s despite recovery from the recession of the average unemployment rate in the major countries of the European Community has risen persistently reaching percent in early The situation in the U.S. economy today should also be compared with that prevailing at similar stages of earlier postwar expansions. In the later stages of the long expansion of the 1960s real growth remained strong. However after the slowdown in the inflation rate and interest rates ( although still low by recent standards ) resumed their upward movement. Tightening of monetary and fiscal policy undertaken to curb rising inflation at the end of the expansion of the 1960s probably contributed to the recession of The expansion that began in was barely a year old when rising inflation and a deteriorating balance of payments led to the imposition of price and wage controls and to devaluation of the dollar. With the removal of controls the inflation rate and interest rates rose in exacerbated at the end by the surge in world oil prices. Shortly thereafter the economy collapsed into one of the deepest recessions of the postwar period In the recovery from the recession the inflation rate and interest rates continued on a downward path for the first six quarters of the expansion and short-term interest rates kept falling for an additional two quarters. However by the fourth year of the expansion ( comparable to during the current expansion ) the inflation rate and short-term interest rates were more than percentage points above their minimum levels for the expansion and this was before the second oil price shock ( in early ) contributed to a further upsurge of inflation and interest rates This expansion ended in a double crescendo of rising inflation and interest rates and falling economic activity. The tightening of monetary policy in late and early and the brief recession in brought only temporary respite from high inflation and interest rates at the cost of a sharp rise in unemployment. Following the reacceleration of monetary growth in mid-1980 the inflation rate and interest rates rose to new peaks in while economic activity collapsed into a deep recession Fortunately the cure applied in proved more enduring even if more painful than that attempted and aborted in Average annual real GNP growth during the first years of the current expansion has been of a percentage point below that for the years from to ( versus percent ) However the inflation rate and interest rates have continued to decline during the current expansion in contrast with behavior in the late 1970s. Currently there are no signs of the developments associated with the unfortunate conclusions of earlier expansions. The destructive sequence of business cycles with progressively rising inflation rates and interest rates punctuated by severe recessions has been broken. With appropriate macroeconomic policies the U.S. economy need not suffer once again the painful process of wringing entrenched inflation out of the economic system RELATIVE PRICES AND STRUCTURAL CHANGE The 1970s and 1980s saw not only wide swings in the overall rate of price inflation but also dramatic movements in relative prices among important sectors of the economy. Such relative price movements are generally associated with important structural changes and with adjustment problems for particular sectors of the economy. Sectors experiencing relative price increases usually enjoy rapidly growing output and employment with rising incomes and asset values while sectors facing relative price declines often suffer stagnating output and employment with falling incomes and asset values Movements in relative prices for several important sectors of the U.S. economy over the past years are illustrated in Chart For each sector the relative price is the ratio of that sector 's implicit price deflator to the implicit price deflator for total GNP. The important message conveyed by Chart is that relative price movements have been much larger in the 1970s and 1980s than they typically were between and RELATIVE FARM PRODUCT PRICES After years of modest fluctuations the relative price of farm products rose sharply in the early 1970s declined substantially in the mid-1970s and then rose again until as shown in Chart ( top panel ) Since the relative price of farm products has been on a declining path and in was below the average These movements in the relative price of farm products in the United States were correlated with similar relative price movements in world markets The rise in the relative price of farm products in the 1970s was associated with substantial gains in real farm incomes and large increases in the real value of farmland. This development encouraged large-scale and sometimes excessive borrowing to finance purchases of farm equipment and farmland. With the decline of the relative price of farm products in the 1980s however farm incomes and land values fell. Many farmers who borrowed heavily in the late 1970s Chart Relative Price Movements Index = Farm Products W \ Index = ( Enlarged scale ) Personal Consumption Expenditures for Services ^ = ^ % X \ \ Capital Goods ( Nonresidential Fixed Investment ) __ t I I I I I t I i I t i I i I i t i i Note. Ratio of component implicit price deflator to GNP implicit price deflator Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers with the expectation of rising farm incomes and land values have experienced severe economic difficulties. The role of government policy in creating these problems and in correcting them is discussed in Chapter RELATIVE IMPORT AND EXPORT PRICES Movements in the relative price of products imported into and exported from the United States followed a pattern broadly similar to that of farm products. The relative prices of imports and exports were quite stable during the late 1950s and the 1960s before rising sharply in the early 1970s. After declining moderately between and the relative prices of imports and exports rose again in the late 1970s. Since the relative prices of imports and exports have been declining and relative export prices are now near levels typical of the period around Increases in the relative price of imported oil contributed significantly to the sharp rise in the relative price of all imports in ^ and again in However movements in the relative price of imported oil do not account for all of the movement in relative import prices ; the same general pattern is observed in the relative price of non-oil imports ( also shown in the top panel of Chart ) An important exception is that the relative price of non-oil imports started to rise modestly in but the sharp decline in the price of imported oil caused the relative price of total imports to continue to decline As is discussed further in Chapter movements in the relative prices of both imports and exports have tended to mirror movements in the real foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar. The depreciation of the dollar in and especially in contributed to increases in the relative price of imports and eased the competitive situation of U.S. exporters relative to their foreign rivals. The very weak dollar in the late 1970s and had similar effects. In contrast the strong real appreciation of the dollar between and early was associated with a sharp decline in relative import prices and placed U.S. exporters under severe pressure vis-a-vis foreign competitors. The substantial decline in the real foreign exchange value of the dollar that started in early began to be reflected in a higher relative price of non-oil imports only in and is not yet clearly apparent in relative export prices. This may be partly because relative import and export prices never fully reflected the very high dollar as well as because of longer than normal delays in the adjustment of relative goods prices to a lower dollar RELATIVE CAPITAL GOODS PRICES After years of only very modest movements ( Chart bottom panel ) the relative price of capital goods ( nonresidential fixed investment ) fell by percent between and This decline is probably related to the same forces that depressed the relative prices of many manufactured goods especially those linked strongly to international trade. The decline in the relative price of capital goods made possible very strong growth of real business fixed investment during the current expansion without correspondingly strong growth of demand for investment financing. Specifically between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of the ratio of real business fixed investment to real GNP rose from percent to a post- war peak of percent. Over this period the share of nominal spending on business fixed investment rose from to only percent. Thus the decline in the relative price of capital goods allowed the share of real business fixed investment spending in real GNP to rise by percentage points while the share of such spending in nominal GNP rose by only of a percentage point The lower relative prices of capital goods presumably made investment spending more attractive by reducing the cost of acquiring productive assets. This contributed to the strong growth of real investment during the current expansion. As is discussed in Chapter the decline in the cost of capital goods allowed a given increase in real investment to be financed with a smaller drain on national saving and hence a smaller demand for foreign borrowing than would otherwise have been the case EFFECTS OF RELATIVE PRICE CHANGES In assessing the effects of relative price changes it is important to remember that the weighted average of the relative prices of all the components of GNP or of total domestic spending is always constant. If the relative prices of some components increase this must be offset by declines in the relative prices of other components. In particular as is shown in Chart the relative price of services ( which constitute about one-third of GNP and of total domestic spending ) generally moves in the opposite direction from the other relative prices ( which refer to components of smaller magnitude ) This relationship is especially apparent in the 1980s when all of the other relative prices in this chart are declining The economic fortunes of particular industries have been strongly influenced by movements in their own relative prices. Agriculture did very well when the relative price of farm products and farm exports rose in the 1970s and has suffered with their decline in the 1980s The domestic oil and gas industry boomed during the period of high relative oil prices and has experienced severe difficulties since the recent sharp decline in oil prices. Consumers of food and energy have been on the other side losing during the period of rising relative prices of these products in the 1970s and gaining during the period of falling relative prices in the 1980s A similar story applies generally for many U.S. manufacturing industries that must compete with imports of foreign products at home or that seek to export their products to foreign markets. Under the shelter of the weak dollar and high relative import prices in the 1970s many of these industries prospered. Despite sluggish productivity growth in many manufacturing industries output employment and exports of many manufacturing industries expanded substantially in the 1970s. This situation reversed during the period of the strong dollar and declining relative import and export prices in the 1980s Many U.S. manufacturing industries came under heavy pressure from foreign competitors in both domestic and foreign markets despite an acceleration of productivity growth. Consumers of manufactured products of course suffered from higher prices of these products than probably would have prevailed if the dollar had remained stronger in the 1970s. Consumers have recently benefited from significantly lower relative prices of these products supplied by both foreign and domestic producers Although movements of relative prices are often associated with problems of particular industries they play an essential role in the effective and efficient functioning of the economic system. When real economic conditions change because of changes in taste or technology or the availability of productive resources relative price changes signal the need to alter patterns of consumption and production However wide swings in relative prices that are associated with the process of inflation and disinflation generate significant problems not only for individual industries but also for the economy as a whole To attempt to restrain relative price movements by any direct means is no solution. Such attempts often generate surpluses or shortages of products whose relative prices are controlled. They injure the economy by limiting its flexibility to respond to economic and technological change. In the end they create worse problems than they resolve. The solution to the excessive and unnecessary volatility of relative prices generally associated with inflation and disinflation is to avoid the macroeconomic policies that contribute to inflation and to the subsequent need to disinflate REAL INTEREST RATES NET WORTH AND SAVING In addition to wide swings in relative goods prices the past years have witnessed substantial movements in real asset values and rates of return. Anticipated real rates of return are important factors in decisions about borrowing and lending and about saving and investing. Wide swings in the real values of assets strongly influence real household net worth and therefore consumption and saving as well. The causes and effects of these movements in real interest rates and real asset values need to be understood within the context of the process of inflation and disinflation that has dominated economic events since the late 1960s THE BEHAVIOR OF REAL INTEREST RATES The real rate of interest on a loan or security is the nominal interest rate less the inflation rate realized over the life of the loan or security. Thus the real rate of interest is the return paid by borrowers to lenders measured in real goods and services. The ex ante real interest rate is the nominal rate of interest on the loan or security minus the rate of inflation that is anticipated when the loan is made or the security is purchased. Ex ante real interest rates however are often difficult to measure because of the lack of reliable and consistent information about expected inflation. A useful proxy measure of ex ante real interest rates can be constructed by assuming that the anticipated rate of future inflation corresponds reasonably closely to recent past rates of inflation. This proxy measure of ex ante real interest rates is probably most reliable during periods when the actual inflation rate is stable and anticipated rates of future inflation are likely to correspond reasonably closely to recent past inflation rates The long-run behavior of this proxy measure of ex ante real interest rates is illustrated in Chart The yield on railroad bonds is used to measure nominal interest rates from to augmented by a composite of long-term government bond yields since The annualized rate of increase in the CPI over the preceding years is subtracted from these nominal interest rates to construct the proxy measure of the real interest rate. The CPI for early years is not completely comparable with the index used today but this is not likely to affect seriously the main results discussed below. For the past two decades the behavior of the proxy measure of real interest rates depicted in Chart is broadly consistent with that shown by other measures of real interest rates The real interest rate on long-term government bonds shown in Chart was in the range of percent during the 1960s before declining sometimes to negative levels in the middle and late 1970s Starting in real interest rates rose substantially above the levels of the 1960s ; the proxy measure shown in Chart reached a peak of percent in Although high by postwar standards the level of real interest rates in the 1980s is not unprecedented over a longer historical period. Over the period since the proxy real long-term rate shown in Chart averaged percent ; in the period it averaged percent. However during a prolonged period in the late 1800s real long-term rates were higher than in the 1980s ; during the 15-year period ending in the real rate on railroad bonds shown in the chart averaged percent. Since there have been two periods ( in the early 1920s and again in the early 1930s ) when real rates rose to levels as high as in the early 1980s. There have also been several periods when the Chart Proxy Measure of Real Long-Term Interest Rates Percent per annum 2-Year Change in CPI Real U.S. Government Composite Bond Rate J/ Real Railroad Bond Rate- ! / II III I I 'll IIII ll III11II ! IIIII ill I ! Ill III IIIII11IIII ! III III ! I III III II Illll II III I III ill III III I It IIII III III ! III till I ! ^ Nominal yield minus the average annual percent change in the consumer price index over the preceding years Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Department of the Treasury proxy measure of real interest rates was significantly negative as occurred in the 1970s High real interest rates in the second half of the 19th century are sometimes attributed to the rapid growth in the U.S. economy and high prospective rates of return on investment that attracted capital from overseas to finance the industrial boom. Similarly the rise in real interest rates in the early 1980s has been attributed to an improved climate for capital investment in the United States resulting from the business tax cuts enacted in the decline in the inflation rate and strong real economic growth early in the expansion Other explanations relate high real rates in the early 1980s to the emergence of large actual and prospective budget deficits and to a shift to disinflationary monetary policy. Although most analysts agree on the direction of the influence of budget deficits on interest rates the evidence of the strength of that influence is by no means unambiguous. The budget deficit increased in and but very large budget deficits did not emerge until after much of the apparent rise in real interest rates had taken place. The increase in real interest rates before therefore would need to be related to expectations of large future budget deficits It is plausible that restrictive monetary policy contributed to higher real interest rates in and perhaps again in the second half of However given rapid monetary growth over most of the expansion it is difficult to see restrictive monetary policy as the persistent and predominant cause of high real interest rates ( except insofar as monetary policy has continued to contribute to the moderation of inflation ) Moreover the rising stock market and the boom in investment spending since are somewhat difficult to reconcile with large budget deficits or disinflationary monetary policy as the exclusive explanations of high real interest rates One apparent regularity in the behavior of the proxy measure of real interest rates illustrated in Chart is the strong inverse relationship between movements in the real interest rate and movements in the inflation rate. During periods of rapidly changing inflation rates expectations of future inflation may differ substantially from recent past inflation. Hence caution is called for in interpreting measures of the ex ante real rate such as those shown in Chart Recognizing this limitation it is nevertheless the case that since all periods of high or rising inflation including the middle and late 1970s were associated with sharp declines in the proxy measure of the real interest rate. During all periods of sharply declining inflation or deflation including the early 1920s the early 1930s and the early 1980s the real interest rate turns strongly positive. When placed in a longer historical context neither the negative real interest rates in the 1970s nor the rise of real interest rates in the 1980s is particularly unusual given the sharp movements in the inflation rate that were also occurring. Although many factors have probably contributed to movements of real interest rates in the past decade the evidence suggests that these movements are consistent with past experience and should be viewed as normal concomitants of the process of inflation and disinflation Adjustment of Inflation Expectations The relationship between changes in the inflation rate and the proxy measure of the real interest rate is consistent with a lag in the adjustment of inflation expectations behind the actual inflation rate The potential effect of this adjustment lag is illustrated in Chart which compares two measures of the ex ante real long-term interest rate during the past years. The " proxy measure " is constructed by subtracting the annual rate of change in the CPI over the preceding years from the nominal yield on 10-year Treasury securities. The " expectations measure " is calculated by subtracting from the same nominal yield a measure of 10-year inflationary expectations taken from a survey of financial experts. Both measures of the ex ante real interest rate in Chart indicate that long-term real interest rates rose sharply in the early 1980s and that real long-term interest rates have been declining since Chart Ex Ante Real Long-Term Interest Rates 10-Year Treasury Securities Percent per annum Expectations Measure J/ I i i 19781V I I I I i i I i i I I I I I 19801V 19821V I i I 19841V I i i 19861V -l/ The expectations measure is the yield on 10-year Treasury securities ( constant maturity ) minus 10-year inflation expectations from the Decision-Makers Poll by Richard B. Hoey Drexel Burnham Lambertjnc -2/The proxy measure is the yield on 10-year Treasury securities ( constant maturity ) minus the average annual percent change in the consumer price index over the preceding quarters Sources : Department of the Treasury and Department of Labor except as noted The relative movement in the two measures of the ex ante interest rate indicates a lag in the adjustment of long-term inflation expectations to actual inflation rates. During the period of high inflation and even years after the inflation rate began to fall the long-term expected inflation rate remained below the 2-year moving average of the CPI. Accordingly through the expectations measure of the real interest rate remained above the measure based on actual inflation. Long-term inflationary expectations began declining in ; but because of the lag in the adjustment of such expectations they fell less rapidly than the 2-year moving average of the CPI. Since the expected inflation rate has been consistently above the 2-year average actual inflation rate. Accordingly after the proxy measure of the real interest rate is above the expectations measure Thus the divergence of the two measures of ex ante real interest rates depicted in Chart reflects the failure of inflation expectations to adjust quickly both to the rise in actual inflation in the 1970s and to its subsequent decline in the 1980s The lag in the adjustment of inflationary expectations helps to explain why nominal interest rates remain relatively high in comparison with actual inflation rates during periods of disinflation and why nominal interest rates tend to decline only gradually with the persistence of lower actual inflation rates. Borrowers and lenders who continue to anticipate relatively high future inflation rates agree to loans with nominal interest rates that reflect these expectations rather than lower actual rates of current inflation. As evidence of lower inflation accumulates inflation expectations are revised downward and this translates into lower nominal interest rates The steady and substantial decline since mid-1984 in the real interest rates shown in Chart reflects this process of the decline in nominal interest rates in the context of a gradual albeit uneven downward adjustment of inflation expectations. The expectations rate in Chart remains considerably below the real interest rate measured with current inflation reflecting the persistence of inflation expectations that exceed recent actual inflation. To a large extent the difference between current and anticipated inflation in can be attributed to the effects of the oil price declines on current inflation which are largely temporary. During the last months of 10-year inflation expectations of to 5Vi percent are apparently incorporated into nominal rates which implies a 10-year anticipated real interest rate of just over percent. This is generally consistent with the level of the proxy measure of the real long-term interest rate recorded in the 1960s Consequences of Real Interest Rate Changes The wide swings in real interest rates associated with the inflation and disinflation of the past years have had important often adverse effects on the economy and on the financial system. In the 1970s when actual inflation accelerated ahead of what had been anticipated lenders earned lower real rates of return than they had expected and suffered large capital losses as increases in nominal interest rates depressed the market value of existing fixed-rate securities Borrowers generally benefited from paying lower ( even negative ) real interest rates than they had anticipated and enjoyed capital gains from the reduced real value of their debts These wealth transfers between borrowers and lenders did not directly affect total wealth but such arbitrary and unexpected redistributions may have interfered significantly with the efficient functioning of national and international credit markets. Lenders having ex- perienced losses likely became less willing to extend credit unless compensated for the uncertainty about future inflation. The borrowers most willing to continue to borrow at higher nominal rates implicitly assumed continued high future inflation With disinflation in the 1980s the situation of the 1970s was reversed. Borrowers experienced capital losses and lenders realized gains as the real cost of credit rose above what had been anticipated When borrowers could not fulfill their obligations lenders also faced losses. In many cases ( including loans to energy producers agriculture and developing countries ) debt problems were exacerbated by declining relative commodity prices associated with disinflation The general association of wide swings in real interest rates with the process of inflation and disinflation suggests that the high real interest rates and associated difficulties of the 1980s are intimately related to the inflation of the 1970s. In an environment of variable inflation it is more difficult for the public to foresee accurately changes in the inflation rate. Hence the public is likely to base lending borrowing saving and investment decisions on information about future real rates of interest that turns out to be incorrect. The result is unanticipated capital gains and losses that can distort incentives to borrow and lend or save and invest. The prescription to diminish the likelihood of a recurrence of these problems is to avoid policies that contribute to a return of high inflation and therefore to the painful consequences of subsequent disinflation REAL ASSET VALUES AND NET WORTH Wide swings in real asset values have been another important counterpart of the process of inflation and disinflation. Generally tangible assets such as farmland and owner-occupied housing that provide reasonably good hedges against inflation rose substantially in real value during the 1970s. During the 1980s real farmland values have declined and the real value of owner-occupied housing has leveled off. In contrast the real value of financial claims against the productive assets used by nonfarm businesses ( the real value of bonds and equities ) declined during the period of rising inflation and recovered strongly during the period of disinflation These swings in real asset values are reflected in the composition of household net worth as reported in Table Between the third quarter of ( when the inflation rate was still under percent ) and the third quarter of ( just before the second oil price shock and second surge of double-digit inflation ) the ratio of household net worth to GNP declined from percent to percent. Among the components of net worth the value of owner-occupied housing grew more rapidly than GNP while the values of consumer durables noncorporate businesses ( farm and nonfarm ) pension fund and life insurance reserves other financial assets and total household liabilities maintained essentially constant ratios to GNP. Thus the decline in the ratio of the value of household holdings of corporate equities to GNP more than accounted for the decline in the ratio of household net worth to GNP. Indeed the real value of such holdings fell absolutely by $ billion of dollars between the third quarters of and TABLE \ \ Real household assets and liabilities [ Outstanding end of period ] Level1 ( billions of dollars ) Item Percent of real GNP III III II III III II Total assets Owner-occupied housing Consumer durables Other tangible assets Total financial assets Equity in noncorporate businesses : Farm Nonfarm Corporate equities Pensions and life insurance Other financial assets Household net worth Home mortgages Installment and other consumer credit Other liabilities Total liabilities ADDENDUM : Net Federal Government debt2 Deflated by GNP implicit price deflator Debt of Federal Government held by the public less Federal debt held by the Federal Reserve System Note. Data include households personal trusts and nonprofit institutions Sources.- Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Next consider the changes in net worth and its components between the third quarter of and the second quarter of ( each the 14th quarter of its respective expansion ) Real household net worth rose by $ trillion of dollars in just under years exceeding its real gain during the years between and The ratio of household net worth to GNP rose to percent more than recovering the ground lost between and Among the components consumer durables maintained a constant ratio to GNP The ratio of owner-occupied housing to GNP declined modestly but remained above that recorded in The real value of equity in noncorporate farm business fell absolutely and as a share of GNP. Liabilities grew more rapidly than GNP but so did total assets. The value of financial assets primarily representing claims on nonfarm business ( equity in nonfarm noncorporate business corporate equi- ties pension and life insurance reserves and other financial assets ) all grew significantly more rapidly than GNP. The combined increase in the real value of these financial assets exceeded the gain in real household net worth To some extent gains in the real value of holdings of these financial assets reflected household saving and business retained earnings However a substantial part of these gains was due to increases in the real market value of existing financial claims against nonfarm business. These capital gains reflect substantial increases in the real value of the existing stock of productive capital employed by nonfarm business. Thus the reversal of the earlier downward movement in the real value of claims on business enterprises played the key role in the recent growth of real household net worth and in the recovery of the ratio of net worth to GNP. As will be discussed below this gain in real household net worth has implications for the recent behavior of household consumption and saving The nature and source of this gain also has potentially important implications for business investment. One prominent theory of business investment holds that when the market value of claims against existing businesses is high relative to the cost of new investment there is a strong incentive for further business investment. According to this theory therefore the combination of strong gains in the real value of financial claims against nonfarm businesses with the recent low relative price of capital goods ( discussed earlier in this chapter ) implies the likelihood of renewed strength of business investment DEBT AND SAVING In the second quarter of the ratio of household debt to disposable personal income was at a postwar high of percent. The ratio of total consumer debt to disposable personal income was also at a postwar high. Over the years of the current expansion the personal saving rate ( the ratio of personal saving to disposable personal income ) has averaged only percent versus a postwar average of percent. In the personal saving rate was only percent the lowest personal saving rate since The concern is often expressed that with high levels of debt and low saving rates households may not be able to sustain the growth of consumption spending that has been the mainstay of the current expansion. Even more worrisome in the event of an economic downturn households might be forced to cut back sharply on consumption and difficulties might arise for the financial system if debtors could not meet their financial obligations in a timely manner Although these concerns have merit especially for some heavily indebted households their importance for the general economy should not be exaggerated. Real household net worth the excess of the real value of household assets over the real value of household liabilities has been growing strongly. The current ratio of household net worth to GNP or to disposable personal income is high by the standards of the 1970s. For the aggregate of all U.S. households increased borrowing over the past years has in effect financed increased gross asset holdings rather than increased consumption. For the reverse to be true real household net worth would need to have fallen rather than risen both absolutely and relative to GNP and disposable personal income. The fact that some of the growth of real household net worth has been accounted for by nonprofit institutions somewhat diminishes but does not overturn the force of this point In assessing saving behavior it is important to take account of business saving from retained earnings and depreciation that is not counted as part of personal saving but is part of private saving and of national saving. During this expansion gross business saving has averaged percent of GNP exceeding the postwar average of percent. The ratio of gross private saving ( personal saving plus gross business saving ) to GNP in this expansion has averaged percent versus a postwar average of percent Further in assessing private saving behavior it is important to take account of significant changes in real household net worth. Studies have shown that at a given level of disposable personal income higher household net worth induces higher consumption spending Alternatively it might be that when households enjoy gains in net worth due to increases in the value of assets they already own they decide to save less of their income. Either story fits reasonably well with the recent experience of large gains in real household net worth strong growth of real consumption expenditures and a low personal saving rate Some potential remains for further capital gains on existing productive assets. For example the ratio of the New York Stock Exchange Common Stock Price Index to the GNP implicit price deflator increased percent between and but is still below the peaks recorded in the 1960s. However much of the recovery of real asset values due to the decline in inflationary expectations and renewed optimism in future U.S. economic performance may already have been realized. Moreover in the 1950s and 1960s when households enjoyed significant capital gains on equity holdings and the ratio of net worth to disposable personal income was as high as it is now the personal saving rate was above levels recorded recently At some point therefore the measured rate of personal saving will probably need to rise above its level to maintain strong gains in real household net worth. This suggests that while growth of con- sumer spending can continue to make significant contributions to total demand growth at some point real consumer spending will need to grow less rapidly than real disposable personal income and real GNP. The economic projections discussed at the end of this chapter take account of these likely developments PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND REAL PER CAPITA GNP Productivity growth is the main determinant of the economy 's long-run capacity to generate increases in real living standards as measured by the growth of real per capita GNP. When labor productivity ( output per hour ) was growing at a relatively strong percent annual rate between the cyclical peak in and the cyclical peak in real per capita GNP grew at a relatively strong percent annual rate. However as reported in Table when the growth rate of labor productivity fell after so did the growth rate of real per capita GNP TABLE GNP productivity and employment measures [ Average annual percent change ] Period Real per capita GNP Real GNP Employmenttotal population ratio2 Labor productivity1 IV to IV IV to III III to III Output per hour of all persons engaged in the business sector Ratio of business sector employment to population including Armed Forces overseas Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Factors other than labor productivity growth also influence growth of real per capita GNP and hence growth of real living standards The broadest aggregate for which labor productivity is measured is the business sector of the economy which currently accounts for about percent of real GNP. Changes in the relative size of the business sector affect the relationship between growth of measured labor productivity and growth of real per capita GNP. This relationship is also affected by changes in average hours worked and in the ratio of people employed to the total population. In particular since the growth rate of the ratio of employment to total population has exceeded the rate of decline of average hours worked. This has contributed to stronger growth of real per capita GNP than of labor productivity. Demographic developments suggest however that this source of growth of real per capita GNP will not be much stronger over the next decade than it has been over the past decade. Hence prospects for maintaining the growth rate of real per capita GNP and for securing increases in this measure of the growth of real living standards depend critically on maintaining and strengthening growth of labor productivity LABOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH Labor productivity is influenced by several important factors : the human capital of the labor force ( education training experience and skill ) ; the amount of physical capital land and other resources available to cooperate with labor in the production of goods and services ; and the technical efficiency of production processes. In the short run labor productivity is also affected by cyclical fluctuations because businesses typically cut output more than employment during recessions and achieve large increases in output without comparable increases in employment during strong expansions. To assess underlying trends in labor productivity it is useful to abstract from these cyclical influences. This calculation is provided in Table by comparing periods whose endpoints correspond to business cycle peaks ( treating the third quarter of as an end point ) TABLE Labor productivity growth rates by sector [ Average annual percent change ] Business sector Nonfarm Period Farm Total Manufacturing Total Nonmanufacturing IV to IV IV to III III to III Postwar trend : IV to III Note. Data are for output per hour of all persons Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Several factors contributed to the slowdown in labor productivity growth that began in the early 1970s. Entry into the labor force of large numbers of new workers who on average were less skilled and less experienced than existing workers tended to depress labor productivity. Growth of capital-labor ratios in the private business sector slowed somewhat during the 1970s. Large increases in the price of energy in the middle and late 1970s diminished the economic efficiency of much existing capital and required that new investment and research and development be directed toward improving energy efficiency The general rate of technological advance also appears to have slowed since the early 1970s. Although difficult to measure this slowdown in technological progress seems to have affected most industrial countries. Other factors such as slower growth of real outlays for research and development and the rising costs of regulatory compliance have also been linked to the decline in productivity growth during the 1970s. Most economists conclude however that a large portion of the decline in productivity growth remains unexplained except by a decline in technological progress that is difficult to attribute to any identifiable source SECTORAL PRODUCTIVITY PERFORMANCE In the current business cycle the labor productivity growth in both total business and in nonfarm business has picked up from the preceding two cycles but remains well below the postwar average. In manufacturing the increase in labor productivity growth has been much more dramatic. Over the past years the annual rate of labor productivity growth in manufacturing has been percent above the postwar average and is more than double the rate of increase recorded in the previous two cycles Labor productivity growth in manufacturing is critical for the international competitiveness of the U.S. economy because exports and imports of manufactures dominate U.S. trade. As is discussed in Chapter weak productivity growth is not the cause of the deterioration of the international competitive position of U.S. manufacturing although stronger productivity growth could always help improve this position. In fact the combination of strong labor productivity growth and restrained wage growth ( in comparison with productivity and wage developments in other leading industrial countries ) has reduced the relative unit labor costs of U.S. manufacturers a fact that has been concealed until recently by the strong appreciation of the U.S. dollar between and early During the current cycle productivity growth remained near zero in nonfarm business outside manufacturing. Although no official estimates are published very sluggish productivity growth in service-producing industries ( which produce nearly percent of real GDP of nonfarm nonmanufacturing industries ) must primarily account for this poor performance. The addition of large numbers of younger less-experienced less-skilled workers to service sector employment probably contributed to sluggish productivity growth in this sector Although many employees in service sector industries ( such as health care and banking and finance ) are high-skill high-wage workers wage rates in service sector industries are generally below average wage rates in manufacturing indicating that skill levels are also lower. Specifically wage rates are relatively low in the two service sector industries ( retail trade and personal and business services ) that have recorded the strongest employment gains since Problems in measuring productivity in service-producing industries may be partly responsible for low measured productivity growth in this sector. To measure productivity growth it is necessary to divide increases in the nominal value of an industry 's product into increases in price and quantity. It is difficult to make this distinction when the composition and quality of an industry 's output is changing particularly for service-producing industries where no easy way exists to define and measure a unit of output of constant quality. Indeed for some service industries such as certain types of medical care and private education and research it is assumed that labor productivity growth is zero. There is little evidence however that the slowdown in measured service-sector productivity growth since the early 1970s is attributable to more severe measurement problems. Nevertheless it should be recognized that a shift of output toward lower productivity service industries would reduce measured productivity growth for all business PROSPECTS AND POLICIES FOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH Slower measured labor productivity growth since mid-1984 relative to that recorded earlier in this expansion probably partly reflects the usual cyclical effect of slower output growth on productivity growth. If real output growth accelerates in accord with Administration projections ( discussed in the next section ) then productivity growth should increase. Thus the macroeconomic developments and policies that underlie the Administration 's forecast of moderately stronger real GNP growth are critical for near-term prospects for stronger productivity growth Four important developments also seem likely to contribute to stronger long-term productivity growth. First as the labor force on average grows older and more experienced over the next years labor productivity is likely to advance more rapidly. Second the recent decline in energy prices should allow for some labor productivity improvement especially in energy-intensive industries. Third expenditures on research and development which declined as a share of GNP in the 1970s have been increasing since and should contribute to a higher rate of technological progress. Fourth as is discussed in Chapter tax reform may have a small negative effect on the long-run capital stock which would tend to depress labor productivity. However tax reform will also reduce distortions affecting the distribution of capital among productive activities. A more efficient distribution of capital should contribute to higher productivity Productivity can be promoted by avoiding policies that inhibit the efficient functioning of private businesses and competitive markets For example productivity is impeded by subsidies that keep unprofitable and inefficient firms in business at the expense of more profitable and efficient firms that must ultimately finance such subsidies This applies not only to direct subsidies but also to tax subsidies and to protectionist measures that provide subsidies by forcing consumers to pay higher prices. Particularly troublesome are protectionist measures applied to intermediate products. They increase production costs and diminish economic efficiency for industries that use these products injuring their ability to compete with foreign firms as is discussed further in Chapter Government can also contribute to stronger productivity growth by eliminating or reducing burdensome and inappropriate regulation. A number of initiatives in this area are discussed in Chapter Government has a critical role to play in education which equips individuals with the basic knowledge and skills to be productive workers and lays the basis for much scientific and technical advance The key governmental responsibility in education is that of State and local governments that fund and operate most of the Nation 's primary and secondary schools as well as its public colleges and universities. In this regard it is noteworthy that standardized measures of educational performance in the Nation 's primary and secondary schools have been improving for about the past years following a long period of decline during the 1960s and 1970s. Improved incentives for educational performance through enhanced merit pay for teachers might contribute to these developments. Increased parental influence over school performance through tuition voucher systems also might contribute to this end The Federal Government has an important role in funding basic scientific research. Such research can contribute to technological advance in the longer term. However its benefits are often too diffuse and difficult to profit from for it to be undertaken by private business Included in this category are basic and some applied research in biomedicine that not only contribute directly to human welfare but also help to improve the health component of human capital The ultimate objective of policies to improve productivity is to enhance human welfare and increase real living standards. Government policies serve these objectives by encouraging investment in human and physical capital improvement of productive technology and allocation of resources to their highest valued uses. The President will soon present initiatives to enhance the Federal Government 's contribution in these areas. This will aid in the reversal that is already under way of the forces that previously limited productivity growth There is good reason to believe that rising labor productivity and a falling unemployment rate will further raise real per capita GNP and the real living standards of Americans in and beyond ECONOMIC POLICIES AND OUTLOOK The future performance of the U.S. economy depends primarily on the productive activities of individuals and businesses. Government policies enhance economic performance by allowing the private enterprise system to function as freely as possible by maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment by providing essential public goods and services and support for the needy and by correcting externalities distortions and deficiencies in the operation of the economic system. Policies that serve these vital purposes are examined throughout this Report. Two broad areas of macroeconomic policy monetary policy and fiscal policy require specific discussion before presenting the Administration 's economic projections FINANCIAL DEREGULATION VELOCITY AND MONETARY POLICY The movements in real interest rates inflation and asset prices as well as structural and regulatory changes in the financial services industry have altered the institutional environment in which monetary policy is conducted. Apparently as a result of both deregulation and disinflation in the 1980s the velocity of money has behaved unusually and measures of the monetary aggregates that historically have been most reliable have become less dependable guides to monetary policy. The velocity of money is the ratio of nominal GNP to the money supply. If velocity behavior is reasonably predictable then control of monetary aggregates is a useful approach to the conduct of monetary policy and measures of the monetary aggregates can provide important information about the likely economic impact of monetary policy. The unusual behavior of velocity and the monetary aggregates in recent years implies increased uncertainty about the meaning and appropriateness of a given rate of money growth With higher inflation and nominal interest rates in the 1970s the effectiveness of interest rate ceilings and other restrictions on deposits was gradually eroded. In many cases competitive market forces found ways to circumvent these regulations and the effects of existing regulations were widely perceived as inequitable or destabilizing In response the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of and the Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of mandated elimination of most of the regulations on deposit interest rates that had been in place since the 1930s. The deregulation of deposit interest rates was largely completed in when the remaining regulations on consumer-owned transactions accounts were removed in January and the interest rate ceiling on passbook savings accounts was removed in March. Depository institutions are now free to pay market-determined rates on all consumer-owned deposits and no legal restrictions remain on the maturity or minimum size of such deposits These and previous regulatory changes as well as shifts in consumer preferences in response to changes in inflation and interest rates have altered the composition of the monetary aggregates. For example interest-bearing transactions deposits accounted for less than percent of Ml ( currency plus transactions deposits ) before ; since then interest-bearing transactions deposits have grown to nearly one-third of M1 while non-interest-bearing demand deposits have declined from their historical share of to percent of Ml to approximately percent at the end of Similarly the composition of the broader monetary aggregate M2 has been affected by the availability of interest-bearing transactions deposits and the relaxation of interest rate ceilings on time deposits. Passbook savings deposits for example accounted for more than one-half of M2 in the mid-1960s but for only about percent of M2 by the end of The Behavior of Velocity As illustrated in Chart for most of the postwar period until recently the growth of Ml velocity has been reasonably stable. On a quarter-to-quarter basis of course Ml velocity has always experienced sizable fluctuations and Ml velocity historically has shown a cyclical component. Nevertheless over longer periods Ml velocity has not deviated very far from its long-term trend. However in the 1980s and particularly since the cyclical trough of Ml velocity has fallen markedly below its postwar growth path. For the broader monetary aggregates velocity was typically less stable than Ml velocity earlier in the postwar period and a sharp downturn in velocity for these broader aggregates has also occurred in the 1980s The recent aberrant behavior of velocity raises important questions for the conduct of monetary policy. Is the behavior of velocity in the 1980s evidence of a permanent breakdown of any reliable relationship between money and income growth ? Or is that basic relationship intact with its characteristics altered ( temporarily or permanently ) by deregulation of bank deposits declining inflation and interest rates or some combination of the two ? If so can a measure of the money supply be devised that preserves a reliable relationship between it and GNP growth ? Although considerable empirical research has investigated these and related questions it offers no completely satisfactory explanation of recent velocity behavior. However some inferences can be drawn from the evidence currently available Chart Velocity of M1 Ratio of Nominal GNP to M1 Ratio _ Trend Fit IV Peak to III Peak ( Percent at Annual Rate ) imiiiimiiiimiiiimiii ^ Sources : Department of Commerce and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The available evidence does not justify the conclusion that the basic money-income relationship has become permanently unreliable To the contrary some researchers have specified stable demand for money functions or expressions for velocity that are robust to changes in income variables interest rate variables and sample periods. For example recent empirical research identifies a break in the trend growth of velocity in the third quarter of and once that change is accounted for statistically the relationship is stable It is much less clear however what caused the shift in the trend of velocity. The change in the trend of velocity apparently occurred too late to be attributable to the change in Federal Reserve operating procedures. Similarly the shift is not closely associated in time with increased volatility of interest rates. Also the evidence suggests that the record trade deficits of the 1980s have contributed little to the observed decline in velocity A number of empirical studies indicate that the decline in Ml velocity in the 1980s is not primarily a reflection of shifts of funds into Ml induced by the introduction of new types of deposit accounts This view is supported by the fact that a similar shift in the trend growth of velocity is observed if velocity is calculated using either currency held by the public or the monetary base. In addition if velocity is measured using a monetary aggregate that excludes the interest-bearing accounts now included in Ml some evidence remains of a decline in velocity albeit a less steep decline. Moreover even though M2 would be expected to be less distorted by financial deregulation M2 velocity has also behaved atypically during the 1980s although its aberration has been less pronounced than that for Ml It appears that inclusion of interest-bearing deposits in Ml has increased the interest-elasticity of the demand for money. With an increased interest-elasticity declining interest rates of the past years would explain more of the decline in velocity than can be explained with lower interest-elasticities. It is also possible that the decline in expected inflation in recent years has exerted additional downward pressure on velocity growth beyond the effect of expected inflation on interest rates. Much of the empirical evidence available at this time suggests that an increased interest-elasticity of the demand for money in combination with the fall in interest and inflation rates may well in time provide the best explanation of the unusual velocity behavior of the 1980s Finally the demand for money balances is presumably affected by the spread between market interest rates and those paid on deposits After a long history of legal restrictions on deposit interest rates these rates have been relatively slow to adjust to changing market conditions since the restrictions were removed. It is therefore plausible that part of the Ml growth that occurred in and is related to declines in market interest rates that reduced the opportunity cost of holding Ml balances. Over time additional changes in market rates relative to deposit rates would be expected to affect the demand for Ml. But with only limited experience in a deregulated environment it is difficult to predict how deposit rates will be adjusted to changes in market interest rates and how the public will respond to changes in relative interest rates Federal Reserve Policy Two opposing types of risk are inherent in the conduct of monetary policy. One risk is that monetary policy might be too expansionary and that excess monetary growth will ultimately generate higher inflation and the subsequent need to disinflate. The second risk is that inadequate monetary growth might constrain the growth of real economic activity. While the balancing of these two types of risk is never easy the task has been made more difficult in recent years by the unusual pattern of velocity behavior which reflects a less reliable relation between money and nominal GNP growth In monetary policy was influenced by a wide range of economic and financial market developments. In the first months of market interest rates declined substantially as the oil price declines and other price developments had favorable effects on the near-term outlook for inflation. In this period the Federal Reserve Board reduced the discount rate twice in order to realign it with lower market rates. Money growth was relatively modest early in the year as M1 expanded along the upper bound of its target range and the broader aggregates were within or below their prescribed ranges As evidence of economic weakness emerged in the second quarter and inflation remained subdued the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) voted in July to ease reserve conditions and the Federal Reserve Board approved another cut in the discount rate again largely in response to additional downward movements in market interest rates that had occurred in June. Even though Ml growth accelerated rapidly beginning in the spring these accommodative policy actions were judged appropriate in light of the fact that the broader monetary aggregates remained within their target ranges and uncertainty continued about the reliability of the linkage between Ml and nominal income growth Similar policy actions were adopted again in August as economic activity continued to appear sluggish and the broader aggregates still grew at moderate rates despite very rapid Ml growth. Because each of the discount rate cuts in occurred after general declines in market interest rates the discount rate followed rather than led interest rate movements. However following the April and August discount rate cuts market interest rates generally increased. In addition in the months immediately following the August discount rate cut long-term interest rates rose both absolutely and relative to shortterm rates resulting in a steepening of the yield curve. This illustrates the limitations on the capacity of discount rate cuts to secure lasting reductions in market interest rates By the summer of the broader monetary aggregates were also growing more rapidly and M2 reached the upper bound of its target range in August. The FOMC appeared to become more concerned about the inflationary potential of money growth a concern that had been apparently discounted earlier in the year when Ml alone was growing rapidly. Implicit in these decisions was the judgment that with the uncertainty about Ml velocity the broader monetary aggregates were more reliable guides to monetary policy than Ml. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Ml growth averaged more than percent well above the Federal Reserve 's target range of to percent. M2 growth from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of was just at the upper bound of its to percent target range Although the full consequences of monetary policy actions are often not felt for more than a year afterwards the record in suggests that the Federal Reserve did a reasonably good job in balancing the risk of inadequate money growth against the long-term inflationary risk of too much money creation. As the economy expanded more slowly than expected during the year and inflation continued to be moderate the Federal Reserve allowed Ml growth to exceed its predefined target range and relied more heavily on a broader range of economic data. Further depreciation of the dollar in was apparently not interpreted as a signal of the need for slower money growth probably because real dollar depreciation was widely regarded as desirable to improve U.S. international competitiveness and because the lower dollar had little visible effect on the inflation rate. In the context of moderate real growth very low inflation and falling inflation expectations and given the uncertainty about the behavior of velocity the de-emphasis of Ml in favor of other variables to gauge the conduct of monetary policy appears to have been an appropriate judgment Despite weaker-than-expected economic growth in no evidence suggests that the Federal Reserve has erred on the side of monetary restriction. Based on money growth interest rates or exchange rates it is not reasonable to conclude that monetary policy was " too tight " in The failure of the real economy to perform as well as most forecasters had predicted is clearly related to sectoral problems and is not the result of inadequate monetary expansion. In particular the adverse effects on the energy sector of the oil price declines the further deterioration of the trade balance and the continued stress in the agricultural sector together appear to have limited economic growth in One can not dismiss the fact however that by historical standards Ml growth in was high. It substantially exceeded the Federal Reserve 's own target range as well as most analysts ' a priori views of appropriate money growth. Until a more reliable relationship between Ml and nominal income growth is reestablished however the implications of this rapid Ml growth remain uncertain. Given the various factors discussed above that appear to be working to alter at least temporarily the relationship between money and GNP growth rates of monetary expansion that would have previously implied a resurgence of inflation appear to have been necessary in recent years to satisfy an increase in the demand for real money balances relative to income. Although the nature of the change in velocity behavior is not fully understood at this time no plausible assessment of the change in velocity growth would imply a permanent need for such rapid money growth. Analysts agree that at some point the rate of monetary growth must be reduced if the ultimate goal of price stability is to be achieved. The difficult policy issue is one of timing to assess when sufficient money growth has been provided to satisfy increased demand for money balances and to determine the extent to which money growth should be decelerated From the outset the Administration has emphasized the importance of promoting sustainable real economic growth within an environment of long-run price stability. With a continuation of slower than expected economic growth moderate inflation and serious stress in some sectors of the economy the dangers of a monetary restriction of economic activity are real and important. Given the economic dislocation associated with the rise of inflation in the 1970s and its reduction in the Nation also can not afford to ignore the dangers of allowing a reacceleration of inflation and the inevitable economic cost of disinflation THE MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF DEFICIT REDUCTION In fiscal the Federal deficit amounted to percent of GNP Under the provisions of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of commonly referred to as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ( GRH ) the deficit is scheduled to decline gradually to zero by fiscal As outlined in the President 's budget it is assumed that deficit reduction will be achieved primarily through restraining Federal spending not by raising taxes. In the long run this approach to deficit reduction should contribute to economic growth by freeing resources that would have been used by the Federal Government for more efficient use by the private sector. Also by avoiding tax increases this approach protects private incentives to work save and invest The analysis of the prospects for reducing the Federal deficit presented in Chapter of this Report provides several facts relevant for assessing the probable short-term macroeconomic effects of deficit reduction. First net interest expense of the Federal Government as a share of GNP will decline by percentage point implying an equal reduction in the Federal deficit as a share of GNP. This decline in net interest expense will occur provided that the economy grows and interest rates decline in accord with the Administration 's projections and provided that growth of the stock of Federal debt is slowed by reducing the Federal deficit in accord with the GRH targets. Second Federal receipts as a share of GNP are projected to rise by of a percentage point between fiscal years and A small part of this rise is due to already scheduled increases in social security pay- roll taxes but most is due to the expected revenue benefits of continued economic growth. Third excluding net interest expense and social security benefits ( which are projected to maintain approximately a constant share of GNP ) the composite of all other Federal spending amounted to $ billion in fiscal or percent of GNP. If real spending on this composite stayed constant at fiscal levels projected real economic growth between fiscal years and would reduce the share of such spending in GNP by percentage points It is plausible to suppose that these three sources of deficit reduction which jointly account for percent of the required reduction in the Federal deficit as a share of GNP will not generate any significant short-run negative macroeconomic effects. Reaching the GRH target of a balanced budget by fiscal however will require more than holding constant real government spending on the composite that excludes net interest and social security benefits. It will also require a cut of about $ billion in real spending from this composite. As is discussed in Chapter achieving such real expenditure reductions while providing for increased real Federal spending in critical areas of national need will require hard political choices However this magnitude of real Federal spending cuts spread over several years should not have serious adverse consequences for overall economic activity Further it should be recognized that at some time the Federal deficit must be reduced as a share of GNP. The potential negative macroeconomic consequences of deficit reduction are minimized by achieving deficit reduction gradually when other economic forces appear likely to sustain economic expansion. As improved U.S. international competitiveness contributes to a smaller trade deficit the likelihood increases that resources that might otherwise be used to satisfy rising Federal expenditures will find other uses. A noninflationary monetary policy that fosters permanent reduction in interest rates also eases the task of deficit reduction by contributing to lower net interest expense for the Federal Government ECONOMIC FORECAST FOR The Administration forecasts a strengthening of economic growth with continued moderate inflation in The impediments to economic growth that brought past expansions to a halt are not evident : inflation and interest rates remain low inventory stocks are relatively lean and resource constraints and production capacity pressures are absent. Table summarizes key aspects of the Administration 's forecast for The Administration 's estimate of real GNP growth this year is percent measured fourth quarter to fourth quarter compared with a growth rate of percent in For strong growth in employment is forecast to continue and the total unemployment rate is predicted to be percent in the fourth quarter. An improved balance of trade an increase in inventory investment and cessation of the economic deterioration caused by the drop in oil prices should contribute to stronger growth in The inflation rate in is forecast to return to the to percent range of recent years before the decline in oil prices temporarily depressed the inflation rate in Specifically the GNP deflator is forecast to rise at a percent annual rate during after a percent rate of increase during During the CPI is expected to increase at a slightly faster rate than the GNP implicit price deflator reversing the pattern in This is because the CPI embodies import prices more directly than does the GNP implicit price deflator and import prices are expected to rise more rapidly than domestic prices because of the continuing effects of depreciation of the dollar TABLE Economic outlook for forecast Item Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases of goods and services State and local purchases of goods and services Real gross national product.. GNP implicit price deflator Compensation per hour2 Output per hour2 Fourth quarter level Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons ; fourth quarter estimated Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers The Administration 's forecast embodies the following assessments for the four main components of GNP : consumption investment government spending and net exports. First growth of real consumption spending is forecast to slow from the percent annual growth rate in but is still expected to make a substantial contribution to real GNP growth in As discussed earlier a rapid increase and high level of real household net worth tend to raise con- sumption spending. However the relatively low personal saving rate in suggests that households may wish to hold growth of consumption spending below that of disposable personal income in order to restore personal saving rates to more normal levels. Moreover the boost to real disposable personal income and hence to real consumption spending from the sharp decline in oil prices in is unlikely to be repeated in Second real investment is expected to strengthen because of gains in nonresidential fixed investment and inventory investment despite a substantial slowdown in residential investment growth. Real nonresidential fixed investment fell in partly because of the problems of the oil and gas industry and perhaps also because of some shortrun adverse effects of the tax reform process. Lower interest rates rising corporate profits stronger economic growth and ( as previously explained ) a high ratio of the market value of financial claims for ownership of business enterprises to the price of capital goods should contribute to some strengthening of real nonresidential fixed investment in Real residential investment however seems unlikely to repeat the strong growth performance of In particular high vacancy rates and the effects of tax reform may inhibit growth of multifamily housing construction. Concerning inventory investment it is noteworthy that manufacturing inventories have generally been falling for more than a year and a half and the inventory-sales ratio is currently low for other sectors as well. With continued growth of domestic sales and improvement in net exports producers should begin accumulating inventories at a faster pace Third given their relatively strong budget positions continued modest growth of real spending by State and local governments seems probable. In contrast the program to reduce the Federal fiscal deficit should lead to a modest reduction in real Federal purchases of goods and services in Fourth after deducting percent from economic growth in real net exports are expected to contribute a similar amount to growth in The falling dollar appears finally to be influencing the prices of non-oil imports. The fixed-weighted price index for non-oil imports rose percent during and further increases are expected in Higher relative prices for goods imported into the United States and lower relative prices of U.S. exports in foreign markets should improve U.S. net exports A special factor that should aid real GNP growth in is the end of the decline of production and investment in the domestic oil and gas industry. Following the oil price drop in early drilling operations for gas and oil plummeted pulling down nonresidential fixed investment for most of the year. If oil prices remain near year- end levels declining activity in the domestic oil and gas industry should not continue to detract from real GNP growth in While the direct effects of lower oil prices were largely completely absorbed by the economy in secondary benefits may still be forthcoming ECONOMIC PROJECTIONS FOR The Administration 's longer term economic projections represent expected trends and should not be interpreted as year-to-year forecasts. They reflect the long-run economic policy goals of the Administration and long-run trends in the economy. Specifically it is assumed that the incentives for economic activity embodied in the reduced marginal tax rates contained in the Tax Reform Act of are preserved and that further gains are made in reducing government spending and the burden of government regulation. Also the Federal Reserve is assumed to continue a policy that is both consistent with gradual achievement of the long-term goal of price stability and not so restrictive as to impair economic growth The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of requires the Economic Report of The President together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers to include an Investment Policy Report and review progress in achieving goals specified in the Act. The projections for through summarized in Table constitute the " ...annual numerical goals for employment and unemployment production real income productivity and prices... " prescribed by this Act. The projections go far in achieving the goals specified in the Act for unemployment and inflation while achieving many other aims of the legislation such as balanced growth reduced Federal spending adequate productivity growth an improved trade balance and increased competitiveness of agriculture business and industry. Although the goal of percent unemployment specified in the legislation is not attained by this does not indicate a lack of commitment to achieving full employment. On the contrary the Administration is dedicated to bringing about full employment and stable prices by creating an environment conducive to healthy and sustained economic growth. There are no quick fixes to reach the legislation 's stated goals ; government best serves these goals by allowing private enterprise to flourish thereby generating long-term growth and full utilization of resources in a noninflationary environment Specifically the Administration 's economic projections detailed in Table show real GNP growth rising to percent in and declining slowly to percent in Stronger real growth reflects the long-term benefits of tax reform as well as factors that will improve growth in the current year and carry forward in later years Further improvements in real net exports are expected especially in TABLE Administration economic assumptions [ Calendar years ] item Percent change year to year Real GNP Real compensation per hour1 Output per hour1 Consumer price index2 Annual level Employment ( millions ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Nonfarm business all persons For urban wage earners and clerical workers Includes resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of labor force including Armed Forces Source : Council of Economic Advisers Higher production will lift incomes and consumption and business investment should strengthen further in and beyond Production is projected to grow sufficiently rapidly to lower the unemployment rate to percent by Consistent with gradual achievement of the long-term goal of price stability the inflation rate is projected to decline to percent by Productivity growth is projected to improve from recent levels because of the normal cyclical effect of stronger output growth and because of expected improvements ( discussed earlier ) in the trend rate of growth of labor productivity. Coincident with this improvement in productivity growth increases are expected in real compensation per hour These projections reflect the Administration 's policies to promote long-term noninflationary growth by encouraging investment in physical and human capital and improvements in productive technology. The Administration believes that creating an economic environment that provides strong incentives for work and production is the best policy for promoting investment and productivity growth. Reducing disparities in the rate of taxation on different economic activities contributes to this result by encouraging resources to be allocated to activities where they can be used most productively. Chapter describes how the Tax Reform Act of promotes these goals Also as is discussed in Chapter Federal spending restraint will free resources to be invested more productively to support growing domestic and foreign demands for U.S. products. Chapters and describe policies to improve the U.S. trade balance UNDERLYING TRENDS IN ECONOMIC GROWTH Long-run growth in the economy is governed by expansion in the economy 's capacity to produce. Growth in the working-age population in labor force participation rates and in output per person all play a role in this expansion. Table outlines the contributions to growth of these factors for historical periods beginning and ending at cyclical peaks for the current cycle so far and for the projection period. The table presents a simple progression of steps from population growth to GNP growth TABLE Accounting for growth in real GNP [ Average annual percent change ] IV to III Item IV to III III to IV IV i to IV GROWTH IN : ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUSCivilian labor force participation rate ) EQUALS- Civilian labor force ) PLUS : Civilian employment rate ) EQUALS : Civilian employment ) PLUS : Nonfarm business employment as share of civilian employment ) EQUALS- Nonfarm business employment ) PLUS * Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) _1 ) EQUALS : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) PLUSOutput per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business output ) LESSNonfarm business output as share of real GNP ) EQUALS- Real GNP Data for IV are preliminary Note. Based on seasonally adjusted data. Detail may not add to totals due to rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers First the sum of population growth and growth in the labor force participation rate determines growth in the labor force. While growth of the adult population has been slowing for some time as the last of the baby-boom generation passes into working age the participation rate continues to climb. Continued growth in the participation rate of women and the incentives for increased work effort provided by tax reform imply growth of the labor force well into the 1990s. A growing labor force coupled with further reductions in the unemployment rate ( represented by increases in the employment rate in the table ) determine employment growth for that is expected to match the experience In order to use published productivity figures employment is adjusted to cover nonfarm business only and then translated into growth in total hours worked. The addition of growth in total hours and output per hour ( labor productivity ) determines growth in nonfarm business output. Recently productivity gains in sectors other than manufacturing have been disappointing. Expectations of future gains although above recent productivity growth have been scaled back somewhat from previous projections. Productivity is projected to increase at approximately percent on average over the period up of a percentage point from rates experienced in the current cycle to date. After adjustment for the stronger relative rate of growth of the nonfarm business sector the growth rate of real GNP is given in the last line of Table The calculations in the table indicate that the projected improvement in productivity growth ( output per hour ) from to percent per year is the key to stronger real GNP growth and to the gains in real living standards that this growth will generate CONCLUSION Although was not an outstanding year in terms of real GNP growth the economic expansion proceeded on a broad front through its fourth year and important progress was made in expanding employment and reducing inflation and interest rates. The problems that kept overall growth below expectations were largely sectoral : a decline in world oil prices that depressed employment and investment in the domestic oil and gas industry ; continued difficulties in U.S. agriculture ; and a further deterioration of the U.S. trade balance. Nowhere evident were the problems that usually portend the end of expansions. Rather the economic developments of affirm that the destructive sequence of progressively rising inflation rates and interest rates interrupted by severe recessions has been broken. The foundation for sustainable growth of production and employment accompanied by gradually declining inflation and unemployment has been strengthened For the future real economic growth is projected to accelerate. Inflation is projected to resume its gradual decline after a modest upturn because of erosion of the temporary effects of the recent oil price decline. Continuation of stable macroeconomic policies is essential to realizing these projections and to avoiding cycles of inflation and disinflation that are associated with unnecessary swings in relative prices real interest rates and real asset values and ultimately with many of the structural and sectoral problems that still beset the U.S. economy. In particular monetary policy faces a difficult task in a period when the traditional guideposts for its conduct have become less reliable. It must continue to tread cautiously between the risk of inadequate money and credit creation that would jeopardize economic expansion in the short run and the risk of excessive monetary growth that would reignite inflation and seriously damage economic performance in the long run Ultimately the long-run growth rate of the economy and the growth of real living standards depend primarily on the productivity of individuals and businesses operating in the private sector. As discussed here and in later chapters of this Report government has an important role to play in enhancing the efficiency and productivity of the economic system. Its principal contribution is to maintain a stable macroeconomic environment and to allow the natural incentives of the flexible private enterprise system to stimulate individuals and businesses to increase the quantity and enhance the quality of productive resources to improve the efficiency of production processes and to deploy the Nation 's resources to their highest valued uses CHAPTER Budget Control and Tax Reform GOVERNMENT TAX AND EXPENDITURE POLICIES strongly influence the economy 's long-run performance. Government-provided goods and services improve economic performance if their value exceeds their cost as measured by the value of the private goods and services they displace. The cost of government-provided goods and services in turn depends on the efficiency of the tax system. An efficient tax system entails low and unvarying marginal tax rates that have minimal effects on private investment and consumption choices The Administration is committed to a policy of restructuring Federal fiscal activities to serve the national interest more effectively Tax reform the Administration 's number one domestic priority for the past several years has been accomplished. The Tax Reform Act of significantly lowers tax rates and will decrease tax-induced distortions in private economic decisions. Progress has also been made in Federal spending restraint. The upward trend in Federal Government expenditures as a share of gross national product ( GNP ) which had persisted for most of two decades was reversed in For the first time since real Federal Government expenditure is projected to fall in fiscal Further spending restraint however will be necessary to achieve the future deficit targets set in the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of ( popularly known as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ) targets to which the Administration is firmly committed This chapter surveys both the Administration 's accomplishments and its future agenda concerning the restructuring of Federal fiscal activities. The chapter begins with a discussion of the Federal budget deficit the need for Federal spending restraint and proposed changes in the budgetary process. It argues that the objective of balancing the budget by can be achieved without a general tax increase and without sacrificing programs essential to the national interest. This task will require uncompromising efforts to eliminate all unnecessary Federal spending efforts that could be aided by appropriate reforms of the budgetary process. The chapter then turns to an assessment of the economic effects of the Tax Reform Act of It finds that tax reform while entailing minor transition costs significantly improves the economy 's long-run economic performance. Specifically it is estimated that national net output of goods and services increases approximately percent because of the longrun consequences of tax reform. In this would have amounted to an increase of approximately $ in the income of the average American family SPENDING RESTRAINT AND DEFICIT REDUCTION The current economic expansion marks the first occasion in the postwar period when Federal deficits have exceeded percent of GNP and when very large deficits have persisted into the third and fourth years of an expansion. At comparable periods during the expansions of the 1960s and 1970s the Federal deficit as a share of GNP was generally less than one-half the level of and The underlying cause of the growing Federal deficit is illustrated in Chart The share of Federal spending in GNP has continued on an upward trend while the secular trend in the share of Federal revenues has remained virtually flat Under the provisions of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings significant deficit reduction will occur in fiscal With moderately good economic performance and absent large new spending initiatives the Office of Management and Budget projects that the Federal deficit will decline by almost $ billion between fiscal and fiscal equivalent to more than a full percentage point of GNP. The Administration 's proposed budget for provides for another important step in the process of deficit reduction to the target of $ billion along a path to reach a balanced Federal budget by Five critical reasons explain why this process of deficit reduction must continue and why deficit reduction should be achieved primarily through spending restraint REASONS FOR DEFICIT REDUCTION First persistent large Federal deficits except during periods of severe economic difficulty or extraordinary national need constitute an unfair burden on future generations. The principle that " there is no free lunch " applies to lunches charged on Uncle Sam 's credit card. In the end all Federal spending must be paid for by some form of explicit or disguised taxation. Finance of current expenditures through the issuance of Federal debt merely postpones the inevitable day when the bill for current services ( plus accumulated interest ) must ultimately be paid either through higher taxes or through reduced public services. More specifically interest payments on the Federal debt must ultimately be financed by some combination of re- Chart Federal Outlays and Receipts as Percent of GNP Percent of GNP Outlays/ \ v \ Outlays Trend / ^ ^ \ \ " f > ~ ~ V Receipts n I i i I i i I i I i i i i i i i i I Fiscal Years Note. Data for are estimates Sources : Department of Commerce Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers during the growth of noninterest Federal outlays below the growth of GNP or by higher future taxes relative to GNP. The longer large deficits persist the larger grows the outstanding stock of Federal debt and hence the greater is the ultimate required adjustment in future noninterest outlays or taxes. Thus the choice is not whether to reduce the budget deficit but rather when and by what means Second deficit reduction through spending restraint is essential to preserve the long-term economic benefits of the low marginal tax rates established in the Tax Reform Act of This chapter later analyzes the gains to national income and national welfare from tax reform. These long-run benefits will begin to emerge however only if marginal tax rates are lowered as promised in and only if individuals and businesses believe that these tax rates will not be increased in the future Third persistent large Federal deficits throughout an economic expansion could pose a difficult dilemma for macroeconomic policy in the event of a significant economic downturn. In such a downturn Federal receipts automatically decline and transfer payments expand Either a sharply contractionary fiscal policy would need to be adopted during a recession to prevent a further increase in the Federal deficit or the share of the deficit in GNP would have to be allowed to expand to levels not previously experienced in the United States in peacetime. As is discussed in Chapter there is no reason now to expect a recurrence of the economic difficulties that contributed to the steep recessions of and Nevertheless it would be imprudent to permit the persistence of large Federal deficits throughout an economic expansion in light of the dilemma such deficits could create in the future Fourth reduction of the Federal deficit through spending restraint is an essential component of the strategy to reduce international payments imbalances. Substantial progress has already been made on one component of this strategy exchange-rate realignments that improve the international competitive positions of many U.S. industries and promise significant reductions in the U.S. trade deficit in and beyond. As is discussed in Chapter however reduction of the U.S trade deficit and of the corresponding trade surpluses of other countries also requires that domestic demand in the United States grow more slowly than U.S. GNP and conversely for foreign countries. Simultaneously the United States must improve its national saving/investment balance ( private saving less the sum of private investment and the government deficit ) Reduction of the Federal budget deficit through spending restraint is a key U.S. contribution to achieving these results in a manner consistent with sustainable noninflationary growth of the world economy. Furthermore as discussed in Chapter significant reductions in the trade deficit increase the likelihood that resources that might otherwise be used to meet the demands arising from Federal purchases will shift rapidly to meet the demands of sectors producing exports and import substitutes Fifth deficit reduction through spending restraint is required because Federal spending in many areas remains above levels necessary to provide essential Federal services on an efficient and cost-effective basis. Much has been accomplished during the past years in cutting back inessential ineffective and inefficient Federal programs. Larger cutbacks can and should be made in a number of Federal programs that serve special interests but whose benefits to the American people do not justify the costs imposed on current or future taxpayers. Equally important new spending initiatives should be limited to critical areas of national need in the realm of Federal responsibility Deficit reduction is ultimately an issue of priorities. The long-run benefits of stronger economic growth from the relatively low marginal tax rates provided in the Tax Reform Act of can be pre- served only if the share of Federal spending in GNP is gradually reduced. Alternatively Federal spending can be maintained and expanded on programs that serve a variety of special interests at the expense of current and future consumption by American families and investment by American businesses. In making the politically difficult choices required for deficit reduction however damage to Federal programs that promote peace maintain national security or provide essential support to the poor and elderly is neither necessary nor desirable GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL BUDGET DEFICIT The tax rate reductions mandated by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of ( ERTA ) reduced the share of Federal receipts in GNP to the average of the 1960s and 1970s. In this share stood at percent virtually the same as in ( also the fourth year of an economic expansion ) Between and the share of Federal tax collections rose to a postwar high of percent primarily as the result of bracket creep. A significant contribution of ERTA was the indexation of tax brackets standard deductions and personal exemptions effective in which ensured that future inflation could not once again push up the share of Federal revenues without an explicit and visible decision to raise tax rates On the spending side of the Federal budget total spending growth has not been adequately restrained but the distribution of Federal spending has changed in important respects. Between and Federal spending rose from to percent of GNP. The key changes in the distribution of Federal spending that occurred between and are illustrated in Chart and may be summarized as follows : The share of defense spending increased from percent of GNP to percent ending the long period of erosion of national defense capabilities The share of social security benefits increased by percent of GNP maintaining a critical commitment to older and disabled Americans and their families The share of medicare expenditures increased by percent of GNP reflecting both increased health care benefits and the partial success of efforts to limit the increasing cost of providing such benefits The share of net interest payments increased by percent of GNP reflecting higher interest rates and the growing stock of Federal debt The share of general nondefense programs ( except social security medicare and net interest ) declined by percent of GNP Chart Federal Outlays as Percent of GNP Percent National Defense 'X / ^ S Social Security A--- " i Fiscal Years Sources : Department of Commerce and Office of Management and Budget Within the broad category of general domestic programs funds were reallocated away from inefficient ineffective low-priority programs and toward programs serving important national needs. For example funding for community and regional development was reduced substantially and general revenue sharing was eliminated while outlays for health research and Federal law enforcement activities increased significantly Despite the substantial progress already achieved in reorienting budget priorities important work remains to be done. Elimination or curtailment of inessential inefficient and ineffective Federal programs is required to contribute to reduction of the share of Federal spending in GNP and to allow room for expansion of programs that serve critical national needs PROSPECTS FOR DEFICIT REDUCTION The Administration is committed to achieving the targets for deficit reduction prescribed by Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ( GRH ) The first important step in this process will be taken during the current fiscal year with a reduction of the Federal deficit to almost $ bil- lion below its fiscal level. Meeting the GRH deficit targets for and later fiscal years will not be an easy task even with the continuation of reasonably strong economic growth and with further moderation of inflation and interest rates. However as the following analysis suggests the task is achievable provided the economic climate remains favorable In fiscal Federal spending amounted to percent of GNP while Federal receipts absorbed percent of GNP leaving a deficit of percent of GNP. Under the Administration 's economic projections continued economic growth and previously legislated increases in social security payroll taxes will increase the share of Federal receipts to percent of GNP by These projections imply that spending restraint must reduce the share of Federal spending in GNP by percent by to achieve a balanced budget without general tax rate increases The President is firmly committed to no reductions in social security retirement benefits. Fulfilling this commitment means that the share of social security expenditures will remain virtually unchanged at percent of GNP. Reductions in the share of total Federal spending in GNP must come from other sources Net interest payments amounted to percent of GNP in fiscal If the economy grows and interest rates decline as projected and if growth in the outstanding stock of Federal debt is slowed by deficit reduction in accord with GRH targets then net interest expense will decline by at least percentage point of GNP by This process is the reverse of that through which a rapidly growing stock of Federal debt ( fed by large Federal deficits ) and rising interest rates contributed to the growth of net interest expense as a share of GNP. To reverse this process however it is absolutely essential to place the ratio of Federal debt to GNP on a descending path mainly through progress in spending reduction in categories other than net interest expense. The sooner this task is accomplished the easier will be the subsequent task of deficit reduction The projected reduction of percent in the share of net interest expense and the relative constancy in the share of social security benefits imply that to reach a balanced Federal budget the combined share of all other categories of Federal expenditure must decline from percent of GNP in to roughly percent in Total Federal spending in this broad composite amounted to $ billion in fiscal If real spending in this composite remained constant at the level projected economic growth between and would reduce its share in GNP from to percent Thus an absolute reduction of real spending in this composite of about $ billion of dollars is required to achieve a balanced budget Cutting $ billion or percent from composite spending of $ billion should not be an insurmountable task. The difficulty of this task is heightened however by the need to accommodate real spending increases in areas of critical national need and primary Federal responsibility. In particular in the budget the President has identified the following major areas as requiring increased expenditures : national defense foreign affairs ( including foreign aid and embassy protection ) scientific and health research ( including acquired immune deficiency syndrome research ) drug abuse control and treatment space exploration and implementation of the new immigration law. Increasing expenditures in these critical areas will require deeper cuts in less essential Federal programs if the deficit reduction targets are to be met PROPOSALS FOR SPENDING REDUCTIONS The Administration 's proposals for program reductions and terminations are described in detail in the President 's budget. A brief review of some of these proposals helps to place the economic issues associated with deficit reduction into proper perspective Spending on farm support programs has been the most rapidly growing major category of Federal spending increasing from $ billion in to $ billion in The desire to assist farm families during a period of severe economic difficulty accounts for much of this increased spending. However total farm support spending has now reached a level that would finance a direct payment of more than $ annually to each of million farm families or an annual payment of more than $ for each of the commercial-sized farms in the United States. By comparison median income for all U.S. families is less than $ Moreover most farmers receive little or no financial assistance from Federal farm price-support programs. Of the percent of American farmers who did receive direct assistance in one-fifth received almost percent of the payments. In the cotton program in percent of the participants received more than one-half of the total payments with some receiving millions of dollars. The largest rice producers will each receive more than $ million in payments As is discussed in Chapter Federal farm support programs are not only expensive to the taxpayer and ineffective in channeling support to the most needy but they also generate huge economic waste Because current Federal programs link financial support to farm output they encourage production of crops for which there is no effective market. Appropriate reform of farm support programs can reduce economic waste and lower Federal expenditures while maintaining income support for distressed farm families The Federal Government continues to subsidize activities for which the original rationale has disappeared or where no persuasive case for Federal involvement can be made in the first place. For example mass transit systems can provide important benefits in the local areas where they operate but generally no good rationale exists for Federal subsidies that distort local choices concerning the construction and operation of such systems. The Administration proposes elimination of discretionary grants for new mass transit systems Another example is the Rural Electrification Administration ( REA ) which has gone well beyond its original purpose of encouraging extension of electrical supply in rural areas. Since when the Agency was founded farms receiving electric service through REA have increased from percent of all farms to percent. Rural telephone service ( added as an REA responsibility in ) now extends to percent of all farms. REA 's original goals have been achieved but it lives on offering subsidized loans to electric cooperatives serving prosperous urban and suburban areas such as Atlanta Georgia ; Denver Colorado ; Manassas Virginia ; and Minneapolis Minnesota Loans have also been provided for electrification in exclusive resorts such as Aspen Steamboat Springs and Vail in Colorado and Hilton Head Island Kiawah Island and Myrtle Beach in South Carolina The Administration proposes to curtail these practices by imposing appropriate limits on REA lending and loan guarantees OTHER REVENUE MEASURES The Administration 's proposals for deficit reduction also involve increasing Federal revenues by levying equitable user fees for Federal services provided to identifiable beneficiaries by selling some federally owned assets and by instituting other relatively minor programs to generate revenues. Both user fees and asset sales serve the dual purpose of raising revenue for the Federal Government and encouraging economic efficiency. Efficiency in the use of services provided by the Federal Government that are similar to services provided by private business is encouraged when the user of the service rather than the general taxpayer pays the cost of providing the service Economic efficiency is also often advanced when business-like operations are shifted from the Federal Government to the private sector where the profit motive and force of competition promote efficiency Major Administration proposals concern increased user fees for guaranteed student loans and for home loans guaranteed by the Veterans Administration ( VA ) and the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and for mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by the Gov- ernment National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Costs associated with defaults on guaranteed student loans have run well ahead of revenues from current fees a situation that should be corrected The same is true for VA home loans. For FHA and GNMA evidence suggests that their association with the government provides an implicit subsidy that allows them to charge less for their services than a private business would have to charge for the same service In addition to continuing sales from the Federal Government 's loan portfolio major proposals for asset sales include the sale of Amtrak and the phaseout of subsidies to Amtrak sale of the Naval Petroleum Reserve and sale of the Alaska Power Administration Transfer of these programs to the private sector would lead to more efficient operation as well as generating revenue Asset sales are a one-time source of revenue. Indeed sales of loans from the Federal portfolio and sales of government enterprises that earn a profit increase current revenue at the expense of future revenue. Such asset sales effectively transfer part of the task of deficit reduction from the present to the future. If adequate progress is being made in attacking the core of the deficit problem however partial transfer of this problem into the future through asset sales may be desirable Once the budget is balanced on a cash basis the nominal stock of Federal debt will not grow and the ratio of Federal debt to GNP will decline. As the ratio of Federal debt to GNP declines ( assuming constant interest rates ) the share of net interest expense in GNP will decline at a moderate pace. This development will allow room for other categories of Federal spending to rise absolutely and as a share of GNP without any increase in tax rates. Lost revenues from prior asset sales can be made up under these circumstances without absolute cuts in spending programs or tax rate increases. This strategy works however only if asset sales play a limited role in the total strategy of deficit reduction as they do in the President 's budget and if the other elements of that strategy are pursued consistently and effectively BUDGET CONCEPTS AND FISCAL AUTHORITY Gramm-Rudman-Hollings significantly alters the congressional budget process. It imposes targets for the Federal budget deficit in each of fiscal years as well as a timetable and procedures for meeting these targets. A number of other proposals have recently been made to reform the process by which budget decisions are deliberated and implemented as well as to change the coverage and content of the budget itself. Proposals to modify the coverage and content of the Federal budget are motivated by the concern that the current budget does not adequately reflect the economic costs of Federal credit programs or capital investments made by the government. The line-item veto and a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution are proposed reforms of the budget process that are motivated by the fact that absent the temporary Gramm-RudmanHollings procedures that expire in congressional decisions to increase outlays are not directly related to decisions affecting expected tax receipts Federal Credit Programs The accounting for Federal credit programs is a major weakness in the present budget. Currently the budget costs of direct loan programs are measured by the net outlays of those programs that is total disbursements and interest paid minus repayments and interest received. Congressional appropriations for direct loan programs are generally only necessary when new disbursements exceed repayments. Loan guarantees do not result in recorded outlays except in case of default. A loan guarantee represents a contingent liability of the government that induces lenders to invest in particular loans thus allocating capital for federally determined purposes. Thus a loan guarantee may provide as large a subsidy as a direct loan obligation The budget neither measures nor controls the most salient aspect of Federal credit the size of the subsidy offered the borrower. Without some means of measuring and controlling this subsidy neither the executive branch nor Congress can make informed decisions about Federal credit programs either by comparing one with the other or by comparing them with noncredit expenditure programs Some inadequacies of the budget treatment of Federal credit programs were rectified by introduction of the Federal credit budget in The Federal credit budget measures direct loan obligations and guaranteed loan commitments. Although it is a step forward the credit budget does not restrain the total volume of Federal credit effectively. Only about percent of the credit budget totals for were capped by appropriation act limitations. Moreover the credit budget does not measure the subsidy costs nor does it directly restrict the level of subsidy that a program offers the borrower The Administration proposes to change the budget treatment of direct loans and loan guarantees. Legislation for this purpose will be sent to the Congress in the spring of this year. The Administration 's proposal would divide the face value of a new direct loan into two parts : the market value of the loan and the present value of Federal subsidies. A Federal Credit Revolving Fund would be established under the direction of the Treasury. Before an agency could make direct loans Congress would have to appropriate funds to that agency for the provision of direct loan subsidies. As loans were made the agency would provide the Fund with the information required to estimate the present value of the direct loan subsidies. The central revolving account would be charged for the market value or nonsubsidized component of direct loans. The agency would then be charged for the subsidy component of direct loans In the case of loan guarantees Congress would first make appropriations to the agency. As the agency granted loan guarantees it would provide the Fund with the information necessary to estimate the present value of the guarantee subsidies. The agency would be charged for the value of the subsidy and would also transmit to the Fund any fees paid by the borrowers. The Fund would then assume the contingent liability for the guarantees To establish an objective measure of direct loan subsidies newly made direct loans would be sold to the public without recourse. Similarly new loan guarantees would be reinsured with private insurers Adoption of the Administration 's proposal would ensure that the budget reflected the true economic costs of Federal credit programs It would provide the President and Congress with the information necessary to make informed decisions about the allocation of budget resources to these programs A Capital Budget The Federal budget is a comprehensive statement of expected cash outlays and cash receipts. The budget includes both operating and investment outlays but does not report separate operating and capital budget subtotals. However details of Federal investment outlays are presented in a special analysis that is published with the budget The comprehensive outlay and receipt totals are indispensable for evaluating the effect of Federal policies on the level and composition of aggregate economic activity. The unified budget deficit which is the difference between total Federal outlays and receipts figures prominently in macroeconomic analysis precisely because it measures the government 's demand for private domestic and foreign saving as well as the change in the outstanding stock of government debt For many years proposals have been made to separate the unified Federal budget into an operating budget and a capital budget. Although the proposals differ in important respects all share the essential feature that Federal receipts and outlays would be disaggregated into their operating and capital components. In general investment outlays would not be charged against operating receipts in the calculation of the operating deficit and only the subsidy component of direct loans and loan guarantees would be considered an operating outlay. Investment expenditures and the market value of direct loans would constitute the outlays used in calculating the capital budget deficit Several arguments have been made in favor of a capital budget First it would provide the information and incentives necessary to promote economically efficient government capital planning. Second borrowing to finance capital outlays would spread the cost of government investments more equitably among current and future beneficiaries and thus link the payment for a government investment with its use. For this reason it has been argued that operating and capital budget subtotals should be calculated separately so as to distinguish between Federal borrowing that finances current operations from borrowing that finances capital investments yielding future benefits Opponents argue that the capital budget would not promote economically efficient capital planning. Because capital outlays would not be deducted from receipts in the calculation of the operating deficit the constraint on capital outlays might be relaxed to such an extent that budget decisions would be biased in favor of capital spending. Furthermore technical disagreement over the definition of capital outlays would likely occur such as whether expenditures for research and development or education should be included in the capital budget and thus not be charged against receipts in calculating the operating budget deficit. More generally opponents argue that a unified budget is needed to hold public officials accountable for appropriations of tax receipts. Separate capital and operating budgets would according to this view invite manipulation to hide and expand Federal spending It is important that the long-term benefits of government capital investments be adequately assessed against the current budget cost of the resulting capital outlays. However it is at least equally critical that budget deliberations take into account the effect of proposed policies on total outlays receipts and the unified budget deficit The Line-Item Veto The line-item veto would authorize the President to veto individual line items in appropriation bills subject to the current provisions for overriding a veto of any bill. Governors in States now have such authority. Congress has approved such authority for the Governors of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Trust Territories and for the Mayor of the District of Columbia but not for the President For more than a century Congress has rejected Presidential requests for this authority in order to maintain the opportunity to package spending proposals that the President would otherwise veto in broader appropriations that the President would approve. Appropriations are presented to the President in only general appropriation bills. Indeed last year Congress did not pass a single one of the appropriation bills but instead passed one 389-page omnibus spending bill. Because Congress had not completed action on the annual appropriation bills the President was compelled by law to shut down the Federal Government. Such abrogation of a responsible budget process by Congress not only discourages careful prudent legislation it encourages excessive spending and waste Effective use of the line-item veto would change the composition and level of Federal expenditure. A Member of Congress is elected by voters in a specific congressional district or State while the President is elected by the voters of the Nation. As a consequence a Member of Congress has stronger preferences for programs and projects that benefit his or her regional constituency especially because only a fraction of the cost of such programs and projects are borne by his or her constituency. The expected result of granting approval for a line-item veto would be a decrease in expenditures on programs and projects whose regional benefits do not exceed the cost to the Nation 's taxpayers. This result should be a sufficient basis for early approval of Presidential authority for a line-item veto Balanced Budget Amendment The President has endorsed the concept of a balanced budget/tax limitation amendment to the Constitution. The objective is to change the rules by which decisions are made to borrow or to increase the size of Federal outlays and receipts relative to national income. Although several amendments have been proposed two that have been considered in the Senate share the following provisions : A requirement that total outlays be no greater than total receipts unless three-fifths of the whole number of both Houses of Congress decide otherwise in a vote devoted solely to that subject ; A prohibition on increases in the public debt absent approval by three-fifths of the whole number of both Houses of Congress ; A requirement that all or some revenue-increasing bills be enacted by a majority of the whole number of both Houses of Congress by roll call vote ; and The authority for Congress to waive these requirements in the event of war Approval of this proposed amendment would be a recognition that each generation may need to bind itself to responsible fiscal decisions in the interests of the current and future American community The line-item veto and a balanced budget amendment can not substitute for the hard choices necessary to restrain the growth of Federal expenditure and to reduce the Federal deficit. Early approval of these proposals however could force a resolution of the choices necessary to resolve major near-term fiscal issues TAX REFORM This section assesses the economic effects of the Tax Reform Act of The purpose of this assessment is twofold : to forecast the effects that tax reform will have on future macroeconomic activity and by demonstrating the substantial benefits of tax reform to guard against possible future changes in the tax code that would undo the important progress that has been made OVERVIEW The Tax Reform Act of fundamentally alters the structure of the Federal income tax. It broadens the personal and corporate income tax bases and substantially lowers tax rates. These changes will significantly alter private incentives and accordingly will influence the economy 's performance through three principal channels : Lower marginal tax rates on personal income in conjunction with a broader tax base will increase labor effort and reduce the exploitation of tax loopholes More uniform tax rates on income from alternative capital investments will induce a more efficient allocation of investment funds A somewhat higher overall marginal tax rate on capital income will modestly reduce the economy 's long-run capital intensity The analysis in this section indicates that tax reform will significantly improve the economy 's long-run performance. This improvement will come from several sources most of which have not been explicitly quantified. Estimates that have been made however suggest that the Nation 's output of goods and services will permanently increase by approximately percent because of the long-run consequences of tax reform This section begins with a discussion of the conditions leading to tax reform and a brief explanation of the importance of marginal tax rates for economic efficiency. The chapter then turns to an assessment of the Tax Reform Act of ( TRA ) This assessment begins with a description of the major provisions of TRA and an analysis of their microeconomic implications. Finally the chapter explores the implications of TRA for long-run economic growth and short-run macroeconomic activity THE CONDITIONS LEADING TO TAX REFORM Despite legislated " tax reductions " during the 1960s and 1970s marginal tax rates rose substantially as inflation pushed taxpayers into higher tax brackets. As is shown in Table a family of four with median earnings in paid cents in tax on the last dollar of income earned. Such a family therefore had a marginal tax rate of percent. The marginal tax rate for a similar family in in contrast had risen to percent due to bracket creep. The growth in marginal tax rates was more dramatic at higher incomes : a family with twice the median income in had a marginal tax rate almost double that of a similar family in TABLE Marginal personal income tax rates for four-person families selected years [ Percent ] Family income Year One-half median income Median income Twice median income ( TRA ) Excludes social security taxes and State and local income taxes Source : Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis For income from capital gains inflation not only increases the statutory rate of tax because of bracket creep but it also causes the effective tax rate to exceed the statutory tax rate. This phenomenon was particularly important in the 1970s when inflation rates were high. In for example a 1-year investment yielding a percent nominal capital gain yielded after percent inflation a percent real capital gain. Federal taxes however are levied on nominal capital gains. A taxpayer in the percent tax bracket who received a percent nominal capital gain therefore earned a percent nominal after-tax return ( taking the percent capital gains exclusion into account ) After percent inflation this translates to a minus percent real after-tax return. Hence for this hypothetical investor inflation increased the effective tax rate on the percent real pretax capital gain from percent to percent. This phenomenon is entirely independent of bracket creep and for the taxation of capital gains is quantitatively much more important Inflation also distorts the taxation of corporate bond interest. The nominal rate of return on bonds includes an inflation premium that is not distinguished for tax purposes from the real return. Corporations can deduct nominal bond interest paid from their taxable income and individual bondholders must include nominal bond interest received in their taxable income. Inflation therefore decreases ( increases ) the effective rate of tax on debt-financed corporate invest- ment if the corporate tax rate exceeds ( is less than ) the marginal tax rate of the marginal bondholder. Because of the offsetting effects of the corporate and personal tax systems inflation affects the taxation of real corporate bond interest much less than it does the taxation of real capital gains The high inflation rates of the 1970s distorted the taxation of capital income in still another way. Deductions for the depreciation of a capital asset which are properly subtracted from gross capital income to determine taxable income are set in accordance with the purchase price of the asset. Inflation therefore reduces the real value of depreciation deductions. This phenomenon in addition to the taxation of inflationary capital gains caused the effective rate of tax on equityfinanced investments to rise substantially during the 1970s It became increasingly apparent in the late 1970s that these inflation-induced increases in effective tax rates were stifling private incentives to work and to save and were impeding economic growth To restore private production incentives therefore the Administration proposed and Congress passed the Economic Recovery Tax Act of ERTA called for a phased reduction in personal tax rates that when completed in substantially reduced personal marginal tax rates ( see the tax rates in Table ) The top marginal tax rate was reduced from to percent. ERTA also extended eligibility for individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) to individuals with other pension plans. Beginning in the rate schedule the zero bracket amount and the personal exemption were indexed to the price level. ERTA also included substantial investment incentives. Although these incentives were scaled back somewhat by TEFRA the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of ERTA and TEFRA together significantly lowered the effective tax rate on income from most capital investments ERTA-TEFRA substantially reduced marginal tax rates but left two particularly undesirable features of the income tax. First ERTATEFRA 's investment incentives increased the opportunities for tax avoidance. Second ERTA-TEFRA did not help to equalize marginal tax rates on alternative capital investments. In particular investments in corporate equipment retained their tax advantages over investments in corporate structures. Uneven tax rates on income from alternative capital investments result in a misallocation of capital and a lower value of output than would otherwise be obtainable To correct these problems and others and to reduce marginal tax rates further the President submitted to Congress detailed proposals for income tax reform in May These proposals became the basis for congressional deliberations that culminated in TRA. This law differs somewhat from the President 's proposals but retains their overall thrust. TRA lowers marginal tax rates broadens the personal and corporate tax bases and helps to equalize marginal tax rates on alternative income-producing activities MARGINAL TAX RATES AND ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY Marginal tax rates the rates paid on the last dollar earned from income-producing activities influence the incentives to engage in productive activities and hence are extremely important elements of the tax system. The marginal tax on labor income for example drives a tax wedge between the value of output that an additional unit of labor produces and the after-tax wage received by workers thereby discouraging additional labor effort. A reform of the tax system that lowers the marginal tax rate on labor income while raising the same total revenue therefore increases labor effort and economic well-being. Economic well-being is increased because the value of total output is increased by more than the total value of leisure is decreased. Likewise the marginal tax on investment income drives a tax wedge between the pretax return to investment and the after-tax return to saving. Additional saving that would be induced by a lower marginal tax rate on capital income increases the total value of output by more than it increases the inconvenience cost of postponing consumption A uniform tax on investment income distorts the overall savings decision. A nonuniform tax on capital income introduces an additional distortion in the allocation of saving and investment. Because investment funds tend to be directed toward assets with the highest expected after-tax returns and because the return to a particular asset type declines with its quantity alternative investments tend in equilibrium to yield equal after-tax returns. Hence the pretax return on a particular investment tends to be higher the higher is the effective marginal tax rate. Unequal marginal tax rates on alternative capital investments therefore result in an output loss. That is the value of output would be increased if investment funds were shifted away from investments with low marginal tax rates and low pretax returns and toward investments with high marginal tax rates and high pretax returns. The greater are the differentials among marginal tax rates on alternative capital investments the greater is the resulting output loss High marginal tax rates on labor income also encourage excessive consumption of untaxed employee fringe benefits. A worker with a 30-percent marginal tax rate for example gives up cents in takehome pay for each dollar of ( untaxed ) fringe benefits he or she receives. The worker or the worker 's union therefore rationally seeks an amount of fringe benefits that have a value at the margin equal to only percent of their true cost More generally high marginal tax rates increase incentives to engage in tax avoidance and evasion. Tax avoidance occurs when taxpayers make legitimate investment or consumption choices that are influenced by the desire to reduce tax liabilities. As was demonstrated for the case of untaxed employee fringe benefits tax avoidance leads to an inefficient allocation of resources and is apt to increase with the marginal tax rate on ordinary income. Tax evasion conversely is the failure to comply with the tax laws. The incentive to hide income from the tax authorities so as to evade taxes increases with the marginal tax rate. Tax evasion like tax avoidance ordinarily results in wasteful expenditures of time energy and tangible resources A MICROECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE TAX REFORM ACT The Personal Income Tax TRA significantly lowers tax rates on personal income. When the law is fully effective in two tax brackets set at and percent will replace the that ranged from to percent. The 15percent bracket and the personal exemption are phased out for highincome returns which results in an implicit 33-percent tax rate for a broad income range. As is shown in Table TRA reduces marginal tax rates to levels that are similar to those that prevailed in These rate reductions are made possible in part by TRA 's basebroadening measures. TRA broadens the personal tax base or taxable personal income to include the following : all long-term capital gains State and local sales taxes IRA contributions for high-income individuals with employer-provided pension plans nonmortgage consumer interest payments miscellaneous itemized deductions less than percent of adjusted gross income net losses from passive investments and net losses from active real estate investments for highincome taxpayers. These base-broadening measures are partially offset by substantial increases in the standard deduction and personal exemption. By the personal exemption is nearly doubled and the standard deduction is increased percent for joint returns and percent for single returns An important feature of TRA is its strong limitations on tax-sheltered activities which have grown greatly over the past several years Two factors are largely responsible for the recent growth in tax shelters ; first the high inflation rates of the late 1970s and early 1980s increased the real value of nominal interest deductions on leveraged investments and second ERTA-TEFRA substantially accelerated depreciation deductions. These factors increased the opportunities for claiming early losses in exchange for later capital gains that have the advantages of tax deferral and a lower tax rate TRA limits tax shelters directly and indirectly. The elimination of the capital gains preference the deceleration of tax depreciation deductions more stringent limitations on investment interest deductions and the lowering of marginal tax rates all serve indirectly to make tax shelters less attractive. Moreover any remaining tax avoidance opportunities are subjected to TRA 's provisions concerning passive business losses and real estate losses. In particular net losses from passive business investments and real estate investments for high-income taxpayers can not be deducted from ordinary income ; they must be carried forward and deducted from net income from like activities in later years These tax-shelter limitations not only make the personal income tax more equitable but they should also result in more economically efficient investment decisions. Investments that previously provided opportunities for tax avoidance are put on a more equal footing with other investments. Investment funds therefore should have a greater tendency to flow to their most highly valued uses The elimination of the nonmortgage consumer interest deduction should also improve the current allocation of investment funds. Consumer durables yield a flow of services that unlike alternative investments yielding monetary income is untaxed. By disallowing nonmortgage consumer interest deductions TRA partially eliminates the tax preference that is currently afforded to consumer durables. TRA therefore puts consumer durables on a more equal footing with alternative investments and should lead to more efficient investment decisions Allowing State and local taxes to be deducted from the Federal income tax base is both inefficient and inequitable. It is inefficient because it reduces the perceived cost of State and local government services and except possibly in cases where State spending generates appreciable spillover benefits encourages excessive State and local spending. It is inequitable because it causes residents of low-tax localities who enjoy relatively small amounts of State and local government services to pay a disproportionate share of Federal taxes. TRA ameliorates these problems in two ways : it disallows the State and local sales tax deduction and by lowering the marginal Federal tax rate it lowers the value of other State and local tax deductions TRA disallows IRA deductions for high-income individuals with employer-provided pension plans. However TRA still allows most working individuals to deposit $ ( nondeductible ) each year in IRAs and defer tax on accrued interest until the funds are withdrawn at retirement. This tax advantage is substantial accounting for a large portion of the tax savings afforded by deductible IRAs Although TRA significantly limits itemized deductions it substantially raises the standard deduction. As a result TRA is estimated to reduce the number of itemized personal Federal income tax returns in by million thereby yielding an approximate $ billion reduction in compliance costs Equity. TRA will cut total personal income taxes by about percent in Table gives the percentage tax cut for eight income classes. The estimates are based on an expanded definition of income that equals adjusted gross income plus such items as excluded capital gains passive business losses and tax-exempt bond interest TABLE Effects of the Tax Reform Act of on Federal tax liabilities and average Federal tax rates by income class Percent change in income tax liability Income class ( dollars ) Average tax rate ( percent ) TRA Prereform to to to to to to to and over ALL INCOME CLASSES The income concept ( modified expanded income ) is one of many possible income classifiers and was used by the Joint Committee on Taxation to present the distributional effects of the Tax Reform Act of An alternative measure " economic income " was used in the Treasury Department 's The President 's Tax Proposals in Note. Distributions reflect most but not all of the provisions of the individual income tax code Source : Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis The percentage tax cut under TRA is largest for low-income returns. The number of poor families paying Federal income tax is estimated to fall by million in under TRA. With one small exception the estimated percentage tax cut under TRA steadily falls for higher income returns. Thus these estimates indicate that TRA actually increases the effective progressivity of the personal Federal income tax despite a less graduated rate structure. This result is shown in the last two columns of Table which give the estimated average tax rate for each income class under TRA and the prereform tax law TRA cuts the average tax rate much more for taxpayers with income less than $ than it does for higher income taxpayers Table concerns only personal Federal income taxes. Because all taxes are ultimately paid by individuals a complete analysis of tax incidence would allocate undistributed corporate income and Federal corporate taxes to the various income classes. Exactly how this should be done however is uncertain. Current evidence is not conclusive but it suggests that part of the corporate tax burden is borne by workers and that the majority is borne by owners of capital. If this inference is correct it would imply that high-income taxpayers who earn a disproportionate share of capital income bear a relatively large share of the corporate tax burden. Because TRA shifts percent of the individual income tax burden to corporations it would follow that a proper imputation of corporate taxes to the various income classes would probably reinforce the conclusion that TRA enhances the effective progressivity of the Federal income tax TRA increases the long-run horizontal equity of the Federal income tax. Horizontal equity concerns the degree to which taxpayers with equal amounts of economic income have equal tax liabilities Because of TRA 's limitations on tax preferences including the elimination of the capital gains preference the limitations on tax shelters and a stricter minimum tax it substantially reduces the variation in the amount of tax paid by taxpayers with the same real income As does any significant reform of the tax system TRA will cause a one-time change in asset values that will redistribute wealth. Existing assets that received tax preference under ERTA-TEFRA and have their tax preferences curtailed under TRA suffer capital losses. Contrariwise any existing assets that are taxed less heavily under TRA than they were under ERTA-TEFRA enjoy capital gains. Special transition rules make these changes in asset values less severe in some cases. The deductions for passive business losses and real estate losses attributable to assets acquired prior to tax reform for example are phased out gradually over years. The same is true for deductions of interest payments on preexisting nonmortgage loans This phenomenon of changing asset values is one reason why changes in the tax law should be infrequent and implemented only for compelling reasons. Investments tend to be inherently risky ; further riskiness introduced by frequent changes in the tax law unnecessarily destabilizes the business environment Business Taxes The proper measurement of economic income from investments in real assets requires that deductions be made for the decline in real asset values attributable to depreciation. Since tax law has allowed investors to deduct for more rapid depreciation on most assets than actually occurs. Accelerating depreciation in this manner lowers the cost of capital which is defined as the minimum pretax investment return that is profitable. The cost of capital has also been reduced by the investment tax credit which applied primarily to equip- ment assets and allowed investors to deduct a percentage of an asset 's purchase price immediately from tax liabilities TRA repeals the investment tax credit allows less accelerated depreciation and lowers the corporate tax rate from to percent These provisions taken together have two general effects : they tend to raise the cost of capital overall and they tend to equalize the cost of capital for alternative capital investments. The latter effect is due primarily to more equal effective rates of tax on investments in corporate equipment and corporate structures Table gives the estimated percent change in the cost of capital brought about by TRA for three sectors of the economy and for various assets within the corporate sector. For the corporate sector the calculations take into account corporate property and personal taxes. Investments are taxed differently depending on whether they are financed with debt or equity. Table gives results for three different modes of finance ; for debt equity and a combination of debt and equity TABLE Percent change in cost of capital under the Tax Reform Act of Financing mode Debt and equity Equity Sector Debt Corporate sector Old view1 New view1 Old view1 view1 Equipment Nonresidential structures Public utilities Residential structures Inventories Nonresidential land Residential land Noncorporate business sector Owner-occupied housing Total business TOTAL See text for explanation of the old view and the new view of dividend taxation Note. Changes are relative to the prereform tax law. The computations take into account corporate taxes property taxes and personal taxes at all levels of government Source : Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis As is shown in the first column of the table TRA substantially increases the cost of debt-financed capital investments. This result follows largely because the value of interest deductions falls with the fall in corporate and personal tax rates There are currently two views in the economics profession concerning the relative importance of taxes on capital gains and on dividends for determining the cost of equity capital. The " new view " of dividend taxation maintains that taxes on capital gains are very important while taxes on dividends are nearly irrelevant for determin- ing the cost of equity capital. The " old view " of dividend taxation conversely maintains that taxes on dividends as well as taxes on capital gains are important for the cost of equity capital. It follows that TRA which raises the marginal tax rate on capital gains and lowers the marginal tax rate on dividends increases the cost of capital more under the new view of dividend taxation than under the old view. No consensus has formed as to which of these two views is correct. Although the new view gained wide acceptance when first introduced recent empirical evidence does not uniformly support either view over the other The estimates in Table indicate that the overall cost of equityfinanced investment falls under the old view and rises under the new view. The cost of corporate equipment rises much more than the cost of corporate structures. This finding also applies to the noncorporate sector and is attributable to the repeal of the investment tax credit Because TRA reduces corporate and personal tax rates the cost of capital falls dramatically for nondepreciable capital assets such as inventories and land Historically approximately one-third of investment is financed with debt and two-thirds with equity. The last two columns of Table use these weights to obtain overall percentage changes in the cost of capital for both views of dividend taxation. These calculations indicate that the overall cost of capital rises by to percent. Because debt finance becomes relatively more expensive under TRA and the financing shares are not allowed to respond to this change these estimates tend to overstate the rise in the cost of capital. On the other hand these estimates do not incorporate tax-shelter limitations or changes in accounting rules provisions of TRA that raise the cost of capital TRA substantially evens the cost of capital across assets within each sector. This effect is shown in the first part of Table which concerns the variation in the cost of capital within the corporate sector. For every asset TRA is estimated to reduce the magnitude of the percentage deviation of the cost of capital from the overall average cost of capital in the corporate sector. Because relative costs of capital within each sector depend primarily on the investment tax credit and depreciation allowances and these features of the tax law are the same for the corporate and the noncorporate sectors these conclusions also apply to the noncorporate sector However TRA does not alleviate the intersectoral distortions in the capital income tax as is shown in the second part of Table The corporate sector is taxed most heavily followed in order by the noncorporate sector and owner-occupied housing TABLE Within-sector and between-sector variation in the cost of capital Old view1 New view1 Sector Prereform TRA Prereform TRA Percent deviation from average corporate cost of capital Corporate sector : Equipment Nonresidential structures Public utilities Residential structures Inventories Nonresidential land Residential land Percent deviation from overall average cost of capital Corporate sector Noncorporate business sector Owner-occupied housing See text for explanation of the old view and new view of dividend taxation Note. Assumes financing is one-third debt and two-thirds equity Source : Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis A recent study indicates that eliminating the uneven taxation of assets within sectors and retaining the intersectoral distortions would cause investment funds to be reallocated so as to increase real net national product real GNP less capital depreciation permanently by about percent. Because TRA reduces the within-sector variance in the cost of capital by about percent this finding suggests that this particular feature of TRA will after a period of adjustment permanently increase net national product by about percent This estimate of the neutrality gains under TRA omits two important factors. First the cost-of-capital estimates do not take into account the possible " churning " of assets. Churning occurs when a used asset is sold and redepreciated for tax purposes by the new owner. Under ERTA-TEFRA this investment strategy was viable only for assets that have an active resale market most particularly commercial structures and rental housing. TRA 's limitations on tax shelters substantially reduce the tax preference afforded to such assets Therefore the quantified neutrality gains under TRA are mismeasured to the extent that TRA 's neutrality gains associated with churnable structures are different than TRA 's neutrality gains associated with other structures. Second TRA increases the relative tax preference given to intangible assets such as expenditures on marketing advertising and research and development. This result follows from the fact that TRA increases the overall cost of tangible capital and income from intangible capital assets is entirely untaxed ( at the margin ) at the corporate level under both ERTA-TEFRA and TRA Because intangible assets are not included in the cost of capital computations the quantified neutrality gains from TRA tend to be overstated Under both TRA and the prereform tax law corporations are able to deduct interest payments. Because dividend payments are not deductible equity finance is put at a disadvantage relative to bond finance which presumably encourages corporate borrowing. The estimates of the cost of capital indicate that TRA reduces the tax advantage of financing corporate investments with debt rather than equity by about percent. TRA therefore should reduce the incentive for corporate borrowing thereby reducing bankruptcy costs and other economic costs attributable to the issuance of corporate debt Under TRA as well as the prereform tax law inflationary returns to capital investments are taxed. Also depreciation allowances are not indexed for inflation. The cost-of-capital estimates in Tables and assume that the inflation rate is percent. If the inflation rate should rise the cost of capital would increase. Table gives the percentage change in the cost of capital under TRA caused by a 5percentage-point increase in the inflation rate. The overall cost of capital rises percent under the new view of dividend taxation and percent under the old view. Higher inflation would also exacerbate the tax-induced distortion in the choice of debt and equity finance Inflation must be kept low therefore to maintain appropriate investment and financing incentives TABLE The cost of capital under the Tax Reform Act of for an 8-percent inflation rate : Percent change from case of percent inflation Percent change Financing mode Debt Equity : Old view11 New view Debt and equity : Old view11 New view See text for explanation of the old view and the new view of dividend taxation Source : Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis TRA 'S EFFECT ON LONG-RUN ECONOMIC GROWTH It has been argued that TRA will lead to more efficient consumption and investment decisions and for fixed aggregate quantities of productive inputs will lead to an increase in output and economic well-being. This section analyzes TRA 's effects on the long-run supplies of capital and labor and the implications for economic growth and economic well-being. This section abstracts from issues concerning the composition of the capital stock and of output topics that were discussed in earlier sections Table gives the marginal tax rate ( averaged over taxpayers ) for all levels of government on labor income capital income and output under TRA and the prereform tax law. So as to estimate conservatively the long-run gains under TRA the effective marginal tax rate on capital income assumes that the new view of dividend taxation applies. The average marginal tax rate on labor income takes account of the social security and medicare payroll taxes. In so doing the linkage between these payroll taxes and future benefits is assumed to be sufficiently weak and uncertain that these payments are regarded as taxes. As is shown in the table TRA lowers the marginal tax rate on labor and raises it on capital. The marginal tax rate on output which is a weighted average of the marginal tax rates on labor and capital falls percent under TRA TABLE Average marginal tax rates on labor income capital income and output TRA Prereform Item Capital income Output Labor income Federal income tax State and local income and sales tax * Social security and medicare payroll tax Rate is the statutory tax rate ( measured as State and local income and sales taxes divided by net national product in ) adjusted down in accordance with the deducibility of State and local taxes ( except sales taxes under TRA ) from the Federal income tax base Social security and medicare payroll tax rate for both employees and employers multiplied by the portion of total labor income earned by individuals who are subject to the payroll tax at the margin Includes taxes at all levels of government Tax rate on labor income multiplied by .labor 's share of income ( ) plus the tax rate on capital income multiplied by capital 's share of income ( ) Sources : Department of the Treasury ( Office of Tax Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers The immediate effect of TRA will be to raise the net wage by percent and lower the net return to saving by percent. These changes will increase labor effort and depress saving as a portion of an enlarged pool of labor income. Relative to their baseline growth paths therefore labor input will increase and capital input may increase or decrease. Capital input is more likely to increase the more labor compensation and hence total income increases. In any case the ratio of capital to labor is decreased The long-run economic effect of TRA is most appropriately measured in terms of real net national product. The effect of TRA on net national product depends on its effects on capital and labor input Net national product is more likely to rise the more labor supply responds to the after-tax wage and the less the supply of savings re- spends to the after-tax return to capital. The change in economic welfare or individual well-being depends on changes in consumption and leisure. Because changes in net national product and consumption may come at the expense of less leisure net national product is an imperfect measure of economic welfare These factors have been analyzed in the context of a formal model of economic growth. The assumptions of the model among them that population and productivity grow at constant rates are extremely simple. None of the assumptions however is expected to lead to biased results. That is no a priori reason exists to believe that plausible alternative assumptions would yield qualitatively different conclusions. The model therefore gives useful guidance but the precision of its estimates should not be overstated Table summarizes the results of this analysis. The point estimates of TRA 's long-run effects are given in the first column of the table. Relative to their baseline growth paths it is estimated that real net national product rises percent aggregate consumption rises percent capital input falls percent and labor input rises percent. Because the value of consumption is raised more than the value of leisure is decreased economic welfare is increased. In fact TRA is estimated to increase individual well-being by as much as would an annual distribution from an outside source equal to percent of net national product TABLE The long-run simulated effect of the Tax Reform Act of Point estimate2 Item Plausible range3 Percent change in : Annual welfare change as percent of net national product Net capital return Capital input Labor input _.4 Net national product Consumption The simulation model is adapted from Lawrence H. Summers " Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model " American Economic Review September The Summers model is extended to allow for endogenous labor supply and an unfunded social security system Elasticity of substitution in production ( ESP ) = Elasticity of intertemporal substitution ( EIS ) = The uncompensated elasticity of labor supply is zero for all cases ESP varies between and and EIS varies between and Source : Council of Economic Advisers The point estimates incorporate assumptions about production technology and behavior that while consistent with the existing empirical literature are subject to error. The second column of Table gives ranges for the long-run changes under TRA that correspond to alternative plausible assumptions. All plausible assumptions lead to the conclusion that TRA increases economic welfare net national product and consumption An important factor that has been omitted in this analysis is TRA 's effect on productivity growth. The returns to education come in large part through higher future wages. Because TRA decreases the marginal tax rate on labor income the incentive to invest in education and other forms of human capital is increased. Hence TRA should lead to more human capital investment and consequently to higher levels of productivity and output growth Also the model underlying the long-run simulations assumes a closed economy with no trade. The tax rates reported in Table however reflect on TRA 's effect on U.S. production costs relative to those of other countries. The average marginal tax rate on output in the United States is estimated to decline by percent under TRA Hence while TRA may cause the composition of U.S. exports to shift toward labor-intensive goods and away from capital-intensive goods it should not adversely affect the overall U.S. current account trade balance for given exchange rates and given after-tax returns to U.S factors of production THE SHORT-RUN MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF TRA Although TRA will increase long-run economic growth it may cause some short-run adjustment problems. First TRA will slow the growth of investment to a modest extent as the capital stock adjusts to its new long-run equilibrium growth path. Hence unless consumption or net exports takes up the slack aggregate demand growth will be dampened somewhat. Second TRA will cause a reallocation of investment that in the short run will cause some industries to grow less rapidly. Other industries of course will grow more rapidly under TRA but possibly with a short lag Aggregate Investment The long-run simulation results illustrate the relationship between investment and changes in the long-run equilibrium capital stock. If the point estimates given in Table are correct TRA will induce a percent decline in the long-run capital stock relative to its baseline growth path. This result would imply that net and gross investment also fall percent in long-run equilibrium. In the transition to the long-run equilibrium however net investment would fall an additional amount equal to percent of the current capital stock or a total of about $ billion. Assuming a short 5-year adjustment period this result would imply that TRA will cause gross investment to fall by less than percent from baseline in each of the next years. After this initial period of adjustment however TRA should have a minimal effect on investment This method of estimating TRA 's effect on short-term investment encounters two problems. First it assumes that the economy is currently on the long-run equilibrium growth path associated with the substantial investment incentives included in ERTA-TEFRA. Recent estimates however suggest that only about one-half of the additional desired capital accumulation induced by ERTA-TEFRA has been completed. This finding implies that Table overestimates the percentage decline in the long-run capital stock. Second the simulation results give a broad range for the probable change in the longrun capital stock. In fact a relatively small change in assumptions raises the implied decline in the long-run capital stock from to percent. However the conclusions regarding changes in economic welfare and net national product are robust with respect to alternative assumptions An alternative upper-bound estimate of TRA 's effect on investment is suggested by the observation that the equilibrium capital stock path under TRA is significantly above that which would have prevailed under the tax law prior to ERTA. This conclusion follows from estimates indicating that relative to the tax law TRA results in a similar cost of capital ( the cost of equity capital however is much lower under TRA ) and a substantially lower cost of labor The resulting higher supply of labor under TRA relative to what would have prevailed under the tax law will simultaneously increase the demand for investment and the supply of savings. It follows that TRA only partially scales back the investment incentives included in ERTA-TEFRA. An extreme upper-bound estimate of the fall in the equilibrium capital stock under TRA therefore is the net addition to the capital stock that has been induced by ERTA-TEFRA over the past years A recent econometric study concludes that ERTA-TEFRA 's business tax cuts increased gross nonresidential fixed investment by about $ billion in the first years of the current economic expansion. Extrapolating this result to each of the past years and assuming the same proportionate effect on multifamily housing investment leads to the conclusion that ERTA-TEFRA 's business tax cuts increased gross investment by about $ billion over the past years After adjustment for depreciation this change in gross investment implies a $ billion increase in the capital stock. TRA therefore will cause the equilibrium capital stock to decline relative to baseline by much less than $ billion. Assuming a short 5-year adjustment period the implied upper-bound reduction in annual gross investment from baseline over the next years is less than percent An investment decline of this magnitude amounts to only percent ofGNP Investment in will be influenced by two additional factors Because the corporate tax rate is percent in and percent thereafter an incentive exists to shift investment from to so that the first year 's depreciation allowances are written off against the higher tax rate. On the other hand some investment that would have been made in may have been shifted to to take advantage of more accelerated depreciation allowances It is important not to confuse the short-run effects of TRA with its long-run effects. In the long run investment will be little affected by TRA and because of an increased labor supply and more efficient investment decisions output and economic welfare will increase Transition Costs A major advantage of TRA is that it evens effective marginal tax rates on alternative capital investments thereby improving the economy 's long-run allocative efficiency. Unfortunately this evening of tax rates entails short-run transition costs TRA will cause investment to shift away from assets that enjoyed favorable tax treatment under ERTA-TEFRA. This shifting will directly affect producers of capital inputs. Construction in particular will be adversely affected because the new tax rules will limit the ability of individuals to deduct net losses on investments in commercial structures and rental housing in exchange for later capital gains These provisions of TRA have probably contributed to the recent slowdown in the construction industry. New nonresidential construction expenditures were unchanged between and after having risen at a 7-percent annual rate between and Likewise multifamily housing starts in were down percent from the pace of TRA may also induce a minor restructuring of the market for final goods and services. The general increase in business taxes under TRA does not significantly affect the relative cost of capital for the various producers of final goods and services but it will raise the relative cost of capital-intensive goods and services. The mix of goods and services therefore will shift toward more labor-intensive goods. The magnitude of this change however will be small. The overall cost of capital rises less than percent which sets an upper limit on the increase in the price of one industry 's output relative to another SUMMARY TRA will lead to substantial long-run increases in economic welfare. Relative to net national product the approximate changes in economic welfare that have been quantified are percent for a more efficient allocation of investment funds and percent for changing long-run factor supplies. Additional welfare gains which have not been quantified will result from greater levels of human capital investment ; from less tax bias toward corporate debt ; from less excessive consumption of employee fringe benefits consumer durables and State and local government services ; and from less tax evasion TRA will increase the long-run fairness of the income tax. All income classes receive a personal income tax cut and the percentage tax cut tends to be largest for low-income taxpayers. TRA also severely limits the opportunities for tax avoidance and will tend to equalize effective tax rates within income classes TRA will inflict some short-run costs on the economy as resources are reallocated to more highly valued uses. However these transition costs will be minor relative to the permanent long-run gains CONCLUSION The Tax Reform Act of is perhaps the most important reform of the Federal income tax since its inception in TRA restores incentives to work save and invest and will substantially boost economic growth and individual well-being Important progress has recently been made in restraining the growth in Federal spending. More must be done. It is imperative that the Federal budget deficit be brought under control in accord with the provisions of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings. To preserve the gains of tax reform and to free more resources for use in the private sector deficit reduction should be accomplished primarily through additional spending restraint. This task will be difficult but it can be achieved without sacrificing essential government services. The effort could be aided by appropriate reforms of the budgetary process CHAPTER Growth Competitiveness and the Trade Deficit THE DETERIORATION OF THE U.S. TRADE BALANCE has been a disturbing feature of the current recovery. From a surplus equivalent to almost percent of real gross national product ( GNP ) in U.S. real net exports of goods and services declined sharply to a deficit equivalent to more than percent of real GNP in far larger than the deficit recorded in any postwar year before The growing U.S. trade deficit is often cited as a principal cause of the slowdown of real GNP growth since mid-1984 and of the problems of many trade-sensitive industries. This chapter assesses the causes and effects of the growing U.S. trade deficit and discusses policies adopted by the United States and other countries that will gradually reduce international trade imbalances in a manner consistent with sustainable growth in the world economy The increase in the U.S. trade deficit is a macroeconomic phenomenon. Imports have grown strongly and exports have stagnated primarily because of the strong growth of the U.S. economy ( especially in terms of demand growth ) relative to other countries the difficulties faced by many developing countries in managing their external debts and the fall in U.S. price competitiveness associated with the large appreciation of the dollar between and early Underlying these developments are several macroeconomic imbalances including the deterioration in the U.S. saving-investment balance that has resulted from the failure of the Federal Government to bring its expenditures in line with revenues Initially the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance was associated with developments that had favorable effects for the U.S. economy ( reduced inflation because of dollar appreciation and reduced upward pressure on interest rates because of a capital inflow ) It certainly had favorable effects for the rest of the world which was suffering from sluggish economic growth. More recently however large trade and payments imbalances have been recognized to pose substantial problems for the world economy including the stimulation of protectionist sentiments Important policy actions have been taken in the United States and other countries to reduce international trade and payments imbalances. Better convergence of performance and policies and efforts at policy coordination have brought about exchange-rate adjustments that improve the price competitiveness of U.S. industries. However there is a lag in the effect of exchange-rate adjustments on trade flows Further efforts are needed to reduce current payments imbalances The United States must press forward in reducing the Federal fiscal deficit through restraint on the growth of Federal spending. At the same time other industrial countries must undertake policies that will strengthen internally generated economic growth. Developing countries need to adopt growth-oriented strategies for resolving their economic difficulties. The overall strategy is to reduce international imbalances in a manner consistent with sustainable economic growth in the United States in other industrial countries and in the developing countries rather than by moving toward protectionism that would injure all countries THE MACROECONOMIC CHARACTER OF THE U.S PAYMENTS POSITION By any measure the United States has experienced an unprecedented deterioration in its international payments position. The U.S current account deficit i.e. the excess of imports of goods and services over exports plus net transfers made to foreign residents widened from $ billion in to an estimated $ billion in ( Chart ) Almost all of this change is attributable to the increase in the merchandise trade deficit which rose to an estimated record $ billion in The deterioration of the U.S. trade balance has been across-theboard. Between and the U.S. merchandise trade balance ( census basis ) worsened in of the major product groups used to classify trade including such disparate sectors as chemicals food and live animals and machinery and transport equipment. Among these major product groups the U.S. merchandise trade balance improved only in the mineral fuels and lubricants sector. This exception however has clearly resulted from special factors the most important being the decline in oil imports following the oil shock and the recent drop in petroleum prices Similarly deteriorations in U.S. bilateral trade balances have been widespread. Between and the U.S. bilateral trade position worsened against all of the top U.S. trading partners ( based on total trade ) and of the top The widening of the U.S. bilateral Chart U.S. Trade and Current Account Balances Billions of dollars Current Account Balance Merchandise Trade Balance \ L I I I I I I l I I I I I I I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Note. Data for are first quarters at an annual rate ; seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce trade deficit with Japan from $ billion in to more than $ billion in has attracted the most public attention but this deterioration is not unique. The change in the U.S. bilateral trade balance with Western Europe has been about as large falling from a surplus of $ billion to a deficit of more than $ billion. Substantial deteriorations in U.S. bilateral trade positions have also been recorded with Latin America and the newly industrializing countries of East Asia in each case exceeding $ billion Special factors have undoubtedly influenced bilateral trading patterns and some markets are more open to U.S. exports than others It is not correct however to place primary blame for the more than $ billion increase in the U.S. trade deficit over the past years on unfair trading practices by U.S. trading partners. The deterioration of the U.S. trade balance is too pervasive to be credibly explained by analyses focused on a product-by-product country-by-country basis Rather the great bulk of the widespread deterioration must be viewed as a product of general macroeconomic developments in the United States and the rest of the world This point is demonstrated by recent developments in U.S. trade in manufactures. Between and the U.S. deficit in manufactures trade widened by $ billion. Imports of manufactures increased $ billion. This increase in manufactures imports has been a focus for protectionist pressures in the United States especially regarding Japan. However as shown by Table most of the change in U.S. bilateral balances in manufactures trade during this period reflects general movements in imports and exports not country-specific changes in bilateral trading relations. Although the U.S. balance of manufactures trade with Western Europe deteriorated by $ billion between and Western Europe provided virtually the same percentage of total U.S. imports of manufactures and absorbed the same percentage of total U.S. exports of manufactures in both periods. Japan supplied a somewhat higher share of U.S. imports of manufactures in than in This increase in market share however accounts only for about one-sixth of the $ 32-billion increase in Japanese exports of manufactures to the United States during this period. At the same time the share of total U.S. exports going to Japan increased. Clearly general movements in U.S. imports and exports not changes in bilateral trade relations represent the proper focus for understanding the deterioration of the U.S. international payments position TABLE U. S. trade in manufactures and Country/Area Canada Japan Change in bilateral balances to ( billions of dollars ) Percent share in U.S. exports U.S. imports Western Europe Latin America East Asian NICs1 Newly industrializing countries : Hong Kong Singapore South Korea and Taiwan Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census The general movements in U.S. imports and exports are summarized in Table Growth of U.S. spending on imports while strong has not been especially rapid given the growth of the U.S economy. Imports of goods and services ( on a national income and product accounts basis ) rose from percent of nominal GNP in to percent in Non-oil imports grew more rapidly but this was partly offset by a decline in the oil import bill. This " normal " growth of import expenditures however masks a substantial increase in import volumes. Import prices have fallen sharply rel- ative to other goods ( most recently due to falling petroleum prices ) and real imports rose percent between and Real exports however grew less than percent during this period even though real export prices have fallen significantly. This absence of export growth combined with continued import spending and rapid growth of import volumes accounts for the deterioration of the U.S trade balance TABLE U.S. Exports and imports of goods and services Relative prices ( = ) As percent of GNP Year Current dollars dollars Exports Exports Imports Exports Imports Imports ,w.4 Implicit price deflator for exports or imports relative to GNP implicit price deflator Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis In summary the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance over the past years is a macroeconomic phenomenon. The trade balance has deteriorated against virtually all major trading partners and in virtually all major product categories. This deterioration has been associated with a stagnation in the growth of U.S. exports strong growth of U.S. imports in volume terms but only about normal growth of domestic spending on imports. The fundamental explanation of these developments is to be found in the relatively strong performance of the U.S. economy during the current expansion in the factors that underlie the deterioration of the U.S. national savings-investment balance and in the forces that generated the strong appreciation of the U.S. dollar and the associated loss of competitiveness of U.S. tradable goods industries during the early 1980s ECONOMIC GROWTH AND THE TRADE DEFICIT A striking feature of the current expansion and certainly one of the key factors in assessing world economic performance is that the United States has enjoyed a strong expansion while the recovery of economic activity in most foreign countries has been weak. This difference in growth has been especially marked in total national spending known as domestic demand. As indicated in Chart total domestic demand grew much more rapidly in the United States than in other countries during the first six quarters of the expansion ( through mid-1984 ) Since then differentials between U.S. and foreign demand growth have narrowed considerably but a large cumulative gap in domestic demand growth remains. This gap reflects the fact that the current recovery of U.S. domestic demand is one of the strongest of the postwar period. It also reflects the fact however that the recovery of domestic demand abroad has been one of the weakest Chart Real Domestic Demand in Selected Industrial Countries Index = ~ ~ " T i I i i i I Four Largest European Countries- ! / * * i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i -I/France Italy United Kingdom and West Germany weighted by GNP consumption expenditures gross private domestic Note. Domestic demand is the sum of personal consumi investment and government purchases of goods and services serv Sources : Department of Commerce and country sources These differences in output and demand growth have contributed to the deterioration of the U.S. international payments position in several ways. At an accounting level the U.S. deficit on goods and services trade signifies that total expenditures on goods and services in the United States ( domestic demand ) exceed U.S. production of goods and services ( GNP ) and that the United States is importing the difference. Intuitively the strong U.S. recovery especially in terms of domestic demand has boosted expenditures on imports as well as on domestically produced goods. Relatively weak growth abroad however has limited the expansion of U.S. export markets Weak foreign growth has been a critical problem for the world economy. Assessments of the U.S. recovery and the deterioration of the U.S. payments position must take account of this weakness and of the importance of the U.S. expansion to sustaining world growth Similarly domestic demand growth abroad needs to be assessed not only in terms of its effect on the U.S. trade balance but also in its role in sustaining foreign growth as the U.S. economy adjusts. This section therefore reviews the recent economic performance of foreign industrial countries developing countries and the United States and analyzes the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance in this regard FOREIGN INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES In the 1980s the industrial countries faced critical economic challenges of reducing inflation rates generally from double-digit levels adjusting to the second oil shock of recovering from the world recession and halting or reversing the growth in government expenditures. All countries achieved substantial reductions in inflation but experienced varying success in meeting other challenges Western Europe 's recovery from world recession has been slack Between and real GNP in Western Europe grew at an average annual rate of about percent one-half of the growth rate experienced in the United States Canada or Japan ( Table ) Annual growth of domestic demand was slightly weaker averaging only about percent. This slow growth has coexisted with rising unemployment during much of the recovery. In the average unemployment rate for the four largest European countries ( France Italy the United Kingdom and West Germany ) was about percent roughly double its rate This slow growth is especially disappointing given the stimulus to world growth provided by the strong U.S. recovery and the appreciation of the dollar ( which increased these countries ' relative competitiveness ) Most Western European countries however generally coped successfully with the depreciation of the dollar in The rapid passthrough of lower petroleum prices increased consumer incomes and both consumption and investment strengthened. This strengthening of domestic demand enabled many Western European countries to enjoy a slight acceleration of GNP growth despite a weakening of real net exports. The cumulative growth rate of Western European domestic demand over the course of the expansion however remains low especially for West Germany ( despite strong growth in ) where the level of domestic demand in was only slightly above its level TABLE Growth in real domestic demand and real GNP in major industrial countries [ Average annual percent change ] t ( ) Country Real domestic demand1 t ( ) t ) Real domestic demand1 Real GNP2 Real domestic demand1 Real GNP2 Real GNP2 III tc III Real domestic demand1 Real GNP2 United States Canada Japan France ( ) ( ) Germany Italy United Kingdom Domestic demand is the sum of personal consumption expenditures gross private domestic investment and government purchases of goods and services Data for Canada France Italy and United Kingdom are real GDP Not available Sources : International Monetary Fund and country sources Unlike Western Europe Japan grew at a percent annual rate between and Much of this growth however was exportled. Following the oil shock domestic demand in Japan slowed markedly as the country adjusted to the higher oil import bill. During the first half of the 1980s the average rate of domestic demand growth was only about one-half its average. Rising exports however enabled GNP to grow more than percentage point higher than domestic demand. This excess of output over demand growth was reversed in as real Japanese exports fell in the wake of the sharp appreciation of the yen. Japanese internal demand increased somewhat but not enough to offset the decline in exports and Japan 's rate of GNP growth slowed to under percent Despite differences in their growth rates Western Europe and Japan shared similar policies and challenges. They both faced the sudden increase in petroleum prices while shifting to anti-inflationary monetary policies. They both moved generally toward fairly austere fiscal policies by restraining government expenditures. While the resulting reduction in inflation and increased budgetary room for tax cuts should provide a good foundation for stronger growth in the long run the initial effect of these developments was to depress economic activity In Western Europe these developments interacted with structural rigidities that in addition to reducing long-run growth intensified and prolonged the effect of macroeconomic shocks. Substantial nonwage labor costs and excessively expensive job security arrangements discouraged labor mobility and new hiring. High marginal tax rates various regulatory burdens and large subsidies to declining industries and to agriculture impeded adjustment and growth by retarding the flow of investment toward high-growth sectors In Japan structural rigidities did not prevent the economy from growing strongly over much of the 1980s. They did however hold domestic demand below what it could have been giving the economy a bias toward export-led growth. Restrictions that have prevented the efficient use of scarce land combined with mortgage instruments that require substantial downpayments have made housing less affordable. Limitations on consumer credit markets have dampened the demand for consumer durables discouraging investment aimed at producing for local markets DEVELOPING COUNTRIES Slack growth of output and demand during the 1980s has not been confined to foreign industrial countries. With the exception of developing countries in Asia growth in the developing world has been particularly weak. Between and annual real GNP growth in Latin America averaged percent less than one-fifth the average growth rate enjoyed during the 1970s ( Table ) Real GNP grew equally slowly in Africa over this period ; in the Middle East real GNP declined. This slow growth has depressed U.S. exports. Developing countries are important trading partners for the United States In developing countries purchased percent of all U.S. merchandise exports. By however their trade share had fallen to percent TABLE Real GNP growth in developing countries [ Average annual percent change ] Region Western Hemisphere Africa to to tol to Middle East Asia Preliminary estimates Source : International Monetary Fund The slow growth of many developing countries is the product of many forces. The recession in the industrial countries in the early 1980s followed by the slack recovery of domestic demand in Japan and Europe reduced the demand for many exports by developing countries. Exporters of primary commodities suffered particularly as the shift from the inflation of the 1970s to the disinflation of the 1980s combined with sluggish world growth depressed prices for these products. Since the dollar price of raw agricultural commodities has fallen percent ; mineral prices have declined percent With the appreciation of the dollar the real burden of the dollardenominated debt of many developing countries increased considerably. Much of this debt was contracted at floating rates making debtservice payments highly sensitive to the sharp rise in nominal and real interest rates in the early 1980s. These developments caused many lenders to doubt the capacity of several developing countries to meet their obligations and to end abruptly the access of these countries to international capital markets The policies of many developing countries were an important cause of the interruption of voluntary lending flows. Overvalued exchange rates price controls arid schemes to boost real wages by legislative fiat made the production of many goods unprofitable and reduced the international competitiveness of many developing countries. Maintenance of substantially negative real interest rates as well as tax and regulatory policies that discouraged investment induced capital flight instead of encouraging the inward flows of capital needed to promote more rapid development. Reliance on inefficient public enterprises to produce a wide variety of goods and services continued to be important drains on government budgets. These drains further increased external deficits in these countries while failing to engender the productive investment needed to increase their capacity to service the associated external debts Whatever the cause the cessation of voluntary lending flows forced developing countries with debt-management problems to cut import spending rapidly in order to reduce their borrowing needs. Between and the value of U.S. merchandise exports to Mexico fell $ billion a drop of almost percent. Exports to the rest of Latin America fell nearly percent or about $ billion. In contrast U.S exports to industrial countries fell percent. Since exports to Latin America have recovered somewhat but still remain below levels GROWTH AND THE TRADE DEFICIT The strong recovery in the United States and the resulting deterioration of the U.S. international payments position was a powerful stimulant to growth in both industrial and developing countries. This growth which took place against the background of world recession provided a vibrant market for foreign exporters at a time when many developing countries suddenly facing credit constraints needed to expand exports to finance imports sufficient to maintain politically acceptable levels of output and income. In contrast sluggish growth in most other industrial countries limited increases in their imports Between and the United States absorbed about percent of the increase in merchandise exports by Latin American countries to industrial countries much more than would be implied by the normal percent U.S. share of Latin American exports to industrial countries At Crst the deterioration of the U.S. payments position helped as well as hurt the U.S. economy. During the first six quarters of the expansion real GNP grew at a healthy percent annual rate ; domestic demand grew even faster averaging percent. In effect growing net imports allowed desired increases in spending to be satisfied without pushing production growth to levels that would have caused bottlenecks. Although the strong appreciation of the dollar reduced U.S. international competitiveness the resulting decline in import prices boosted real incomes in the United States and helped to ameliorate inflationary pressures Since mid-1984 domestic demand has grown at a percent annual rate. However despite this slowing of demand growth to more sustainable levels increases in imports continued to outpace exports and the annual rate of real GNP growth from the second quarter of to the fourth quarter of averaged only percent. Insofar as the expanding capacity of the U.S. economy was more than sufficient to meet increases in total U.S. demand the expansion of the U.S. trade deficit during this period was an important factor limiting growth. This negative consequence has stimulated protectionist sentiment in the United States especially because the burden of the resulting adjustment has not been spread evenly through the economy. Industries that account for about percent of U.S. GNP produce either services that do not enter into international trade or products that are largely nontradable. The deterioration in the U.S. balance in goods and services trade between and amounting to percent of real GNP was therefore concentrated in sectors of the economy that account for only about percent of GNP. Moreover the distribution of the adjustment within these sectors was not even THE SAVING-INVESTMENT BALANCE The deterioration of the U.S. international payments position has also been closely associated with movements in national saving and investment. As discussed in the previous section the U.S. deficit in goods and services trade signifies that total spending in the United States on goods and services exceeds U.S. production of goods and services. This necessarily implies that the United States is absorbing foreign saving to finance the difference between expenditures and income or equivalently that U.S. investment exceeds U.S. saving For example in gross national saving in the United States was $ billion ; gross private investment was $ billion. The difference was financed by a net capital inflow of nearly $ billion from abroad THE PRIVATE SAVING-INVESTMENT BALANCE The national saving-investment balance is the excess of the private saving investment balance the difference between gross private saving and gross private domestic investment over the general ( Federal State and local ) government deficit. Between and the private saving-investment balance fell from percent of GNP to percent. This decline reflected the strength of consumption and investment growth as is normal for a recovery. Given the length of the current expansion the current level of the private savinginvestment balance is not unusually low. The private saving-investment balance was lower in and than it was in Between and the gross private saving rate defined as gross private saving divided by GNP fell less than one-half percentage point ( Table ) The ratio of private saving to GNP fell significantly but this decline was more than offset by increases in net business saving. Such offsetting movements in household and business saving are not surprising since households are the ultimate owners of all wealth including the capital owned by businesses TABLE Private saving and investment As percent of GNP Year Gross private domestic investment Private saving Gross1 Personal Business ( net ) dollars Relative price of investment ( = ) Current dollars Gross private saving is personal saving plus net business saving and capital consumption Net business saving is undistributed corporate profits plus inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Implicit price deflator for gross private domestic investment relative to GNP implicit price deflator Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers The gross private saving rate fell sharply in However even with the drop in private saving most of the decline in the private saving-investment balance during the current expansion is accounted for by strong investment growth. Real gross private domestic investment rose percent between and boosting the share of real investment in real GNP from a near record low of percent to a near record high of percent. Although investment growth has been sluggish since the share of real investment in real GNP has remained near cyclical highs This strength in real investment spending however was partially offset by a substantial decline in the relative price of investment goods. As reported in Table the relative price of investment goods fell percent between and In nominal expenditures on gross private domestic investment accounted for percent of GNP well below levels and only percentage point above the average share of nominal investment expenditures experienced over the past years. Thus the lower relative price of investment goods allowed large increases in real investment to occur with only moderate demands on nominal saving. This development produced a normal cyclical decline in the private saving-investment balance despite the decline in the gross private saving rate and the strength of real investment THE GOVERNMENT DEFICIT The large increase in the general government budget deficit however stands in marked contrast to its normal cyclical behavior. The general ( Federal State and local ) government budget deficit averaged percent of GNP in This deficit/GNP ratio although large is not the largest experienced during the past years. The general government budget deficit exceeded percent of GNP in both and The and deficits however occurred during sharp recessions ; the current large deficit comes in the fourth year of an expansion As indicated in Chart until recently the general government budget deficit has tended to track the private saving-investment balance during cyclical expansions and declines. National saving has approximated national investment and the current account balance has been small. In recessions government budget deficits typically widen as a result of declining tax revenues and increased expenditures associated with income support. The private saving-investment balance however usually increases by more than the cyclically induced decline in the general government budget deficit ( because of weak investment and consumption spending ) and the current account balance tends to improve. In the sharp recession for example the largest general government budget deficit in the postwar era ( meas- ured as a percent of GNP ) coincided with one of the largest U.S current account surpluses Chart Private Saving-Investment Balance Government Deficit and Current Account Balance Percent of GNP Private Saving-Investment Balance _ / \ ~ ^ ^ Current Account Balance I I I I I I I t I I I I I I I I i I i \ i I I I I I I Note. For current account balance data for are first quarters at an annual rate ; seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Similarly strong investment growth during an expansion usually outstrips increases in private saving and the private saving-investment balance declines. The associated growth in tax revenues however traditionally lowers the general government budget deficit and the deterioration in the U.S. current account deficit usually remains modest. This pattern has not been followed in the current expansion The increased surpluses of State and local governments have been more than offset by the large growth of the Federal Government budget deficit. This unprecedented deterioration of the U.S. fiscal position during an expansion combined with a normal cyclical decline in the private saving-investment balance has been reflected in an unprecedented deterioration in the U.S. current account balance It is important to emphasize that the government budget deficit and the U.S. international payments position are the product of many forces and that the link between them is complex. As noted above increases in the government budget deficit that result from a cyclical decline are typically associated with improvements in the U.S. international payments position. Clearly it is incorrect to say that movements in budget deficits always cause equal movements in the U.S current account balance. It is equally clear however that the persist- " ence of the Federal deficit late into the current expansion is one of the most important factors contributing to the growth of the trade deficit It is also important to emphasize that the desirability of any fiscal measure taken to reduce the current large budget and trade deficits depends critically on whether the measure is desirable in its own right Federal outlays have remained at a high percentage of GNP. Sustained efforts to control Federal spending are needed not only to preserve the benefits of tax reform but also to reduce the U.S. international payments imbalance. The key point is that a substantial reduction in the U.S. current account deficit will require restraint of U.S. domestic demand growth relative to GNP growth. If this restraint does not come from controlling government spending it must come from the other components of domestic demand consumption and investment. Tax increases are not the answer. Higher tax rates would not only lower GNP growth in the short run but would also continue to dull economic incentives and to reduce growth far into the future. This would make even more painful the necessary adjustment of consumption and investment to bring domestic demand in line with GNP in the long run INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS The link between the current account balance and the national saving-investment balance also helps to emphasize the importance of international capital markets and net capital flows in the development of the U.S. current account deficit. The counterpart to the U.S. current account deficit is a capital account surplus ; developments influencing one account significantly influence the other. On the one hand deep liquid international capital markets have represented a ready source of financing for the large shortfall of U.S. saving relative to U.S. investment. On the other hand changes in the desirability of holding U.S assets particularly dollar-denominated assets have had substantial effects on exchange rates thereby affecting the current account International capital markets channel resources from the ultimate savers in the world economy to those countries that offer the most attractive opportunities to invest. For example through most of the 19th century the inflow of capital from abroad helped the United States to exploit its vast productive potential much more quickly than if U.S. capital formation had been limited to U.S.-based saving. In this case the associated current account deficit was part of a process that invigorated a then-young economy Similarly the capital inflows now associated with the U.S. current account deficit have once again become an important source of investment financing. Several factors have made the United States one of the most attractive places in which to invest funds. The strong growth of the U.S. economy during the first six quarters of this expansion stood in marked contrast to the sluggish performance abroad especially in Europe. This growth combined with the reduction in capital taxation embodied in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of ( ERTA ) surely increased the relative attractiveness of investment in the United States It is important to recognize however that the development of the U.S. current account deficit has also been associated with a sharp drop in the national saving rate ( relative to the cyclical peak in either or ) Between and the national saving rate fell more than percentage points ( Table ) This drop has made the United States increasingly dependent on net capital inflows to finance U.S. investment. In net capital inflows and the associated buildup of foreign claims on the United States equaled one-half of U.S. net capital formation. To the extent that the drop in the national saving rate is not desirable this dependence on net capital inflows to finance U.S. investment is also not desirable. Part of the decline in the national saving rate has resulted from the failure to bring government expenditures in line with revenues. Part of the increased dependence on capital inflows to finance U.S. investment therefore ought to be viewed as a by-product of a fiscal stance that should be corrected by gradually reducing the share of Federal expenditures in GNP TABLE National saving investment and net capital inflow [ Percent of GNP ] Year Gross private saving Government saving1 Gross national saving Gross private domestic investment3 Net capital inflow2 Federal State and local governments Includes statistical discrepancy Nominal prices Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis _ o This conclusion however in no way minimizes the role capital markets have played in driving the current account. Exchange rates are determined in asset markets. As is discussed in the next section the strong increase in the demand for dollar-denominated assets during the first half of the 1980s and the consequent appreciation of the dollar between and early was a key factor underlying the deterioration of the U.S. current account balance EXCHANGE RATES AND COMPETITIVENESS Exchange-rate changes are a direct channel through which international divergences in economic policy are transmitted to domestic economic performance. Exchange-rate movements that persistently exceed international inflation differentials real exchange-rate movements change the prices of a country 's imports relative to domestically produced goods and alter the ability of its producers to compete in world markets. This section reviews the behavior of the real foreign exchange value of the dollar and the relative price of U.S. imports over the past decade investigates the sources of these real exchange-rate movements and assesses the effect of these exchangerate movements on the international cost competitiveness of U.S manufacturers SOURCES OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS The past decade has been characterized by wide swings in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and in the relative price of imports Chart presents an index of the foreign exchange value of the dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies from other industrial and developing countries. The index is adjusted for differences in wholesale price inflation in each country and thus measures changes in the real foreign exchange value of the dollar. Also presented is an index of the relative price of non-oil imports computed as the ratio of the import price deflator excluding petroleum to the total GNP price deflator. As can be seen from the chart broad movements in the dollar 's real exchange rate and the relative price of imports over the past decade can be divided into three phases During the late 1970s the real value of the trade-weighted dollar depreciated and the relative price of imports increased by roughly percent. According to many observers the weakness of the dollar in the late 1970s was directly related to the perception that the United States was embarked on significantly more inflationary policies than were Japan and many West European countries. This perception led to depreciation of the dollar not only in nominal terms but also in real terms. The nominal foreign exchange value of the dollar fell Chart Real Exchange Rate and Relative Price of Imports Index : = Real Exchange Rate1'/ Relative Price of Imports Less Petroleum1/ I I I i II II I IIIi I Ii II I I III -VTrade-weighted value of the dollar adjusted by relative wholesale prices -2/Ratio of implicit price deflator for imports less petroleum to GNP implicit price deflator Sources : Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York and Department of Commerce more than was justified by the actual excess of inflation in the United States over inflation in other countries because the exchange rate responds to expected future inflation as well as to current and past inflation The relatively weak dollar during the late 1970s benefited many trade-sensitive industries in the United States. The real depreciation of the dollar shielded these industries from their foreign competitors because as is shown in Chart import prices increased faster than did the prices of domestically produced goods and services. This allowed some manufacturing industries to remain profitable while increasing real wage rates substantially more rapidly than in the rest of the United States economy despite slow productivity growth. The insulation from foreign competition that the weak dollar provided to many trade-sensitive industries in the United States in the 1970s left many of these industries poorly prepared to deal with such competition in the 1980s The first half of the 1980s was marked by an unprecedented surge in the real foreign exchange value of the dollar. From the third quarter of through the first quarter of the real value of the trade-weighted dollar appreciated by some percent and the relative price of imports declined by percent. Although some observers have claimed that the dollar 's appreciation can be attributed to a single cause several factors contributed to the sustained rise in the dollar between and early The shift in monetary policy from one of perceived ease and accommodation to an actual and ultimately perceived anti-inflationary stance in the early 1980s was likely critical to the reversal during and of the real depreciation of the dollar that had occurred in the late 1970s. Between the third quarter of and the fourth quarter of the dollar appreciated in real terms back to its early level. The dollar appreciated an additional percent in real terms in This appreciation was likely due at least in part to increasingly persuasive evidence that the Federal Reserve was committed to an anti-inflationary monetary policy From the trough of the recession in the fourth quarter of through the first quarter of the dollar appreciated an additional percent in real terms. The initial dramatic decline and subsequent stability of inflation in conjunction with the strong growth in real GNP in comparison with both past expansions and growth in most other industrial countries probably played an important role in the further appreciation of the dollar during The excess of real domestic demand over real domestic output that has characterized the current expansion translates into an excess of real domestic investment over real domestic saving that in turn equals the real net inflow of foreign capital. At least a portion of this capital inflow and the appreciation of the dollar during likely resulted from the increase in the after-tax profitability of physical investment in the United States during this period. The increase in the after-tax profitability of investment resulted from the interaction of the ERTA tax reductions with the decline in inflation which increased the value of original cost depreciation Real business fixed investment grew much more rapidly relative to real GNP in the first years of the expansion than in previous cyclical upswings. Indeed the share of real business fixed investment in real GNP achieved a postwar record in This strength occurred despite high real interest rates and concern that the Federal budget deficit would crowd out private investment. Furthermore the real valuation of the corporate capital stock by the equity markets also surged during this period. As discussed in previous Economic Reports these facts are consistent with the view that changes in the tax law raised the value in equity markets of new physical capital and the attractiveness of foreign investment in the United States Since the first quarter of the real value of the trade-weighted dollar has fallen by percent back to its late level. Although the causes of this steep depreciation of the dollar are difficult to isolate with precision the decline in real GNP growth in the United States since mid-1984 likely contributed to the dollar 's fall. In addition the announced intentions of the Group of Five to seek a lower dollar in the Plaza Agreement and subsequent actions to back up these intentions especially the continuation of the easing of U.S. monetary policy that began in late probably contributed to further dollar depreciation after September More generally the convergence of economic performance and economic policies of the leading industrial countries in and was probably necessary to support a significant adjustment of exchange rates So far little evidence exists of the effect of the substantial depreciation of the dollar on U.S. trade flows. Several factors help to explain this limited impact. Existing empirical evidence indicates that import prices respond with a lag of up to years to even large changes in exchange rates. This phenomenon results from the choice of foreign producers to boost profit margins as their currencies depreciate against the dollar and to allow these margins to narrow so as to maintain market share as their currencies appreciate against the dollar. According to one study foreign producers widened their profit margins considerably during the appreciation of the dollar. This provided them ample room to narrow profit margins by limiting price increases and thus maintain market share as the dollar depreciated. Indeed as is shown in Chart non-oil import prices actually declined in and began to rise only in Another factor that has limited the immediate effect of the depreciation of the dollar on U.S. trade flows is that the dollar has not in fact depreciated substantially against the currencies of several important trading partners. Total imports from Canada Korea and Taiwan exceed imports from Western Europe or Japan yet the dollar has depreciated less than percent against the currencies of Canada and Taiwan and has actually continued to appreciate against the Korean won PRODUCTIVITY AND COMPETITIVENESS Declining international competitiveness of the U.S. economy especially manufacturing industries is often cited as an important cause of the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance. Programs to revive supposedly sagging productivity growth are often recommended as a means of improving competitiveness and reducing the trade deficit In fact as is discussed in Chapter productivity growth in manufacturing during the current cycle has exceeded the postwar average and substantially exceeded the sluggish rate of productivity growth during the 1970s. Since the business cycle peak in the third quarter of output per hour in manufacturing has grown at an average annual rate of percent percent faster than the postwar average of percent per year and more than twice the annual average rate of percent recorded between and Furthermore real wage growth in the manufacturing sector has exhibited notable restraint during the current cycle. Since the business cycle peak real hourly compensation in manufacturing has grown at an average annual rate of percent percent slower than the postwar average annual rate of percent As the result of restrained wage increases and strong productivity growth unit labor costs in manufacturing have increased at an average annual rate of only percent since the peak and have actually declined at an average annual rate of percent since the recession trough in the fourth quarter of By contrast unit labor costs in manufacturing have grown at an average annual rate of percent over the entire postwar period and grew at an average annual rate of percent between and Table compares movements in unit labor costs in the United States with a trade-weighted average of unit labor costs in of the largest foreign industrial countries. As is shown in the second column of the table when measured on a national currency basis growth in unit labor costs during the first half of the 1980s was percentage points higher abroad than in the United States. In the absence of other developments the relatively better U.S. performance which was a product of surging productivity growth and restrained wage increases would have improved U.S. international cost competitiveness. However the cost competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers also depends upon the dollar exchange rate. Foreign importers can charge a lower dollar price to cover the same level of national currency costs when the dollar appreciates against their own currencies As indicated by the third column of Table the appreciation of the dollar during the first half of this decade overwhelmed the other determinants of international cost competitiveness. In national currency terms unit labor costs in the largest foreign industrial countries rose more than percent during the first half of the 1980s ; in dollar terms foreign unit labor costs fell nearly percent. Instead of experiencing a percent improvement in U.S. international cost competitiveness between and the strong appreciation of TABLE U. S. and foreign unit labor costs [ = ] Eleven foreign industrial countries1 United States Year National currency basis Dollar basis Trade-weighted average of Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Norway Sweden and United Kingdom Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers the dollar boosted the ratio of U.S. unit labor costs to foreign unit labor costs by percent This gap between the unit labor costs in U.S. manufacturing industries relative to manufacturing industries in most other industrial countries has been narrowed significantly by the depreciation of the dollar that began in early According to the International Monetary Fund the ratio of unit labor costs in the United States to a trade-weighted average of unit labor costs expressed in dollars in other industrial countries fell almost percent to its level between the first quarter of and the second quarter of In sum the deterioration of international cost competitiveness in U.S. manufacturing during the first half of this decade was the result of the real appreciation of the dollar not sagging productivity growth or excessive wage increases. This fact does not imply however that the United States can or should rely solely on exchange-rate movements to improve further its international cost competitiveness. Exchange-rate depreciation can increase competitiveness in the intermediate run by making foreign-produced products more expensive but at the cost of slower real income growth. By contrast improving international cost competitiveness through greater productivity and economic efficiency increases real income growth. The United States should seek to strengthen international competitiveness by implementing policies that increase productivity. The President is sending to the Congress a package of initiatives to enhance further U.S. productivity and competitiveness including increased funding for basic and applied scientific research reforms of Federal regulations to reduce business costs while continuing to serve important regulatory goals and efforts to improve access for U.S. products and services in foreign markets POLICY COORDINATION AND EXCHANGE RATE STABILITY There is general agreement among economists that better convergence of economic performance and better coordination of economic policies among the leading industrial countries is both desirable and essential for achieving greater stability of exchange rates. At the Tokyo Economic Summit the leaders of the seven largest industrial countries agreed to a flexible approach to improving the international monetary system by providing more effective procedures for the coordination of economic policies. The approach adopted in Tokyo represents an important step down the path to greater convergence of economic performance and better coordination of economic policies a path that was charted at earlier Economic Summits and Ministerial Meetings including especially the Versailles Economic Summit and the Group of Five meeting of September Three features of the approach outlined at the Tokyo Summit deserve particular emphasis First efforts at policy coordination will not focus narrowly on achieving specific values or ranges for exchange rates. Policymakers are to consider a broad class of indicators of economic performance and economic policy : GNP growth rates inflation rates interest rates unemployment rates fiscal deficit ratios current account and trade balances monetary growth rates reserves and exchange rates. This approach should help to avoid the inherent weakness of pegged exchange-rate systems : rigid commitments to particular exchange-rate values or ranges become too expensive in terms of other important policy objectives and ultimately collapse under the pressure of policy conflicts. The Tokyo Summit leaders explicitly stated that the objectives of policy coordination are much broader than limiting exchange-rate movements. Objectives include " promoting non-inflationary economic growth strengthening market-oriented incentives for employment and productive investment opening the international trading and investment system and fostering greater stability of exchange rates. " Second individual nations are responsible for formulating their economic objectives and forecasting the critical indicators of economic policy and performance. Collective assessment of the mutual compatibility of objectives and forecasts is required as the essence of policy coordination and the managing director of the International Monetary Fund is assigned his traditional role in assisting multilateral surveillance. However no agency is asked to undertake the essentially impossible task of forcing sovereign nations to pursue policies contrary to their perceived national interests. Instead the onus is on individual nations to live up to their own commitments and forecasts Third when significant deviations from the intended and agreed upon course arise individual nations are pledged " to make their best efforts to reach understanding on appropriate remedial measures. " This pledge is not an effort to fine-tune the world economy to correct for all of the minor and inevitable deviations from its forecasted path. The emphasis is on " significant deviations from intended course. " Further the Summit leaders agreed that remedial efforts should " focus first on underlying policy fundamentals. " This agreement does not preclude official intervention in foreign exchange markets when such intervention would be useful. However it does place the emphasis for policy coordination where it belongs on the economic policies that ultimately influence important developments in the world economy Experience with the operation of this new system of policy coordination will contribute to its further development. Even at this stage however it is clear that better policy coordination offers the promise of more stable exchange rates reduced external imbalances and a more favorable economic environment for developing countries CURRENT REQUIREMENTS FOR POLICY COORDINATION In the period ahead the principal challenge of policy coordination is to reduce present international payments imbalances in a manner that will support sustained noninflationary growth in the world economy. Unilateral actions by the United States are not sufficient to accomplish this goal. Although a sharp U.S. recession would probably improve the U.S. trade balance it would not only injure economic well-being in the United States but would also sharply curtail prospects for growth in the rest of the world. Massive dollar depreciation by shifting world demand toward U.S.-produced goods would help reduce the U.S. external deficit but at a cost of increased inflationary pressures in the United States and depressed output growth in the main U.S. trading partners. Put simply reduction of the U.S. current account deficit requires that real GNP in the United States grow more strongly than domestic demand. This implies that real GNP growth abroad will fall short of foreign domestic demand growth Unless foreign domestic demand strengthens improvement in the U.S. current account balance will necessarily be associated with reduced foreign growth. Given the size of the potential adjustment in the U.S. current account the risk is that foreign growth would be sharply reduced An essential element of any program to reduce current external imbalances therefore is that other industrial countries must achieve stronger domestic-led growth. Stronger domestic demand growth is needed primarily to maintain satisfactory output and employment growth in these countries while the United States adjusts. It is also needed to engender the much needed expansion of U.S. export markets without having to rely on further massive depreciation of the dollar. Finally strengthened foreign domestic demand is needed to maintain the growth of demand for the exports of many developing countries. Many of these countries especially those with debt service problems face considerable pressures to improve their external positions. The United States however will be reducing not increasing its external deficit ; thus further improvements of the developing countries ' payments positions must come from the other industrialized countries Because the reduction of the U.S. current account deficit will take time strengthened foreign growth must be sustained over the medium term. Achieving such long-lasting improvements requires the elimination of those structural ( i.e. microeconomic-based ) distortions that have impeded growth. In particular to ease adjustment in the traded goods sectors efforts must be redoubled to eliminate not only those practices that have restrained domestic demand but also those rigidities that have reduced the mobility of labor and capital between sectors. In Western Europe where the recent economic recovery has coexisted with sustained rises in unemployment in some countries to depression levels there is a clear need to reform those policies that have reduced labor flexibility and have rendered employment unprofitable. In Japan where the emphasis has been on export-led growth the need is to eliminate those policies that have hindered domestic demand. In many countries there is a need to consider tax reforms that would substantially lower marginal tax rates without necessarily reducing government revenues in the long run. These measures are desirable not simply because they would indirectly help reduce present external imbalances ; they are desirable because they would improve long-term economic performance and well-being Efforts by foreign industrial countries to effect a growth-oriented reduction in external imbalances must be matched by corresponding efforts by the United States. Reductions in the U.S. current account deficit require that domestic demand in the United States grow less rapidly than GNP and that national saving increase by more than national investment. The United States can make a critical contribution to achieving these results by reducing the Federal deficit through expenditure restraint. Restraint on Federal spending would help slow domestic demand growth but the effects of this slowing would not significantly reduce GNP growth provided that stronger growth of demand abroad and the lagged effects of dollar depreciation boost U.S. exports The preferred approach to unwinding current external imbalances calls for continued growth of world demand but with a smaller contribution coming from the United States and a larger contribution from surplus countries. Domestic demand growth abroad would expand faster than potential GNP while domestic demand in the United States would grow more slowly than potential output. Movements in exchange rates would offset the effect of these changes in the sources of world demand for any one country 's products. In the United States the reduced size of the government would allow for a greater percentage of the Nation 's output to be devoted toward private investment and consumption Two other elements are also essential for the effective implementation of this program. First developing countries especially those with external debt problems need to adopt more growth-oriented policies. The critical issue here is really for developing countries themselves to make the reforms necessary to support long-term growth. However the industrial countries and the international financial system have an important role to play in assisting countries that are moving toward more growth-oriented reforms. This role is the essence of the program articulated by the Secretary of the Treasury in October to deal with the problems of debtor countries. The long-term goal of this approach is to restore the access of these countries to international capital markets by increasing their capacity to service their debts. By taking the measures needed to restore their access to international credit markets these countries will not only be pursuing policies that will promote long-term growth with existing resources but will also restore the capital inflows needed to underwrite additional investment and growth. These developments would primarily benefit the developing countries themselves. They would also expand markets for the products of the industrial countries Meanwhile industrial countries can contribute to growth-oriented adjustment in developing countries by sustaining a growing market for their exports. ( For a detailed analysis of this subject see Economic Report of the President : Chapter ) Finally all countries must avoid new protectionist measures and work to reduce and eventually dismantle existing barriers to international trade in both goods and services. Much attention has recently focused on growing protectionist sentiment in the United States Progress in reducing the U.S. trade deficit combined with efforts abroad to reduce protectionism in foreign markets are clearly important in resisting protectionist actions in the United States Similarly efforts in the United States to resist protectionism are needed to prevent the awakening of protectionist forces abroad International trade after all is dominated by trade in goods. Just as most of the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance was in manufactures improvements in the U.S. trade balance will come about largely from a swing in manufactures trade. This development will present serious adjustment problems for U.S. trading partners especially as the performance of manufactures output in many countries notably Western European countries has been weak. It would be singularly unfortunate therefore if the United States were to suggest just as its trade position was beginning to improve that protectionist measures were an acceptable response to these adjustment pressures. In the end all countries share an important common interest in the liberal system of international trade and must work to protect and expand that system International policy coordination will always be made difficult by intercountry differences in economic situation and policy priorities At a minimum however it is important to identify those situations in which joint actions will reinforce efforts to achieve individual as well as common goals. Clearly it is in every nation 's interest that international payments imbalances unwind in an environment of continued world growth. Actions by other nations to strengthen their domestic demand and to reduce structural rigidities that have impeded adjustment combined with resolute action by the United States to restrain Federal spending offer a means of accomplishing this goal CHAPTER Opening International Markets ONE OF THE MORE REMARKABLE FEATURES of the past years has been the rapid increase in real income per capita in many parts of the world. This economic expansion has been fueled in large part by a tremendous growth in world trade. In turn growth in world trade has resulted from a major effort led by the United States and other countries to reduce global barriers to international commerce These events stand in direct contrast with the decade preceding the start of World War II. Then stagnation in the domestic economies of major nations was compounded by the spread of import barriers export subsidies trade wars and a general emphasis on closing domestic markets to foreign competition Determined not to see this scenario unfold again after the war the United States sparked a move to establish a world trade system complete with firm rules to govern trade practices and to ensure that trade policies would not degenerate into beggar-thy-neighbor protectionism. International organizations were created to guide the world economy along this new path. Among them was the General Agreement on Tariffs and Tra<Jt ? ( GATT ) ^ et up to initiate a reduction of trade barriers and to mediate-commercial disputes between member nations GATT has presided over seven multilateral rounds of negotiations that have produced historic global tariff reductions. As tariffs have come down the volume of international trade has increased much faster than world production. Unfortunately while GATT has been expanding trading opportunities among countries largely through tariff reductions these efforts have been undermined by new and much less transparent protectionist measures The world thus stands at a crossroads similar to the one it faced years ago. The commercial playing field is littered with government policies aimed at protecting various industries from the rigors of international competition. Trade in major product sectors including steel automobiles electronics textiles apparel and footwear is becoming increasingly regulated by measures such as voluntary export restraints and orderly marketing agreements. The cost of these policies is enormous while the benefits reach only a few. Unless some- thing reverses the trend toward government-sponsored trading arrangements the growth enjoyed by world economies over the past four decades could be severely curtailed The United States as the largest participant in world trade and as a long-time champion of free trade stands in a unique position to fight this move toward greater protectionism. From its start the Administration has supported free trade. Most recently it reaffirmed this position in a policy statement issued on September which contained a multipronged program to enhance and strengthen the international trading environment. Elements of the program included macroeconomic policies aimed at dollar realignment fiscal deficit reduction and an effort to ease the debt burden of developing countries With respect to trade policy the statement proposed that the United States undertake a number of bilateral measures aimed at reducing foreign trade barriers. A second thrust of U.S. trade policy would be to rekindle the GATT process by urging fellow members to enter into a new round of multilateral trade talks More than a year has passed since these policies were announced Using a series of self-initiated cases under Section of the Trade Act of the Administration has sought to eliminate certain unfair trading practices of foreign governments. A fund of money has been established to support Export-Import Bank loans as part of an effort to persuade foreign countries to restrict and eliminate commercial subsidy elements of their foreign aid grants. Bilateral talks aimed at establishing free-trade areas have been concluded with Israel and begun with Canada And because of a leading role taken by the Administration a new round of multilateral trade liberalization talks held under the auspices of GATT has commenced in Geneva. This new round presents an important opportunity for rolling back interventionist measures and for strengthening rules of conduct in international trade Indeed it offers prospects to rein in the various new forms of protection that have arisen because of current weaknesses in the GATT process. The new round also provides the opportunity to extend rules of commercial relations to areas previously exempted from or not covered by GATT including agriculture services direct foreign investment and intellectual property rights This chapter reviews the Administration 's trade policy initiatives of the past year especially as they relate to efforts to open foreign markets. The fundamental premise behind these efforts is that free trade offers Americans the greatest hope for a prosperous future. Consequently this chapter begins by reviewing the benefits of free trade THE CASE FOR FREE TRADE Governments have long interfered with the exchange of goods across their boundaries. One purpose of their barriers was to collect revenues through tariffs or tolls. Local industry usually supported and benefited from the protective effect of these policies. Indeed in many instances pressure from domestic producers induced governments to shelter them from foreign competition with trade restrictions. Another purpose was to achieve trade surpluses through export subsidies and import restrictions. These policies whose ostensible goal was to increase and preserve domestic wealth at the expense of other countries became known as mercantilism For more than years many economists have argued against mercantilist policies and made the case for free trade. They generally believe that restrictions on commercial activity reduce wealth rather than increase it. Conversely the argument for free trade is relatively simple yet compelling The case for free international trade is much the same as the case for free internal trade. Commerce between the United States and Japan benefits Americans as does commerce between New York and California. The exchange of goods internally or internationally arises as a natural outcome of specialization. Because of factors such as climate natural resource endowments or technology different economic regions possess different abilities to produce certain goods Individuals firms and industries within these regions tend to concentrate their efforts in the goods and services that they are best able to produce. Then their output is exchanged in the marketplace for that of other economic agents Specialization allows for a more efficient use of scarce resources and permits improved productivity of the economy. The larger the size of the market the greater are the possibilities for specialization and for increasing the wealth of the community. The extent of specialization in international trade is related to the forces of international competition. As barriers between markets are lowered some domestic producers will face increased competition from abroad Other producers will exploit export opportunities as accessible markets expand. Hence production will tend to contract in industries where foreign goods are superior relative to domestic goods on a price and/or quality basis. In those industries where domestic goods are relatively superior to foreign local output will expand. These latter industries are said to have a comparative advantage In essence comparative advantage means that an industry will export if it is more efficient relative to other domestic industries. An industry 's productivity relative to other industries within the same country determines its ability to command scarce resources within that economy and thereby to export to the rest of the world. Thus a local industry 's efficiency compared with that industry in foreign countries is not the main determinant of whether it exports or faces import competition Because comparative advantage refers to an internal ranking of productivity a country may import goods even if the local producing industry is more efficient than its foreign rival. A country will tend to concentrate production in those industries in which it has the greatest comparative advantage. Standards of living rise as resources are put to their most productive uses. One sign of rising standards of living of course is a rise in real wages A common misconception about international trade is that it is unfair. For instance some argue that because U.S. wages are high relative to wages in other countries U.S. producers can not compete This argument is true for some industries but not true in general U.S. wages are high because American workers are in general rnqre productive than their foreign counterparts. The relatively high U.S productivity comes about from this Nation 's enormous stock of physical and human capital. As U.S. productivity levels increase so do wages paid to workers. This puts upward pressure on wages even in relatively inefficient sectors of the economy. But if wages rise and productivity does not keep pace then American firms will have trouble competing An instructive example comes from the U.S. steel industry. From to wages rose much faster than labor productivity in steel and faster than wages and labor productivity in overall manufacturing. As a consequence unit labor costs increased dramatically and the comparative advantage of U.S. steel products deteriorated badly In other sectors where wages are relatively high but productivity remains strong such as aircraft and computers U.S. products compete successfully in world markets In addition to raising the general standard of living the forces of free trade also produce dynamic gains for the economy. These benefits accrue because in the absence of government intervention investment in new plant and equipment and in research and development tends to concentrate in the most efficient sectors of the economy. This increases the rate of growth of the economy. Conversely in an economy riddled with protectionist policies investment is often diverted from more efficient industries because of government-induced distortions in relative rates of return Finally political gains arise from free-trade policies. As countries rely more on each other for goods and services they are more likely to settle international disputes through negotiation rather than hos- tile action. An example is the remarkable reduction in national tensions between the countries of Western Europe since the adoption of internal free-trade policies following World War II It is sometimes argued that the benefits of free trade depend upon special assumptions about economic behavior. But the case for free trade is quite general. Early arguments for free trade assumed that industries were perfectly competitive and that trade arose from climatic or technological differences between countries. Later economists focused on trade resulting from relative differences in national endowments of factors of production such as labor and capital. In both instances the free-trade outcome was one where production expanded along the lines of comparative advantage and countries enjoyed the consequent gains of trade More recent theories of international trade flows stress the importance of imperfectly competitive market structures arising from such phenomena as increasing returns to scale and domestic barriers to entry. Even here however free international trade is beneficial. Expansion of markets because of freer trade may allow a firm to realize economies of scale from an output level higher than would be expected in the absence of trade. These economies can then be passed on to the consumer as lower prices. Expansion of markets through free trade also leads to an erosion of monopoly power enjoyed by those industries where both significant barriers to domestic entry and foreign competitors exist. Another source of gain is the benefit to consumers from an increase in product diversity in both quality and variety The benefits of free trade are relatively independent of actions taken by foreign countries. In particular it is often argued that because protectionist policies exist in foreign countries the United States must follow suit. This argument is generally false. The benefits to the United States flow from buying goods and services for which foreign producers have a comparative advantage and selling U.S goods and services where U.S. companies have a comparative advantage. To the extent that foreign policies reduce these trade possibilities those countries and the United States gain less Furthermore the benefits of free trade do not require that trade be balanced at any point in time. Indeed overall trade balances and the associated international capital flows allow countries the mutual benefit of trading goods and services over time. Countries with overall trade deficits borrow from the rest of the world. Such borrowing can provide the requisite funds for financing investment expenditures crucial to economic growth. Countries with overall surpluses lend to the rest of the world. This lending raises the wealth of the country if it is allocated to projects that earn higher rates of return than would otherwise be possible. However neither borrowing nor lending can go on indefinitely and economic forces will work over time to ensure that imbalances are closed. Thus trade in goods and services between any country and the rest of the world tends to be in balance over the long run On the other hand trade between any two countries may never be in balance. For a variety of reasons countries tend to amass surpluses with some countries and deficits with others. Unfortunately interest in bilateral trade balances essentially a mercantilist trait remains great. In May the House of Representatives passed an omnibus trade bill H.R. that called for the President to identify countries that have " excessive " trade surpluses with the United States and then to negotiate with or take actions against these countries regardless of the underlying causes of the surpluses. The President labeled the bill " kamikaze legislation " and promised to veto the measure but it died when the 99th Congress adjourned Despite the obvious benefits of a liberal trading order various forms of protection abound and are proliferating at an alarming rate Why do governments continue to pursue these policies ? Various justifications have been put forward by governments to defend protectionist policies. Examples include government revenue national defense unfair foreign trade practices preservation of certain ways of life and short-term aid to revitalize industry Whatever the motive protection in any form redistributes income and wealth. And because the redistributive effects are usually not readily apparent special interest groups sometimes favor and governments often choose these methods over other more visible and much less costly forms of subsidy. Protection raises the price of imports and domestically produced import-competing products. But consumers are seldom aware of the tax imposed upon them by protection because they rarely have the opportunity to observe the difference between domestic and world prices. The cost of protection to consumers can be quite dramatic. For instance the Council of Economic Advisers estimated that if Congress had been successful in its attempt to override the President 's veto of the Textile and Apparel Trade Enforcement Act of Americans would have had to pay up to an additional $ billion for textiles and apparel over the next years Given these considerations the Administration supports policies designed to improve the efficiency and productivity of the U.S. economy. Such steps should make Americans more prosperous. These policies include retraining for displaced workers reforming antitrust laws and strengthening property rights both domestically and abroad. Other initiatives include the repeal or reform of regulations that unnecessarily impinge upon U.S. competitiveness SECTORAL MARKET OPENING INITIATIVES SECTION ACTIONS Trade imbalances are largely macroeconomic phenomena not related directly to market access barriers or unfair trade practices by foreigners. But trade barriers and unfair practices distort economic activity and generally harm economic efficiency. For this reason the Administration is committed to eliminating foreign trade policies that pose a significant burden on U.S. exports Section of the Trade Act of as amended provides the authority and procedures for the President to act against certain unfair trading practices of U.S. trading partners. The President must first find that action is appropriate to enforce U.S. rights under any trade agreement or to respond to any act policy or practice of a foreign country that ( a ) is inconsistent with the provisions of or otherwise denies the United States benefits under any trade agreement or ( b ) is unjustifiable unreasonable or discriminatory and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce. If he so finds then he is authorized to act to enforce these rights or to eliminate the act policy or practice Unjustifiable practices are those that violate or are inconsistent with U.S. international rights. The term " unreasonable " refers to acts policies or practices that are not necessarily illegal or inconsistent with U.S. international legal rights but are viewed as being unfair. The act applies not only to practices that harm U.S. trade in goods and services but also to actions against U.S. direct foreign investment that affect trade in goods or services Section is administered by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ( USTR ) Petitions may be filed by any interested party or they may be " self-initiated " by USTR on its own or at the request of the President. Once an investigation has been opened USTR in cooperation with other U.S. Government agencies determines the extent of harm to domestic interests and recommends action for the President. At the same time USTR consults with the foreign government involved in the complaint and attempts to negotiate a settlement Depending upon the specific nature of the alleged practice USTR has up to months to conclude the investigation and recommend action to the President. If no solution is reached USTR may recommend that the President impose duties or other restrictions on imports from the foreign country or take any other action authorized by law. Retaliatory actions taken under Section may be nondiscriminatory or solely against the goods and services of the foreign country involved in the dispute. The products subject to retaliation need not correspond to the products related to the dispute Between January and November cases had been initiated under Section Table details the disposition of these cases. In addition numerous firms and industry groups have consulted with USTR regarding the Section process or have filed and then withdrawn their petitions before a case could be initiated. More than percent of initiated cases were begun under the current Administration. Until all of these came as the result of privately filed complaints. Recently however the role of Section as an active component of U.S. trade policy has grown with the President directing USTR to self-initiate four investigations and three trade actions aimed at the practices of several U.S. trading partners. Five of the seven proceedings have been favorably resolved while two are pending. Brief descriptions of the circumstances of these self-initiated cases follow TABLE Summary of cases under Section [ January to November ] Number Category Petitions considered Petitions withdrawn Cases terminated : Due to resolution of dispute Due to other reasons Cases resulting in retaliation Cases suspended Cases pending Note. Case resolutions do not equal number of petitions considered because cases may fall into more than one category Source : Compiled by Council of Economic Advisers from data provided by Office of the U.S. Trade Representative Self-initiated Section Cases On September at the request of the President an investigation was begun into practices that act as a barrier to U.S. cigarette sales in Japan. These practices included tariffs combined with internal ad valorem excise taxes an absolute prohibition on the manufacture of foreign cigarettes in Japan discriminatory treatment in the collection of excise taxes and restrictions on the distribution of foreign cigarettes. Bilateral consultations were held between representatives of USTR and the government of Japan. Japan promised to suspend altogether tariffs on cigarette imports. It also agreed to eliminate the discriminatory deferral in collecting excise taxes terminate discriminatory distribution practices and make its price approval system virtually automatic. On October the President suspended the investigation with the intent that it be terminated upon full implementation of the agreement In the autumn of the President directed USTR to self-initiate two Section investigations against the practices of Korea. The first involved restrictions on the ability of U.S companies to sell fire and life insurance in Korea. The second was aimed at the lack of effective protection of U.S. intellectual property rights such as copyright protection for literary and artistic works including computer software and patent protection for chemical and pharmaceutical products. Bilateral consultations resulted in agreements covering both complaints. The first increased U.S. market access to Korea 's insurance market by allowing U.S. insurers to underwrite both life and other insurance. The second promised to expand dramatically the protection of intellectual property rights. The President approved the agreements in August and the investigations were terminated On August the President determined that Taiwan 's practice of calculating customs duties based on prices listed in dutypaying tables violated a trade agreement or was unjustifiable and a burden on U.S. trade. In effect this practice had led to increased duties paid to Taiwan because the prices in the tables often exceeded transactions values. Before USTR could recommend an appropriate method of retaliation Taiwan agreed to stop the practice In October Taiwan agreed to provide greater market access for U.S. exports of beer wine and cigarettes within to months In particular Taiwan agreed to lift an import ban on beer and to allow U.S. products to be sold at all retail outlets where Taiwanese products were sold. It also agreed to limit retail markups on U.S products to the level applied to local products and to allow market forces to determine the levels of importation of U.S. products On October the President determined that Taiwan had not honored the agreement and accordingly found the Taiwanese practices to be unreasonable and a burden on U.S. commerce. He directed USTR to retaliate. On December before the retaliation could be implemented Taiwan agreed to settle the dispute and the President ordered the case terminated On March the President announced his intention to impose quotas on several European Community ( EC ) products in response to EC restrictions affecting U.S. exports of oilseeds and grains to Portugal. He also vowed to increase tariffs on certain products if the EC did not provide compensation for reduced U.S. exports of corn and sorghum to Spain as a result of the replacement of Spain 's 20-percent tariff on these products by the EC 's variable levy The EC had taken its actions in connection with the accession of Spain and Portugal to the EC On May the President imposed quotas on EC imports in response to the Portuguese import restrictions. However to date these actions have not restricted trade. On July the EC and the United States reached an interim agreement and the quotas were lifted to permit continued sales of corn and sorghum to Spain for an additional months. Both sides had agreed to December as a deadline for the final agreement. Unfortunately subsequent negotiations have failed to produce a settlement. Consequently on December the President announced that ad valorem tariffs of percent would be placed on certain products primarily imported from the EC with a trade value approximately equal to the estimated loss of corn and sorghum exports. The tariffs will be implemented no earlier than January thus allowing additional time for negotiations On September at the President 's direction USTR began a Section investigation into all aspects of Brazil 's computer and computer-related ( informatics ) products policies. Included in the investigation were practices concerning import restrictions limitations on U.S. investment and failure adequately to protect intellectual property rights. On October the President announced that Brazil 's informatics policy was unreasonable and a burden or restriction on U.S. commerce but ordered that the case be continued until December to give both sides more time to reach an agreement. In the meantime he requested that USTR notify GATT of U.S. intentions to suspend the application of tariff concessions to Brazil and to effect such suspensions when appropriate In the weeks that followed the Presidential announcement some progress was achieved on certain procedural aspects of Brazil 's informatics policy. Consequently on December the President suspended those aspects of the investigation. In addition he ordered a further extension until July to give negotiators additional time to settle remaining issues in the case Analysis of Section Actions The Administration 's decision to self-initiate several Section cases has sent important signals. First U.S. industries know that if they encounter unreasonable trade barriers in foreign markets a mechanism exists to help them overcome these barriers. Moreover both the self-initiations and actions in cases initiated in response to industry filings demonstrate U.S. concern to its trading partners about their commercial policies. The message of the Section process is that in the products and countries involved in the various cases the United States thinks its comparative advantage is being unfairly denied Section puts the weight of the President behind disputes over specific narrowly defined trade practices abroad. This attention sharpens the focus of the dispute and allows pressure to build on a clear and remediable problem. The threat of retaliation can provide leverage to negotiate an end to unfair foreign practices. Section also encompasses a greater range of issues ( in goods services investment and intellectual property rights ) than does GAIT Section should be used with caution. Actions taken under it may be perceived as an intrusion into the policies of a foreign government And while these policies may clearly be egregious and often lower the economic welfare of the foreign country in some cases the threat of retaliation may not provide the best incentive for successful resolution of the issue Political leaders may not want to appear to be vulnerable to foreign threats and may resist a mutually beneficial agreement to preserve national pride. Thus Section cases are most likely to succeed in areas that have little economic and political significance to foreign governments and retaliation is more likely in those cases with significant foreign national interest The level of contentiousness is even higher when the process is initiated at the President 's direction without a petition filed by a U.S firm or industry. In these cases it is most unlikely that the investigation will lead to any finding other than unreasonableness. The possibility of abandoning the case because the costs of retaliation are too high is limited U.S. retaliation may inflict as much or more harm on the American economy as it does on its target. In addition unless carefully handled it is likely to violate GAIT rules undermining an already weak international dispute settlement process. Moreover retaliation does not always stop with the issue at hand but may escalate into further rounds of retaliation and counter-retaliation. The potential for mutually destructive trade wars rises with the magnitude of the case and with the size of the trading partner While the focus of a Section case is usually on a specific product the effects of a settlement may extend to other related areas. For instance the recently concluded agreement with Japan over trade in semiconductor products has led at least temporarily to increases in the prices of these products. As semiconductor prices rise the competitiveness of industries using these products as inputs may diminish Several proposed trade bills recently considered by the 99th Congress would have amended the Section decisionmaking process Most of these proposals are ill-advised. For instance Senate bill S.I860 would have mandated the President to self-initiate several Section investigations each year. It would also have required the President to retaliate if settlement were not reached after a fixed period of time. Such requirements add inflexibility to areas where flexibility is vital and do nothing to address the fundamental problem of opening foreign markets. The decision to self-initiate raises the stakes in the negotiating process. Section currently allows the President to lend the force of his office in those situations where it most benefits the outcome of the process Finally the credibility of U.S. complaints about foreign trade barriers depends in part on the extent of its own barriers. U.S. tariffs are low on average but tariffs on certain products remain high and nontariff barriers affect a significant percentage of total imports. For example the United States participates in the international Multifiber Arrangement which authorizes complex bilateral trade-restricting agreements between exporters and importers of textiles and clothing The United States has asked its trading partners to limit their exports of steel and machine tools and uses nontariff barriers or high tariffs to restrict trade in sugar dairy products lumber products motorcycles and a number of other goods MARKET-ORIENTED SECTOR-SELECTIVE TALKS A much less confrontational approach to bilateral market opening is represented by a series of sectoral negotiations between the United States and Japan. Following the successful conclusion of talks to liberalize Japanese financial markets both governments sought to address the often contentious issue of commercial trade with Japan. In high-level discussions called Market-Oriented Sector-Selective ( MOSS ) talks began with the purpose of identifying and removing impediments to market access in Japan. Sectors initially chosen for discussion were telecommunications electronics medical equipment and pharmaceuticals and forest products. Transportation machinery was added later The MOSS talks have shown substantial progress. Japan has implemented reforms in telecommunications forest products and medical equipment and pharmaceuticals. MOSS discussions on electronics were largely preempted by the semiconductor agreement. Negotiations in transport machinery especially involving trade in automobile parts still continue RECIPROCAL MARKET OPENING INITIATIVES Opening markets on a piecemeal basis is difficult and inefficient. A more fruitful approach is to enter into discussions with foreign governments to open all markets reciprocally. These discussions can occur on a bilateral or multilateral basis. Important progress was made on both fronts in FREE-TRADE AREA NEGOTIATIONS A free-trade area ( FTA ) is an arrangement between two or more countries to remove barriers to trade among themselves but to maintain separate barriers with respect to nonmember countries. The benefits from FTAs resemble those attributed to free trade in general : expansion of market size can lead to efficiency gains through specialization. Consumers gain because they pay lower prices for certain goods because of increased competition Conclusion of FTA agreements can help to maintain the momentum for liberalizing trade. When the international climate does not permit widespread reductions of trade barriers liberalization among like-minded nations promotes free trade. When nations that refuse to reduce their trade barriers see that others will achieve gains from trade by reducing barriers bilaterally they might reconsider their commercial policies and join the effort to open markets FTAs have their problems. The potential cost of FTAs relative to freer trade in general arises from the fact that FTAs discriminate in favor of trade between member nations and against trade with nonmember countries. Hence the source of trade may be diverted away from the lowest cost world producer in favor of a higher cost FTA member Both the Administration and Congress however think that freetrade area arrangements are worthwhile. The Administration 's trade policy statement noted that bilateral negotiations are no substitute for multilateral negotiations but that " such agreements could complement our multilateral efforts and facilitate a higher degree of liberalization mutually beneficial to both parties than would be possible within the multilateral context/ ' Congress for its part has granted the Administration authority to enter into bilateral trade-liberalizing negotiations FTA Agreement with Israel The Trade and Tariff Act of specifically authorized the President to conclude an FTA agreement with Israel. Formal talks began in January An agreement was signed in April and the first stage of liberalization went into effect in September The agreement covers both tariff and certain nontariff barriers that exist between the two countries. Although most substantive elements of the agreement address liberalized trade in goods some relate to trade in services and protection of intellectual property rights The U.S.-Israel FTA is the first such agreement reached by the U.S. Government. One motivating factor for negotiating this agreement was Israel 's previous entry into a similar agreement with the EC covering trade in manufactured products. By negotiating an FTA with Israel the United States regained the competitive advantage that U.S. exporters had lost to their European competitors FTA Talks with Canada More trade passes between the United States and Canada than between any two other countries. In this trade totaled about $ billion. Canada is this country 's largest foreign market accounting for percent of total merchandise exports. The United States is Canada 's largest market purchasing more than percent of total Canadian exports. The two countries engage in substantial trade in services. In addition about percent of U.S. direct foreign investment is in Canada Over the course of U.S.-Canada relations special trade pacts have periodically been considered. From to trade between the two countries was governed by special treaty. Since the United States and Canada have had a sectoral agreement covering trade in automobiles. However more comprehensive and longstanding agreements have eluded American and Canadian negotiators for decades Recently a new effort to reinforce U.S.-Canada economic ties began. On September the Prime Minister of Canada called for negotiations between the United States and Canada to achieve " the broadest possible package of mutually beneficial reductions in barriers to trade in goods and services. " The Administration welcomed this proposal and formally notified Congress in December of its intent to enter into negotiations under the negotiating authority established in the Trade and Tariff Act of These negotiations were begun in May After consultations with advisory committees representing industry labor and agriculture the Administration developed objectives for the talks. The first objective is the elimination of Canadian tariffs. A second broad goal is the elimination of nontariff barriers to certain U.S. exports. The United States is also interested in eliminating barriers to foreign investment in Canada liberalizing trade in services and protecting intellectual property rights Canadian objectives include reducing U.S. tariffs and improving access to the government procurement process both Federal and State from which Canadian vendors have often been excluded because of various Buy American provisions. Both sides seek a dispute settlement mechanism that could be used to enforce any agreement emerging from these negotiations and to deal with individual disputes in the future The mutual economic gains of liberalized trade with Canada are likely to be substantial. The United States would benefit because Canadian tariffs are quite high and hence reduction of these barriers could lead to increased market access for U.S. exporters. Canada would gain from taking advantage of the economies of scale that it could achieve through producing for a market ten times larger than its own. Both countries also stand to gain in many nonquantifiable ways not the least of which is the reduction of commercial tensions Since the Administration has concluded or examined comprehensive bilateral trading arrangements with several countries. Although such arrangements are better in general than sectoral negotiations between countries and far better than negotiations conducted under threat of retaliation ( such as Section ) multilateral trade talks are the most efficient and all-encompassing means by which to reduce global trade barriers. Hence the Administration has placed strong emphasis on a new round of GATT talks THE NEW GATT ROUND An important Administration success in trade policy has been the launching of a new round of talks in GATT to reduce barriers to international trade and to strengthen and improve the global trading system. The announcement of an agreement to begin this new round was made at an international gathering of trade ministers at Punta del Este Uruguay on September Organized discussions began on October ; the negotiations are scheduled to continue for years The Uruguay Round holds considerable promise for U.S. commercial interests. In addition to traditional areas new topics that will be considered in the negotiations include trade in services treatment of foreign investment and protection of intellectual property rights The Administration played a key role in ensuring that these issues would be included in the talks History of GATT GATT was created at the end of World War II as one of several international agreements designed to promote world peace and development. It serves both as a forum for trade liberalization talks and international commercial dispute settlement and as a multilateral body that sets rules of conduct in international commerce. Countries that agree to follow GATT rules are said to be contracting parties As of December GATT comprised contracting parties including all developed Western economies. In addition numerous developing countries as well as several Eastern-bloc countries are GATT contracting parties. Together GATT members account for about percent of international trade As a code of commercial conduct GAIT prohibits quantitative restrictions on trade in goods and the GATT subsidies code outlaws government export subsidies for nonagricultural products. It does permit certain protective measures for balance of payments reasons to provide temporary relief for local industries in distress ( i.e. safeguards protection ) or to promote infant industries in developing countries. GATT has procedures for settling disputes arising between members. The dispute settlement process may sometimes be long and problems over compliance with decisions may develop. In the Uruguay Round the United States hopes to streamline and strengthen the dispute settlement process Since GATT has served as a forum for seven rounds of talks aimed at reducing international barriers to trade. Perhaps the two most successful and well-known are the Kennedy Round of the 1960s and the Tokyo Round of the 1970s. The major achievement of the Kennedy Round was across-the-board tariff cuts averaging percent on manufactured products. In the Tokyo Round manufactured goods tariffs were cut again this time an average of percent. In addition codes concerning nontariff barriers such as government procurement practices and customs valuation procedures were established The operating principle underlying the agreements to cut tariffs is the unconditional most favored nation ( MFN ) treatment among countries. This notion holds that if a contracting party grants trade concessions to another contracting party or to a nonmember country it must grant the same concessions to all contracting parties. The economic basis for this principle is sound. Because all countries belonging to GATT are treated alike and because GATT members account for most of world trade trade flows will tend to occur along the lines of comparative advantage. Thus potentially trade-distorting discriminatory treatment is minimized. The MFN rule also protects small countries by preventing big countries from negotiating exclusive mutual concessions. Thus less developed countries benefit from the full weight of U.S. influence in negotiating trade concessions. The MFN rule is extremely efficient in that it enables countries to avoid the huge administrative costs of conducting the thousands of bilateral trade agreements that are the effective equivalent of a multilateral GATT round ADMINISTRATION AIMS IN THE NEW GATT ROUND Talks in the new round will be conducted on the basis of a comprehensive agenda in two parallel areas one involving trade in goods and the other trade in services. The negotiations involving trade in goods represent an extension of previous negotiations. Topics to be addressed include tariff and nontariff barriers trade in tropical and natural resource based products textiles and clothing agriculture and trade-related investment and intellectual property rights issues In addition negotiations will seek to strengthen GATT rules related to subsidies dispute settlement and safeguards protection. The talks involving trade in services represent the first multilateral negotiations ever undertaken on this issue Dispute Settlement GATT acts as a forum for the settlement of disputes concerning the rules and obligations set out in the GATT agreement. In the first years of GATT the dispute settlement process was effective in interpreting the rules of GATT and pressing countries to adhere to GATT rules. Beginning about however confidence in GATT procedures and compliance with its rules began to wane. The Tokyo Round attempted to tighten the dispute settlement process but significant problems remain Basic weaknesses pervade the settlement process. The fundamental problem is delay. It is not atypical for cases to drag on for several years. Under current arrangements parties to a dispute can block adoption of settlement recommendations thereby compounding the problem of unsuccessful resolutions. Furthermore the process is least effective where GATT rules themselves are weak or ambiguous as with agriculture The United States is strongly committed to repairing and improving the dispute settlement system. The Administration supports new rules and procedures designed to restore international confidence in the system. Included in these rules would be the development of new arrangements to ensure compliance with GAIT rules and rulings New and strengthened trade rules make no sense for the world trading system without effective enforcement Trade in Services From to the production of services increased as a share of total U.S. output from to percent. As employment in manufacturing was falling as a share of total employment employment in the services sector was rising faster than total employment. Today about percent of American jobs are in the nongovernmental services sector. Between and real service exports rose faster than real GNP. Other developed economies have shared similar experiences. In the economies of developed countries on average services now account for about percent of value added and constitute approximately percent of international trade Despite the growing importance of the production and trade of services in the U.S. economy and the economies of other developed countries little has been done to limit government policies that restrict or distort trade in services. A key element of the Ministerial Declaration at Punta del Este was the establishment of a negotiating group on services : the object is to fashion a legal framework to reduce barriers to and govern trade in services The agreement to consider trade in services required considerable effort by U.S. negotiators. Opposition to negotiations over services was largely related to issues of national sovereignty. Several countries remain concerned about their ability in the face of foreign competition to develop domestic services industries in such sectors as telecommunications and insurance. Moreover these countries fear that without domestically supplied services they will be at risk. These familiar mercantilist arguments have no more validity in this instance than they do with trade in goods The Administration has stated objectives regarding talks in services. It would like to see a legal framework that consists of at least the following elements : transparency of restrictions so that all parties to the agreement are aware of laws and regulations in place to protect local industry ; open regulatory procedures ; limitations on the activities of local monopolies ; a dispute settlement process ; and a commitment to pursue liberalization in future talks Negotiators will still face the appropriate definition of the service sectors. The Administration seeks a framework covering activities readily traded internationally including but not limited to insurance telecommunications data processing shipping aviation construction and engineering. A second and potentially more difficult problem lies with the measurement of production and trade in services For most countries adequate data on trade in services do not exist Developing better measures of activity in the services area could be an important by-product of the Uruguay Round Investment The international diversification of capital through direct foreign investment raises economic welfare around the world. In countries that receive the investment standards of living rise because real wages rise resources are used more efficiently and technology levels increase. Countries that export financial capital under free market conditions also benefit because they allocate their capital to projects that earn higher rates of return than could have been earned otherwise. Thus the international flow of capital between countries is mutually beneficial in a fashion similar to the free exchange of goods Governments that unnecessarily restrict the location and operation of foreign capital lower the welfare of their citizens by lowering their incomes. All investment policies that distort or impede trade alter the pattern of trade away from that dictated by comparative advantage and lower the economic well-being of both the countries that impose the laws and the rest of the world The United States has traditionally welcomed foreign investment and only limits it in a few sensitive areas generally on essential national security grounds. Many countries have established free-trade zones and offer incentives to potential foreign investors. In effect they subsidize direct foreign investment in their countries and thereby distort capital and trade flows. Typical trade-distorting incentives include performance requirements which establish minimum export levels expected of the foreign corporation. Laws that require the use of domestic parts or labor exchange controls controls on technology transfer local equity requirements and regulations on licensing research and development are other common restrictions. In the Uruguay Round the United States will seek to develop effective multilateral disciplines over the whole range of trade-distorting investment measures Intellectual Property Rights Economic growth is spurred through the inventive innovative and creative activities of individuals and companies. When the resulting ideas are disseminated widely the ideas of one person often contribute to the creative activities of others. In order to encourage this process countries establish systems of laws to promote and protect inventions literary and artistic works trademarks and other forms of intellectual property. These patent copyright and trademark laws provide incentives to create intellectual property by granting exclusive rights to their creators. For instance patents afford inventors time to recover their investment and the costs of creating and marketing inventions. Copyrights give authors control for a period of time over the reproduction dissemination and public performance of their works. Trademarks assure consumers about product characteristics such as quality Different countries provide different levels of intellectual property protection. The United States seeks comprehensive protection for all forms of intellectual property. Certain other nations afford little protection to foreign holders of intellectual property or limit protection in several important areas. Some countries provide only minimal protection and use compulsory licensing to acquire foreign technology or reproduce copyrighted works. This problem is becoming increasingly important as U.S. producers expand the marketing of items such as computer software and pharmaceutical products abroad The Administration hopes the conclusion of an enforceable multilateral trade agreement will eliminate trade-distorting practices arising from inadequate protection of intellectual property. Part of this agreement would seek the adoption by GATT members of minimum standards of protection contained in existing international conventions where the United States perceives standards to be adequate. In areas where no convention exists or the standards under existing conventions are considered inadequate the Administration will seek greater protection Agriculture Trade policies affecting agricultural products are perhaps the most difficult and contentious issues awaiting the new round. Virtually all countries distort their trade in agriculture through tariffs quotas and export subsidies Industrialized countries adopt domestic agricultural policies aimed at raising farm income. Instead of providing farmers with income transfers decoupled from production governments employ price-distorting policies that encourage agricultural production. In order to limit the cost of these programs governments typically will also impose import tariffs or nontariff barriers such as quotas or variable levies and may subsidize the export of unwanted surpluses of domestic production. Thus a direct relationship exists between domestic agricultural policies and the distortion of agricultural trade The cost of these policies to both consumers and taxpayers is exceedingly high. Consumers are often forced by their governments to pay several times more than world price for the same product. For instance the price of sugar in the United States has recently been percent above the world price. Japanese consumers currently pay eight times the world price for rice. Beef prices in the EC are currently more than twice world prices The budget costs are also enormous and are worsening. Trade in agricultural products should be determined by comparative advantage ; instead it is determined by which government is willing to tax its own citizens the most in order to subsidize domestic producers This situation has prompted competitive countersubsidy trade wars among the industrial countries in an effort to capture world markets It is not surprising that the predominate source of all GAIT dispute settlement cases has been agricultural trade. The same is true for Section cases. Current rules on agricultural trade are weak vague and easily circumvented. Practices are tolerated that GATT has elsewhere forbidden The keen interest of the United States in negotiating tougher rules to govern agricultural trade stems in part from its role as a major exporter of agricultural products. In U.S. farm exports totaled $ billion accounting for percent of U.S. merchandise exports. U.S. agricultural exports have been declining rapidly however In the peak year for U.S. trade in this area exports totaled $ billion percent of all U.S. merchandise exports. Some of the loss of export markets can be attributed to the strength of the dollar. In addition recent technological advances in agricultural pro- duction have allowed countries that were only recently net importers of agricultural products to increase their production levels and become net exporters. High support prices in other countries have had similar effects. For example in the mid-1970s the EC was a net importer of million tons of grains percent of world trade in these products. By largely because of its internal farm policies the EC had become a net exporter of million tons a swing of million tons in the world market in a decade Some of the lost market for U.S. products has been caused by the production and export subsidy practices of certain competing nations. In order to stave off this reduction in markets the United States has resorted to subsidizing exports. The Uruguay Round offers the opportunity to end this costly and counterproductive subsidy war. Stable undistorted world agricultural markets offer the best opportunity for America 's farmers to export their products The United States seeks to improve the climate of international agricultural markets by bringing them under effective and enforceable multilateral rules. The United States hopes the Uruguay Round will make progress in reducing import restrictions on agricultural products in outlawing export subsidies and in reducing other forms of market barriers in developed and developing countries alike. Clearly the key to achieving fundamental reform in this area will be for countries to agree to eliminate distorting domestic agricultural policies CONCLUSION The Administration seeks to open foreign markets to U.S. exporters. Administration actions include the increased use of Section which attacks specific foreign trade practices ; the initiation of negotiations leading to bilateral free-trade areas between the United States and several important trading partners ; and the achievement of a new round of multilateral trade liberalization talks in GAIT The Administration 's approach stands in sharp contrast to efforts proposed by some to attack the trade imbalance with protectionist policies. Instead of bilateral market opening these forces recommend bilateral restrictions. Instead of multilateral trade liberalization they call for general import surcharges. Calls for protection ignore its cost to consumers its deadening effect on the efficiency of U.S. industry and the global economy its invitation to counter-retaliation that stings U.S. exporters and the inspiration it gives to other industries to seek government assistance in the guise of import relief. Raising trade barriers would only reduce the opportunities to open world markets for American products. Through its efforts to contain and reverse the growth of protectionism both at home and abroad the Administration hopes to ensure that the postwar expansion continues in the years to come CHAPTER Toward Agricultural Policy Reform U.S. AGRICULTURAL PROGRAMS have resulted in enormous budgetary costs benefits that do not reach those most in need huge surpluses of farm products major trade disputes with other countries and great harm to well-functioning international markets. Programs instituted at the Federal level have distorted economic incentives sufficiently to create serious long-term problems. Programs for some commodities have imposed substantial losses on consumers Chronic surpluses of major commodities exist throughout the world largely because of high U.S. Government target prices and heavy subsidization of agricultural production by most other developed countries Despite the massive taxpayer and consumer costs of current programs the U.S. agricultural sector faces its most severe economic crisis since the 1930s. Instability within the sector continues with little improvement apparent in the financial condition of many family farms and rural banks. Soil erosion and the pollution of surface and groundwater with toxic waste continue with only moderate signs of relief Agricultural policies have become contentious issues of immense importance to all countries. The shift in U.S. agriculture from its prosperous state in the inflationary period of the 1970s to its unsettled existence in the 1980s is linked to events abroad and to the policies pursued in both the agricultural sector and the U.S. economy in general. For these reasons this chapter focuses on the current state of U.S. and world agriculture how the Nation arrived at this state and what public policies would foster a healthy U.S. farm economy CHANGES IN U.S. AGRICULTURE Over much of the 20th century agriculture has been one of the most innovative and productive sectors of the U.S. economy. In the 1930s no perceptible difference in crop yields was visible among the United States England India and Argentina. In the subsequent years however U.S. agricultural productivity has increased dramati- cally. It has grown faster than other industries and until the mid1970s faster than agricultural productivity in other countries Farmers in the United States represent less than percent of the civilian labor force but they produce enough food to feed the entire domestic population while maintaining the capacity to export large quantities to the rest of the world. Farming operations represent only one component of a total food and fiber system that embraces all activities from the provision of farm inputs through commodity production and on to final consumption. Defined in this fashion the food and fiber system accounts for approximately one-fifth of the Nation 's gross national product ( GNP ) and slightly more than one-fifth of total labor force employment Factors that affect U.S. agriculture can be categorized as follows : macroeconomic financial and exchange-rate factors ; demand and supply ; and agricultural and food public policies. The interaction of these three forces along with the inherent instability of the U.S. agricultural sector explain the changes in the U.S. food and fiber system During the 1970s the combination of these forces had the effect of pushing agricultural prices and incomes to record levels. In the period the fall in the U.S. dollar the emergence of a wellintegrated international capital market to finance trade the lack of supply response in many foreign countries due to trade barriers and the growth in real income around most of the world boosted demand sharply for U.S. farm output. The elimination of the huge U.S. governmental stocks in that had accumulated during the 1960s made the system more vulnerable to shocks Throughout the 1970s supply and demand worked both to expand world agricultural trade and to increase the U.S. share in trade at an unprecedented pace. Foreign food consumption grew by million tons per year while the annual average increase in foreign grain production was only million tons. For the decade as a whole world trade expanded -fourfold while U.S. exports increased sixfold. By more than one-third of U.S. cropland was committed to producing for export while out of every tons of farm products traded were produced in the United States Rapid inflation in and again in boosted nominal agricultural prices and helped drive up the price of agricultural land Higher land prices made additional borrowing more attractive which was further stimulated during much of this period by negative real interest rates In the early 1980s the forces that stimulated the agricultural prosperity of the 1970s reversed direction. The need to control inflation led to a mix of U.S. fiscal and monetary policies that drove ex post real interest rates to postwar highs. The rise in the value of the dollar in the first half of the 1980s the worldwide recession that reduced demand for U.S. exports the increase in supplies of agricultural products from other countries and record U.S. crops in and all combined to reduce world prices and U.S. export sales. The Food and Agricultural Act of made it more profitable for U.S. farmers to forfeit their output to the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) at rigidly fixed loan rates than to export at lower world prices. This imbalance led to larger and larger stocks and in turn to larger and larger acreage reduction programs which culminated in with more cropland idled in the United States than all of Western Europe planted to crops The decline in the growth rate of worldwide consumption in the 1980s was attributable to the low rate of income growth in much of the world and in many countries the high interest costs of large external debt. The rate of growth of consumption decreased from million tons of grain to million a year. With foreign grain output increasing million tons per year during the 1980s the 10-millionton yearly increase in net foreign grain imports of the 1970s was replaced by a 10-million-ton annual decline during the 1980s Throughout the developed world increasing self-sufficiency has severely contracted available export markets. For example during the 1970s the European Community ( EC ) was a large net importer of grains. In particular in the mid-1970s the EC imported about million tons of grain a fifth of world trade. By the EC was exporting million tons. That change reduced the annual size of the world market available to the United States by million tons a year in a single decade With falling rates of return to agricultural production during the 1980s and the increasing attractiveness of financial instruments the value of agricultural assets particularly land dropped sharply. The change in asset values resulted in a loss of owners ' equity since of almost $ billion. Owners ' equity can no longer shield many farmers from their debt repayment problems resulting in an increased frequency of farmer bankruptcies and rural bank failures MARKET GOVERNMENT AND RESOURCE RISK The special characteristics of U.S. agriculture include inherent instability and uncertainty because of unpredictable weather patterns the lack of complete insurance markets for sharing risk the immobility of certain resources in farming and particular environmental effects of farming on the Nation 's resource base Some human resources are trapped in farming with few off-farm rural employment opportunities. Despite falling commodity prices and widespread overcapacity many farmers are reluctant to enter other occupations. This reluctance is reinforced by government policies that encourage an overcommitment of resources to the agricultural sector. However the immobility of farmers has declined as a distinguishing characteristic of U.S. agriculture as farms have grown larger and have become more integrated into the rest of the economy Macroeconomic developments induce increased volatility of commodity prices. Because agricultural prices are generally more flexible than nonagricultural prices due to product homogeneity modern integrated markets biological time lags and shorter contracts monetary shocks cause agricultural prices to respond sharply while leaving other prices relatively unchanged. This phenomenon helped fuel the explosion of agricultural prices in the 1970s and their dramatic fall in the early 1980s Public policies have been designed to reduce the risk associated with high variations in commodity prices and production in the agricultural sector. Farm policies such as price stabilization schemes and crop insurance are supposed to help the agricultural sector cope with the capricious nature of its physical and economic environment When the government guarantees farmers a certain price for instance it absorbs risk and eliminates some of the uncertainty faced by many in the agricultural sector While government policies have absorbed risk in many instances government itself has also created risks by contributing to commodity market instability. The Food and Agriculture Act of changed commodity programs to permit a wider fluctuation in prices The export embargo of variations on the rules of the FarmOwned Reserve program since the payment-in-kind program of and the issuance of generic certificates of to name but a few large government agricultural programs make it clear that policy uncertainty can be a major contributor to private commodity market instability. In addition the mere existence of governments is one reason why private stockholders may not store commodities for extreme contingencies and thus provide needed price stabilization If complete risk markets existed the inherent instability and uncertainty within the agricultural sector would not be sufficient justification for public policy. One reason more comprehensive risk markets do not exist within the agricultural sector is because of heavy government involvement. So much of the risk is borne by the public sector that little incentive exists for the emergence of private institutions to manage inherent instabilities and risk. For example the introduction of commodity futures options markets has provided an important mechanism for hedging risk. Options markets allow agricultural producers merchants and processors to take advantage of favorable prices while limiting the risk associated with harmful price move- ments. These risk-transfer mechanisms offer distinct advantages to producers relative to traditional futures markets because of the avoidance of margin calls and their associated demands on liquidity. However because of government policy most farmers have little if any incentive to use these options markets Government policy while perhaps achieving its direct goal may have side effects and consequences that are unanticipated and unintended. Once it is known that the government intends to redistribute income from one group to another specific economic groups lobby the government to gain these lucrative transfers for themselves. If for instance the government has reduced the downside risk in producing certain commodities farmers will specialize in these commodities because they offer a less variable rate of return than was previously the case. Farmers will then also have an economic incentive to push for the political maintenance of that government program from which they benefit Environmental effects of farming activities justify some corrective public policy. Some lands currently under cultivation are highly erodible. Current irrigation levels with average precipitation result in " mining " of more than million acre feet of water from aquifers in the Western United States. Nationally nearly a quarter of the groundwater used by agriculture is not replenished. Groundwater contamination from agricultural as well as nonagricultural sources has also become serious in many parts of the country. Western irrigation practices have raised groundwater salinity. Perhaps one-quarter of the lands currently under irrigation in the West depend heavily on nonrenewable water supplies and the productivity of several million additional acres is threatened by rising salt levels. Excessive application of fertilizer pesticides and other chemical uses in agricultural production generate much of these off-farm environmental risks and adversely affect the quality of groundwater and surface water THE STRUCTURE OF AMERICAN FARMS Today slightly more than million farms in this country have gross sales exceeding $ a third of the number years ago. Although the rate of decline has slowed fewer but bigger farms are expected in the future. Over the past years average farm size has increased in terms of sales acreage and the real value of assets The population of farms can be divided into three groups. First a large number ( million ) of farms have gross sales under $ per year. More than one-third of all farms have sales less than $ and three-fifths have sales less than $ The farms with sales under $ per year account for percent of all farms but only generate percent of gross farm income. Net farm income is usually a minor component of average income for these farms in fact averaging a $ loss in But off-farm income averaged $ per farm. These farms are minimally affected by agricultural policies and in fact receive only percent of government payments A second class of farms have sales from $ to $ constitute about a fourth of all farms ( ) and account for percent of gross farm income. For these enterprises farming is the major occupation and livelihood of their owners and family members provide most of the labor. Off-farm income amounts to percent of net farm income and they receive percent of direct government assistance to agriculture Finally a small number of farms ( or only percent of all farms ) have gross sales of more than $ and account for percent of gross farm income. Off-farm income constituted only percent of net farm income for this group. The largest farms gain disproportionately from government support. Those with sales over $ receive percent of government payments while those with sales over $ representing percent of all farms receive percent of such assistance In terms of income and assets farming is not as badly off as is sometimes popularly portrayed. Individual hardship cases do indeed exist. Compared with the past however poverty or low farm income is not as important a rationale for farm policy as it once was Average net cash income per farm was $ in or percent of median family income but in stood at $ percent of median family income ( all figures in dollars ) In government payments were high enough to pay an equivalent of $ to each U.S. commercial farm ( those with sales above $ ) while U.S. median family income was $ The current financial stress suffered by farmers has focused attention on the debt/asset position of farming as a whole. The agricultural sector had $ billion worth of assets primarily in land and $ billion of debt as of December Because of the dramatic declines in land values and the large accumulation of debt during the 1970s the debt relative to net farm income currently is almost twice as high as years ago CURRENT AGRICULTURAL POLICY : PROBLEMS AND OUTLOOK Public policy has played a major and in some instances dominant role in U.S. agriculture over the past years. The Food Security Act of is the most recent omnibus farm law that provides the basic authority for implementing U.S. food and agricultural programs. Like the act the legislation provides income support to farmers through deficiency payments. Deficiency payments are computed as the difference between the target price which is set by law and the higher of the basic loan rate or the average price received by farmers over the first months of the marketing year. Loan rates for each commodity are announced by the Secretary of Agriculture before the commencement of the marketing year. The Secretary has some discretion in the case of feedgrains and wheat to lower the loan level up to percent below the basic loan rate. For soybeans the loan level can be lowered no more than percent. For cotton and rice the effective loan is set at world market prices. As a result cotton and rice farmers participating in government programs can first pledge their output as collateral for a loan at the basic rate and at maturity repay the loan at the then world market price if it is lower than the basic rate The payment base for each farmer is determined by base acreage and " program " yield ( based on the individual 's or county 's past yields ) adjusted for any acreage reduction programs. For the crop year deficiency payments are limited to $ and loan deficiency payments based on the difference between the basic loan rate and the Secretary of Agriculture 's announced loan rate are limited to $ For cotton and rice the $ limit pertains to the difference between the basic loan and the marketing loan repayment rate. Chart shows the recent history and current legislative provisions for target prices loan rates and market prices for corn As with previous legislation the act requires acreage reduction programs in an attempt to manage total market supply. In essence the government induces farmers to participate voluntarily by offering subsidies in the form of deficiency payments. In return the government asks the farmer to idle some portion of the farm 's land By idling land the government hopes to reduce supply to markets thereby raising market prices and indirectly lowering the amount of deficiency payments Some features of the act allow market discipline to operate while other features have moved U.S. agriculture farther away from the free market. The former features include the dramatic reduction in operative loan rates for several important commodities. In the case of cotton and rice the introduction of the marketing loans has eliminated price supports. This particular feature however has increased significantly the cost of these commodity programs to the government Moreover the use of generic commodity certificates has reduced the effectiveness of the loan rate as a price floor for corn and wheat Chart Corn : Target Price Loan Rate and Market Price Dollars per bushel Crop Years -l/Set by the Secretary of Agriculture within mandated limits Source : Department of Agriculture The negotiable generic commodity certificate allows the holder of the certificate to take ownership within a specified period of time usually months of most commodities that are held in CCC stocks The certificates may also be exchanged for cash or used to redeem outstanding commodity loans. The certificates are specified in dollars and can be exchanged for a quantity of the commodity based on local market prices. Thus CCC stocks can be placed on the market even when prices are below loan levels The reduction in price supports has made the United States more competitive internationally and in the case of some commodities lowered prices for U.S. consumers. Other features of the act also gradually lower direct income support for some commodities. In particular the act allows a producer to receive deficiency payments on percent of permitted acreage if percent or more of eligible land is planted. In this instance permitted acreage is defined as the acreage that remains after land has been idled under an acreage reduction program The provision provides a partial decoupling of the link between deficiency payments and planted acreage. Because farmers can collect payments on percent of the permitted acreage the only reason to plant more than percent is if the market price or the loan rate exceeds variable production costs. However if farmers choose to plant less than percent of eligible acreage they can not grow other crops on the land that is idled. Very little use was made of the provision during the crop year in part because of the large setup costs associated with planting any portion of a farmer 's acreage base Another instance of partial decoupling is the freezing of historical program yields in the determination of deficiency payments. This change means that farmers no longer have an incentive to manipulate their yields in current and future years in order to increase the level of production on which deficiency payments are determined Between and the Federal Government spent about $ billion on farm price and income-support programs. The original estimate for farm program outlays for was significantly below the actual cost of $ billion associated with CCC activities to support the agricultural sector. Other related programs also support agricultural production and rural America ; in the outlays for these programs amounted to approximately $ billion. The largest single item was Farmer Home Administration outlays at $ billion Other features of current programs act directly or indirectly on the demand for farm output. Major trade programs include amendments to the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of ( Public Law ) short- and intermediate-term trade credit guarantees targeted export assistance and the export enhancement program. In fiscal the value of commodities exported under Public Law ( both Titles I and II ) amounted to $ billion ; $ billion of export guarantees were provided ; and the export enhancement program that subsidizes U.S. agricultural sales abroad cost the U.S Government nearly $ billion. In the domestic market food assistance programs cost $ billion in fiscal ; the bulk of this expenditure supports the food stamp program and the women infants and children feeding program Target prices the remaining partial coupling of deficiency payments to production and the implied export subsidies have continued to cause distortions in economic incentives and further misallocations of economic resources. Moreover the act has continued to impose waste and economic losses on the American economy in other commodity programs especially sugar and dairy. Over much of the 1980s taxpayer costs of government programs designed to support U.S. agriculture have been at record levels. In government outlays for corn wheat and rice represented less than percent of the crop value. This share grew to about percent by Given the current level of the Federal budget deficit growth in the outlays for agriculture simply can not be sustained. Unfortunately program expenditures are not expected to improve much during fiscal with CCC outlays for direct income and price supports projected to be between $ billion and $ billion Furthermore the distribution of program benefits is viewed by many as inequitable. The benefits provide little assistance to those suffering the greatest financial hardship. As is shown in Chart government payments are concentrated among the larger farming operations with the average payment to all farmers having annual sales exceeding $ per year being almost $ Since many large farms do not produce commodities eligible for government programs participating farms receive considerably more than this $ Chart Average Direct Government Payments per Farm by Sales Class Thousands of dollars Less than to to to to to Farm Size by Annual Sales ( Thousands of Dollars ) Over Source : Department of Agriculture The commodity programs with the largest outlays include corn wheat cotton and rice. Table shows how much is going to the growers of various crops and what proportion of farmers are receiving large payments. One large California cotton producer is expected to receive more than $ million in CCC payments ; the crown prince of Liechtenstein as a partner on a Texas rice farm received a subsidy of more than $ million ; and dairy producers in California Florida Idaho Texas and Arizona received payments exceeding $ million each under the dairy termination program TABLE Direct government payments for agricultural programs Payments Program Total ( millions of dollars ) Payees receiving over $ Average payment to all payees Portion received of total payments Portion of all payees Percent Corn $ Wheat Cotton Rice Note. Data are estimates for crop year Source : Office of Management and Budget FINANCIAL STRESS AND ECONOMIC WASTE Financial stress in U.S. agriculture continues to be a serious problem. Approximately percent of all farms were in serious trouble at the beginning of The Department of Agriculture considers a farm to be financially distressed if its debt/asset ratio exceeds and it can not generate sufficient cash to pay its bills. A comparison of Chart with Chart shows that much of the money spent on Federal agricultural programs does not go to distressed farmers partly because many farms are not eligible for commodity programs Even though the participation rate among farms eligible for commodity programs wras very high in only about percent of all farms had access to direct government payments. Financial stress is concentrated among family-size commercial farms ; farms with sales between $ and $ represent about percent of the total number of farms but include in their numbers more than percent of all financially stressed farms The benefits received by farmers include not only the government outlays for agricultural programs but also the gains from higher prices that are the result of government policies. Such policies even if they do riot entail government outlays impose extra costs on consumers and taxpayers that exceed the amount of income transferred Chart Distribution of Financially Distressed Farms by Sales Class January Percent Less than to to to to to Over Farm Size by Annual Sales ( Thousands of Dollars ) Note.- -Financially distressed farms are defined as those with debt/asset ratio over percent and negative cash flow Source : Department of Agriculture The higher prices result from price supports acreage reduction programs or trade barriers The benefits to farms are directly tied to output. Taxpayer transfers are specifically tied to the acreage base of each farmer. The larger the stream of future subsidies the higher the value of land This feature of government programs increases the cost of production and makes the United States less competitive relative to other exporting countries Table summarizes estimates of the consumer and taxpayer costs and producer gains from the major commodity programs. In most instances economic resources are wasted because producer gains are less than the sum of losses to consumers and taxpayers. Most of these estimates assume U.S. policies do not affect world prices when in fact the United States is an influential agricultural producer and consumer whose public policies can affect world prices. For example U.S. sugar policies have such a large influence on world prices that Table includes estimates of the costs and gains taking account of such changes. If U.S. sugar prices were determined by a free market the world price would rise ; thus producer gains and consumer losses would be lower because the gap between the internal and world price would be narrower TABLE Annual gains and losses from income-support programs under the Food Security Act and trade restrictions [ Billions of dollars ] Commodity Taxpayer cost1 Consumer loss Corn Sugar I3 Sugar II3 Milk Cotton ( ) Wheat Rice Net loss Producer gain Peanuts Tobacco o Includes CCC expenses after cost recovery Less than $ million Case I assumes U.S. policies do net affect world sugar prices. Case II takes into account the fact that U.S. policies reduce world sugar prices. The value of sugar import restrictions to those exporters who have access to the U.S. market ( that is value of quota rents ) is $ million Note. All figures reflect Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Source : Compiled by the Council of Economic Advisers from various sources Given the incentives provided by agricultural policy in the United States it is no surprise that surpluses have become burdensome. At the beginning of the crop year the world 's wheat exporters held million metric tons of wheat stocks of which the United States held more than half. At the end of the year stocks of the major world wheat exporters were estimated to be million tons of which the United States held percent ( Chart ) or the equivalent of about years of domestic consumption. Of the amount stored in the United States most was held by the government ( million tons ) For coarse grains at the end of it is estimated that U.S. stocks which will be about percent of world stocks will represent approximately year 's domestic consumption and almost four times the amount of U.S. exports of coarse grains in any given year The overcapacity that exists and the chronic surpluses of major commodities continue to be sources of bad news for the future of American agriculture. During the 1980s world stocks of sugar have risen percent ; world butter stocks have soared to a massive million metric tons which is approximately percent of annual consumption and prices have fallen by percent ; stocks of beef within the EC have risen to more than percent of total world trade Chart Carryover Stocks of Coarse Grains and Wheat Millions of metric tons Wheat Coarse Grains United States United States Rest of World United States 1980/81 1982/83 1986/87 Note. Data are for crop years ; 1986/87 data are preliminary estimates Source : Department of Agriculture Within the United States overcapacity is in the neighborhood of onethird of recent annual production of corn wheat and rice ; and in overcapacity in the dairy industry was approximately percent of total milk production PROMISING DEVELOPMENTS Several developments engender hope that the current overcapacity in the U.S. agricultural sector may begin to ease. The Tax Reform Act of eliminated or severely curtailed many of the tax shelter features that led to an overcommitment of resources in agriculture Special tax rates for capital gains have been eliminated so the capital gain benefits for breeding and dairy livestock no longer will apply Opportunities provided by cash accounting have also been restricted Farmers will be able to deduct the costs of prepaid feed seed fertilizer and similar supplies when they are purchased only to the extent that they are percent or less of total farm expenses ; those exceeding percent will have to be deducted when used. In addition only those involved in farming on a regular continuous and substantial basis can now use farm losses to offset wage and salary income Growth in the use of many inputs has fallen significantly. Investment in machinery and structures has been below replacement levels since and thus should act to curtail capacity. The demand for new credit which already has declined approximately percent should continue to slow as farmers pursue cost-cutting strategies The dramatic drop in energy prices will offer farmers large savings in production costs. Furthermore the changes in how government deficiency payments are computed should lead to reduced output The declines in interest and exchange rates have begun to improve the outlook for the U.S. agricultural sector. Because farming is extremely capital intensive and debt-to-asset ratios have risen steeply movements in real interest rates have significant effects on the cost structure facing agricultural production. In interest accounted for percent of farm production expenses excluding depreciation Storable commodity prices are particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates ; for nonstorable commodities ( for example cattle and hogs ) breeding stocks are interest-rate sensitive The downturn in outstanding farm debt that began in continued through The large drop in interest rates during ultimately should offer improved returns to farming by eliminating several billion dollars of interest expense. The fall in production expenses is expected to boost net cash income about percent in over From a longer term perspective existing overcapacity in the U.S agricultural sector today can be altered by increases in demand or by the introduction of new cost-reducing technologies. Unfortunately relief from current surplus conditions is unlikely to come from a growth in U.S. demand for food. Over the past quarter of a century there has been no appreciable growth in per capita U.S. food consumption. On the other hand U.S. agricultural productivity has been growing at a significant rate. The divergence between these two trends highlights the need to find markets for U.S. agricultural output beyond U.S. borders or else experience further shrinkage of the farm sector. Fortunately the rather steady growth in foreign food markets since provides a major outlet for U.S. excess supply One major source of world trade growth is the developing countries. Developing countries ' effective demand for food has significantly outpaced their growth in food production. The result is large increases in trade ; for example during the period the developing countries with the fastest growth rates in staple food production increased net imports of staple foods SVa-fold. Between and less developed country ( LDC ) net grain imports increased from million to million tons. Unlike the EC and centrally planned countries LDC imports have continued to grow in the 1980s reaching million tons in Even though growth has stagnated over the past few years the developing countries still remain the major potential growth market for U.S. exports Foreign economic growth rates are likely to increase over the next several years because of improved macroeconomic and financial conditions. Expanding incomes and global trade declining inflation and lower interest rates are providing the basis for recovery in purchasing power. Moreover the world will add another million people per year in the late 1980s. As a result the growth rate of foreign demand for agricultural products could more than double the early 1980s ' rate of to percent per year To enhance their rate of growth LDCs must be encouraged to implement effective strategies including those that improve the performance of their own agricultural sectors. Recent studies have demonstrated that such policies do not lead to reduced export demand for U.S. agricultural products. On the contrary by fueling domestic growth and increasing rural income many developing countries become better customers for some agricultural products that only the United States and other developed countries can provide Another promising development is on the emerging technology front. The United States is at the threshold of a revolution in biotechnology and genetic engineering. This revolution has the potential to increase agricultural productivity and reduce unit cost of production to levels that will significantly enhance U.S. trade competitiveness. The expected technological advances will result in some painful adjustments that when completed should eliminate the overcapacity that exists within the industry provided that market signals are not distorted by government policies In addition more intensive use of resources more effective management and regional shifts in production patterns could under the right circumstances expand the production of agricultural products within the United States. These potential changes have led to a percent productivity growth rate forecast for U.S. agriculture as a whole which is significantly above the rate of growth for the sector since Countries that allow market incentives to operate and that effectively manage commercialization of biotechnology and genetic engineering are expected to lower their costs of production and reap substantial benefits as a result of their greater international competitiveness Conditions may now be in place for an eventual economic and financial recovery of the U.S. agricultural sector. Nevertheless the painful adjustment process currently underway will continue. Given appropriate reforms in government policies these adjustments will eventually lead to a lower cost structure for the sector fewer farmers ultimately higher incomes per farmer and an improved financial structure for American agriculture GLOBAL DISTORTIONS IN AGRICULTURE Not only has the United States subsidized its agricultural sector but other developed countries have also pursued similar strategies Until the Food Security Act of however one major difference existed because of high and inflexible price supports within the United States : U.S. commodity programs frequently encouraged farmers to turn their commodities over to the government. As a result much of this supply became locked up in public stocks and did not enter the export market. Some countries using the high U.S price as an umbrella promoted expansion of production and exports that would be otherwise unprofitable. Accordingly U.S. agricultural exports fell from their peak of more than $ billion to a level of $ billion in In fact the net agricultural trade balance for the United States was negative for several months during Although this fact may be surprising especially in light of the recent decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar several reasons contributed to this deficit The dollar fell against major currencies but not against the currencies of major agricultural exporters such as Argentina Australia Brazil and Canada. Also the recession of the early 1980s from which many Third World countries have still not recovered reduced economic growth abroad. Large harvests in a number of countries ( e.g. Soviet Union ) also played an important role. And because the Food Security Act of dramatically lowered price supports from one crop year to another ( to ) major importers during the first half of had no incentive to purchase supplies from the United States until new dollar price supports took effect. For example at the end of July cotton was priced in the United States at approximately cents per pound ; at the beginning of the new crop year August cotton cost about cents But the fundamental difficulty behind U.S. export performance is pervasive government intervention in domestic agricultural markets World agricultural markets have been distorted by government policies in both the developed and the developing world. Policies in some industrial countries support and protect domestic farmers and shrink potential import markets. Sometimes the policies are so drastic as to turn net importers into net exporters. A dramatic rise in the yen against the dollar will have little impact on U.S. agricultural exports to Japan if trade barriers restrict the flow of such goods regardless of price As a general rule developed countries raise farm prices above market levels through policies that lead to an overcommitment of resources to agriculture. On the other hand developing countries have taxed the agricultural sector forcing prices below levels that would be generated by the market often causing local shortages. Thus developed countries are pushed toward a net export position and developing countries toward a net import position regardless of underlying comparative advantages In the industrialized world governments generally increase the size and scope of the agricultural sector. Often the underlying goal of industrialized countries is to raise farm income which is achieved through schemes that protect their small but sacred agricultural sector against foreign competition. For example Japan protects its inefficient rice producers through trade barriers the EC protects almost all of its farmers arid the United States shields components of its agricultural sector from import competition and assists its exports through subsidization ( Table ) TABLE Sources of producer support equivalents for selected countries and major commodities Commodity Japan European Community United States Grains State trading Price supports maintained by intervention purchases Variable levy Export refunds Deficiency payments PIK entitlements CCC inventory operations and commodity loans Oilseeds Deficiency payments Deficiency payments CCC inventory operations and commodity loans Dairy Price supports through government stockholding and trade barriers Some deficiency payments Price supports maintained by intervention purchases Variable import levies Export refunds Price supports maintained by tariffs quotas and government purchases Livestock BeefQuotas Tariff Domestic price stabilization Pork : Variable levy Poultry : Tariff Price supports maintained by intervention purchases Variable import levies Export refunds BeefTariff Other : General ( research and development inspection etc. ) Sugar Price stabilization Import levy Price supports maintained by intervention purchases Variable import levies Export refunds Production quotas Price supports Import quotas Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service The cost of the " common agricultural policies " in the EC is enormous with about the same budgetary costs as in the United States The direct subsidy cost of the EC agricultural policy during is estimated to have been $ billion with as much as $ billion spent on surplus disposal. Taxpayers and consumers together subsidized farmers in the EC by up to $ billion a year during This subsidy is now significantly higher. In Japan which has about half the GNP of the United States or the EC taxpayers subsidized farmers by $ billion in but as consumers they paid many orders of magnitude above this amount. Japanese consumers pay food prices that are estimated to be around percent higher than would be the case if the fall in world prices and the yen appreciation since had been reflected in internal agricultural prices For the early 1980s a recent World Bank study found that if all the subsidies and protectionism throughout the industrialized world were removed taxpayers and consumers would save $ billion a year while farmer incomes would fall slightly more than $ billion For or so developed countries current taxpayer and consumer costs are in the neighborhood of $ billion per year Government price supports give rise to incentives to import those goods potentially displacing the farmers the government seeks to help. Thus governments have two choices : introduce barriers to trade or purchase domestic and imported supplies until the world market price is bid up to the internal level. Because the latter policy would require extraordinary government outlays most governments impose trade restrictions that involve no budgetary expenditures but impose losses on consumers. With few exceptions trade restrictions instituted through border measures are in place solely to validate domestic farm programs. Hence a country 's agricultural trade policy is derived largely from its domestic support programs Import quotas are quite common because they are more binding in their protection. A classic example is the impori quota that the United States imposed recently to maintain internal price supports for sugar at three to four times the world price. As the differential between internal sugar and world prices has increased the import quota has become more binding as shown in Chart Sugar imports have fallen dramatically while use of a major substitute corn sweeteners has increased significantly because of the high internal prices of sugar. The high price not only makes the production of substitutes more profitable but induces consumers to switch consumption away from expensive sugar. Furthermore protection for sugar has led to protection for other goods. In the United States put quotas on processed goods that contain sugar ( e.g. cakes and pancake mixes ) because sugar quotas encouraged their import The large gap between the U. S. and the world price of sugar even made it profitable to extract the sugar from these goods and sell it in the United States Chart Shares of Total U.S. Consumption of Sweeteners Corn Syrup and other Sweeteners Oi Note. Data are for crop years ; are preliminary estimates Source : Department of Agriculture Protection in the industrial countries has to some extent prevented the developing world from sending more agricultural products abroad. This result combined with the export subsidies used to dispose of surplus production has allowed the export share of industrial countries to rise from about percent in the early 1960s to about percent in the mid-1980s By contrast agricultural policies in developing countries are in general biased against the agricultural sector regardless of the country 's net export or import position. Government interventions tend to shift resources out of agriculture by lowering its profitability relative to industry and manufacturing. Because of the large size of the agricultural sector compared with other sectors in many developing country economies agriculture is taxed heavily to raise government revenue. Export taxes in the range of to percent are not unusual. This taxation reduces the country 's exports and market share in world trade One way to quantify the effect of government policies on agriculture in developed and developing countries is to compare producer subsidy equivalent levels and consumer subsidy equivalent levels These ratios indicate the net effect of government policies on producer and consumer incentives. Producer subsidy equivalents measure as a percent of crop revenues the value to producers of trade and domestic policies. The most recent producer subsidy equivalents ( ) indicate clearly that all developed countries subsidize their agricultural producers. Across all commodities the weighted producer subsidy equivalents ( in percentage terms ) for some of the major industrial countries over the period are as follows : Japan ; EC ; U.S. ; Canada ; and Australia In these figures for all countries have increased especially the U.S. subsidy equivalents. In the case of wheat beef and dairy the cost of producer support is borne mainly by consumers in the EC and japan while the United States and other developed countries use budget contributions ( except in dairy or sugar support ) to assist producers ( Table ) TABLE Who bore the cost of support to producers [ Percent of producer support ] Commodity Wheat Dairy Beef European Community Borne by consumers Budget contribution Japan Borne by consumers Budget contribution United States Borne by consumers Budget contribution Note. Data are for crop years Sources : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) and Council of Economic Advisers Consumer subsidy equivalents measure the value as a percent of consumer costs of government policies to consumers with negative figures indicating consumer taxation. Consumer subsidy equivalents show that developed countries tax consumers almost uniformly across commodities. For example these equivalents for beef pork and poultry are around for the United States and range between and for the EC. The developing countries are divided again : East Asian newly industrialized countries generally tax consumers whereas some countries such as India Argentina and Nigeria often subsidize consumers The importance of the disincentives inflicted upon agriculture in LDCs can best be dramatized when those disincentives are removed After two decades of sluggish growth agricultural output in the Peo- pies Republic of China has soared since when regulations were liberalized and prices were allowed to rise and approach market-determined levels. This remarkable expansion making China now the largest wheat producer in the world was achieved almost entirely through productivity gains. The amount of land ( including irrigated ) under cultivation and the use of tractors for farming declined between and ; the major change was the incentive system Nations that have not liberalized their agricultural policies particularly those in Africa have suffered from food shortages and even widespread malnutrition and famine. When the enormous surpluses of the developed economies are juxtaposed with the situation of poorer LDCs the world agricultural imbalance seems particularly galling. The problem is not one of agricultural supply however but one of allocation. The poorer countries are not underfed because they need more agricultural production but because they lack the income to buy more food on world markets. By liberalizing their agricultural policies and allowing market incentives to motivate their farmers poorer LDCs can not only increase domestic production in products for which they have comparative advantage but they can also increase rural incomes so they may trade for the foodstuffs essential for a healthy populace INTERNATIONAL COSTS OF AGRICULTURAL POLICIES Even though agricultural policies may be aimed at domestic concerns their effects spill over to the rest of the world. For example the distorted price incentives in industrialized countries stimulate production that directly or indirectly depresses world prices. The depressive effect is particularly pronounced when a government subsidizes the sale of stocks on the world market makes concessional sales or simply donates the food as aid Sugar is a glaring example of the international cost of industrialized country policies. The EC and the United States have both guaranteed high prices for domestic sugar producers which has led to growing domestic production. The EC sugar program turned the Common Market from a net importer to a net exporter in The United States under its current sugar policy may make the same change soon. The U.S. and EC sugar policies have placed great burdens of adjustment on many developing countries. These sugar policies have not only eliminated a major importing market for countries whose climate is more naturally suited for sugar production but also promise to make the EC and the United States export competitors One study estimates that industrialized countries ' sugar policies cost the developing countries about $ billion in lost export revenue during reduced their real income by about $ billion and in- creased price instability in the residual world market for sugar by approximately percent. The list of sugar-producing countries that suffer from these policies almost coincides with the list of countries and regions that are of utmost interest to American policymakers e.g. Philippines Brazil and Central America In essence by expanding output and depressing domestic demand the agricultural protectionist policies of industrialized countries reduce world prices and distort the relative prices of agricultural versus other goods. Prices for the most highly protected products are depressed more than prices of other agricultural products. These distorted prices make the use of resources in world agriculture even less efficient. If Japan were to reduce its protection of the rice varieties in which other Asian countries have a comparative advantage they and Japan could achieve greater efficiency and higher income When fanners in the Netherlands produce vegetables in greenhouses because energy costs are subsidized they indirectly discourage farmers in Mediterranean countries from pursuing their natural advantages in the production of these products Differential rates of subsidization also create particular difficulties for LDCs when the rate of support for processed agricultural products exceeds that for raw products. In industrialized countries tariff and nontariff barriers tend to be higher on more processed forms of a particular good. As a result escalating support of agri-processing severely disrupts economic development by blocking the most natural step toward industrialization. Such policies have resulted in industrialized countries exporting larger quantities and importing smaller quantities of processed products than of related raw materials. For example the EC accounts for percent of world wheat exports but percent of wheat flour exports. Developing countries often respond to such policies by subsidizing local processing industries which inevitably encourages further inefficiencies and compounds the direct harm arising from industrial countries ' tariffs Any one country 's competitiveness depends not only on its own efficiency but also on the political decisions of other countries. The returns to a country from the world market may be undermined by increased direct and indirect subsidies. For example high target prices for U.S. rice coupled with marketing loans have resulted in large U.S. exports imposing significant costs on Thailand a major rice exporter. The same basic policies for cotton have generated similar although riot as dramatic effects for Egypt Bangledesh Mexico Guatemala Paraguay and other cotton-exporting countries EXPORT-MARKET RESPONSIVENESS During the policy debates on the Food Security Act of supporters of the legislation emphasized the dependence of the U.S. agricultural sector on foreign markets. The general view was that exports led to the boom of the 1970s and the bust of the early 1980s As a result if American agriculture were to escape its plight exports would have to lead the way once again. Unfortunately the length of time before lower price supports would improve U.S. agricultural export performance was underestimated The effectiveness of the new policy in enhancing exports of U.S agriculture depends critically upon the responsiveness of export demand to price. The evidence shows that the short-run responsiveness of export demand for many commodities from the United States is relatively weak. As a result increases in export volume will lead to lower total values of exports in the short run because the fall in prices will be sharp enough to offset the increase in volume sold Over the longer run to years in the case of many commodities lower prices can be expected to drive inefficient producers out of the market force some government policy changes and stimulate greater consumption thereby increasing export sales at higher prices Exports of agricultural products depend heavily on government behavior throughout the industrialized world. Only if protectionist policies are curbed will it be possible to increase demand for farm products from those countries that have comparative advantages. Certainly over the next few years major competitors of the United States can be expected to make some adjustments in their production. However if total market demand increases only moderately in response to declining market prices and slow growth in foreign income any significant increase in either the U.S. share of world trade or in the volume of exports is unlikely. Some increase in share and some gain in volume might occur of course but they may not correspond to the dramatic reduction in U.S. price support levels. The current protectionist policies that are pursued throughout the world the large overcapacity in place and the worldwide market fragmentation will serve to limit growth of U.S. exports over the balance of the 1980s REFORM OF U.S. AGRICULTURAL POLICY The Food Security Act of and its predecessors have helped to create many new problems that afflict the U.S. agricultural sector and have failed adequately to solve many old problems. The fundamental flaw is that Federal farm subsidy payments are linked directly to farm production. Because farmers are paid subsidies ( explicit or implicit ) that are proportional to their output they are encour- aged to produce even more. Excess production must either be stockpiled by the government dumped on v/orld markets or restrained through inefficient land or production restrictions To the extent that price supports are above market-clearing prices government stocks accumulate while exports fall. This design has also contributed to instability and uncertainty on private markets. For example government management of commodity generic certificates can exacerbate the volatility of wheat and corn markets. If no further generic certificates are released the market will expect corn and wheat prices to rise above current loan rates because most stocks will be held in government hands rather than by the private sector In contrast if the Department of Agriculture releases a large number of generic certificates market prices will fall below the loan rates Two of the major features of the Food Security Act of are the high target prices and the relationship between government incomesupport payments and production decisions. Under the act target prices are set at high levels and are not permitted to decline until for feedgrains and wheat and for cotton and rice ; furthermore the scheduled reductions in target prices are far too small ( and percent respectively for the years arid in the case of feedgrains and wheat ) The limited decoupling of government income payments and production decisions provided by the provision is insufficient. This small step in the direction of decoupling is not expected to have any major effect on the current chronic surpluses and overcapacity within the sector The Administration seeks major revisions in the act in order to reduce budget exposure provide fairness restore a sense of proportion to agricultural policy attempt to set loan rates at or below market-clearing levels and move more meaningfully in the direction of decoupling production from payments. Specifically the Administration proposes to extend the provision to a provision ; administratively and legislatively tighten the definition of a " person " for purposes of the payment limitations ; limit the total payments to $ per person ; reduce target prices from by percent per year through ; and provide more flexibility in establishing loan rates for program crops Under the provision farmers would receive payments based on historical acreage without being required to plant the program crop on those acres. To ease the adjustment from chronic surpluses any land that might be idled under this provision could not be used to produce any other crop. Hence this provision does not allow total decoupling of program payments and farmer production decisions The proposed revision simply means that participating farmers can collect percent of what their income subsidies would be under full production even though all of their land is idle. Current law requires that at least half of their land be planted The proposed $ 50,000-per-person payment limitation pertains to deficiency and land diversion payments as well as to marketing loan payments in the case of cotton and rice and loan deficiency payments for other program crops. Under current law the limit is $ Tightening the definition of a person will achieve consistency and fairness in the application of payment limitations by closing loopholes that circumvent current legislative intent. The current loose definition of " person " has fostered a proliferation of overlapping partnerships and other farm reconstitutions in order to qualify for multiple payment limits The proposed reduction in target prices is expected to lead to a decline in agricultural program outlays by $ billion over fiscal through This action would reduce the current incentive to overproduce and also contribute to reductions in the budget deficit If loan rates are above market prices incentives will still remain to plant for the government and not the market. Thus an important step in decoupling is to reduce loan rates to below market prices Under the proposed revisions the Secretary of Agriculture could reduce loan rates by up to percent per year. Current law establishes loan rates by formula ( percent of 5-year moving average dropping the high and low price ) but superimposes a limit on how fast annual adjustments can be made to the computed formula loan rate. The current limit is percent after a special provision of percent for some commodities. The proposed revision would allow U.S. prices to be more competitive reduce incentives to produce for the loan rate itself and make the decoupling more effective Because the program for crop year has been largely determined many of the revisions can be adopted only for years through The decoupling provision could however be instituted immediately. The proposed revisions for the past years of the current legislation would provide an effective transition to a more comprehensive and coherent agricultural policy The Administration also proposes changes in the U.S. sugar program to deal with the distortions generated by current policy. The proposed reform would lower the price-support loan rate to cents a pound while providing transition payments to cane and beet producers over a 4-year period. Prices paid by domestic sugar consumers will fall as a result. By modifying the incentives that distort domestic production and consumption U.S. sugar policy moves slowly toward a more market-oriented position SUPPLY MANAGEMENT BIAS The cornerstone of any comprehensive reform of agricultural policy is the elimination of incentives to produce for government programs rather than for the market. As long as such incentives exist surpluses will be generated. As a consequence the government will attempt to manage supply by acreage reduction programs voluntary diversion acreage set-asides or production quotas Given the changes that have occurred within agriculture the supply management bias of current programs is doomed to failure The sector 's capacity to produce under the stimulus of favorable economic conditions and large government subsidies is extremely high As a result the cost of agricultural commodity policies that attempt to restrain production and enhance prices through land controls are in short toweringly expensive. Moreover a program attempting to limit supply by renting land from farmers by outright purchases of farm commodities or by mandatory supply controls can not avoid directing its benefits to the largest producers. For a given supply reduction most of the idled land or the eliminated production must come from the to percent of all producers who account for approximately two-thirds of total production Attempts to limit supply fail to exploit the continued growth in world food markets. Although increases in the acreage reduction and the voluntary diversion programs can provide some short-term assistance in reducing current chronic surpluses this benefit can only be achieved by incurring other costs. These other costs include the losses imposed upon consumers the reduction in markets for the farm supply industry and the increase in costs for food processing and distribution. Moreover acreage controls result in the excessive use of other inputs which partially offsets the desired production cutback. Such programs are not cost-effective in terms of government outlays Mandatory acreage controls could be more effective than current voluntary programs in managing the total amount of land allocated to a particular crop but at a high social cost. Recent Department of Agriculture studies show that a 125-million-acre reduction in cropland would be required to raise commodity prices to percent This program would discourage domestic use cut exports sharply devastate the farm supply industry raise costs for the entire food processing and distribution chain and impose huge losses on U.S consumers. This option applied to feedgrains would reduce earnings for livestock producers throughout the United States. Exports of farm commodities could be expected to fall percent. This mandatory control program would reduce GNP by $ billion and eliminate approximately million jobs a number almost equal to all the farmers in the United States. The greatest impact would fall on the poor who spend the largest portion of their income on food. Moreover in comparison with current programs the concentration of benefits among large producers would be even greater with no effective payment limitation Subsidies could be offered to counteract some of the adverse effects such as those on the U.S. livestock industry and on export sales. Such subsidies however would drive the cost of the mandatory acreage control program above even the high costs that were incurred during fiscal All attempts to limit production will impede the international competitiveness of the U.S. agricultural sector both in cost and output In acreage reduction programs for example farmers must retire a certain fraction of their acreage base e.g. percent in the case of corn to receive deficiency payments. Thus every firm in the industry is asked to spread its total fixed cost over percent of its potential output. This scheme raises the average cost of production relative to competitors who suffer from no such constraints. Moreover supply management policies create an artificial scarcity of farmland bidding up its price to a higher level than otherwise would have occurred Finally limiting output places the United States in the position of being the residual supplier to world commodity markets. Whatever growth occurs in world food markets is allowed to be tapped by major competitors. Moreover the supply management bias of agricultural programs in the United States lowers the costs to other countries of subsidizing their agricultural sectors. As a result U.S programs operate to improve the position of major competitors in terms of both their access to major markets and the cost of their agricultural policies A COHERENT LONG-TERM AGRICULTURAL POLICY A comprehensive policy to foster and maintain a vital and progressive U.S. agricultural sector would contain four major components : complete decoupling targeting resource conservation and negotiation and trade cooperation Complete Decoupling Under complete decoupling payments to farmers would not be linked to current production either through subsidies or artificially high prices. Production decisions would be based on economic incentives not governmental policy. Set-asides and acreage reduction programs could be phased out over a specified period of time. Distortions such as intensive use of inputs would diminish and budgetary outlays would largely be known in advance Decoupling could be phased in by allowing increasing discretion with regard to the use of idle land. For example after a period of time in which idle land could not be used for any other crop percent of the land could be planted in any crop then percent and finally percent. Income support could also be decoupled from prices. Farmers should receive a known payment regardless of what they plant and the market price they receive. The income support that has been decoupled from production and prices should be phased out Targeting Separating payments from production and prices would make it possible to target such transfers so as to preserve the family farm and rural communities while protecting the rural landscape. Targeted income-deficiency payments would preserve some farms unable to manage the riskiness of their operations and would ease the costs of labor adjustment from agriculture for other farmers. Income supports targeted at those who rely more heavily on farm income and yet do not have the immediate resources for retraining job searching etc. would ease the inevitable pain of change and improve the long-term flexibility of U.S. agriculture Targeted farmers should receive income supports unconditionally Farmers could then employ their support in whatever fashion they considered most appropriate from retraining to remaining in farming. One possible method of targeting would be to have payments based on current acreage and historic yields with a limit to the qualifying farm size Resource Conservation One feature of the Food Security Act of that is in the longrun interest of the United States is the provision for placing highly erodible land in the conservation reserve. Under the legislation lands that pose significant off-farm environmental threats for example water quality damage can also be included in the conservation reserve program. It is the largest conservation program in the history of Federal agricultural policy calling for the voluntary gradual enrollment of million to million acres of land. Under this program landowners agree not to produce on qualifying cropland for years in exchange for an annual rental payment. Unfortunately this program is hampered by competing supply management programs In essence the government is bidding against itself to idle farmland Currently most farmers are better off collecting deficiency payments or diversion payments for idling acreage under commodity programs than by idling land on a long-term basis under the conservation reserve program Over the period that supply constraints are being phased out difficulties stemming from the concurrent operation of the conservation reserve program and the price-support programs must be resolved The joint operation could be effectively managed by the introduction of a land-targeting scheme. Lands declared eligible for the conservation reserve program would be declared ineligible for the acreage reduction program A redesigned conservation reserve program combined with decoupled and targeted income support would reduce incentives for intensive land use that arise when farmers seek to increase their immediate cash incomes. Finally and most significantly the elimination of commodity programs that connect income supports to production levels would ease the extensive and intensive use of land and other resources in production. The significant reductions in the use of pesticides and other chemical inputs resulting from these program changes would also reduce environmental damage Negotiation and Trade Cooperation The current state of agricultural trade can be described as one in which many countries feel trapped. If any country reduces its export subsidies or limits its farm support it will lose market share. Its own action will rarely be sufficient to induce a significant rise in world prices. Thus the rewards to individual countries from unilateral agricultural policy reform often seem too little to encourage change Simultaneous action by many countries might break this trap. The Administration began a coordinated move to raise the issue of agricultural protectionism at the last economic summit. How to achieve multilateral systematic rationalization of policies across sovereign states with different resource endowments and policy mechanisms if not policy objectives remains a major challenge The difficulty of international cooperation in adjustments however does not excuse delay in U.S. policy reform. Reform is in the selfinterest of the United States and should be initiated regardless of whether trading partners act as well. In addition the reformed policies would eventually stimulate other protectionist countries to make similar adjustments Although sound economic grounds exist for greater market orientation even with no action by other countries the chances of significantly reducing the degree of protection provided to U.S. agriculture are far better if coordinated moves also occur in other major agricultural exporting countries. The political feasibility of implementing decoupled and targeted deficiency payments is greatly enhanced if other industrialized countries would pursue similar actions A cooperative effort of major agricultural exporting countries could involve coordinated and lockstep moves in decoupling. The possibility of such cooperative ventures is much higher in today 's environment because of the huge subsidization under the Food Security Act of In contrast with the U.S. legislation governing the early 1980s many exporting countries including Australia Canada and Argentina now have far more incentive to enter a cooperative effort to reduce worldwide protectionist trade policies CONCLUSION Today 's highly complex patchwork of agricultural policies has become increasingly antiquated and unproductive. Agriculture and rural communities have become so vastly different in structure and in their relationships to the domestic and world economies that the premises underlying current policies are no longer valid. Besides costing taxpayers and consumers billions of dollars and representing a significant portion of the Federal deficit agricultural policies divert land labor and other resources from more to less productive uses The huge surpluses generated in the United States and throughout the world harm U.S. allies and less developed countries while providing huge windfalls to powerful economic interest groups. These programs are unfair with some individuals receiving millions of dollars from the government The policy reforms outlined here would correct the major imbalances that exist within U.S. agriculture. Other reforms are also needed. For example some Federal marketing orders attempt to maintain or enhance commodity prices by restricting either the amount produced or the amount marketed. These market regulations tend to tax consumers in order to generate extra profits for established producers of the protected commodities. Such marketing orders should be deregulated. In contrast marketing orders that focus on research promotion and providing timely information to producers and consumers should continue to be supported. The Farm Credit System faces huge losses and is currently unable to diversify the risk of its loan portfolio ; it needs to be restructured. Federal and State governments must address problems such as depleted aquifers groundwater contamination water salinity and the excessive use of irrigation water attributable to inappropriately administered prices. The challenge facing both the public and private sector is to invent the means for enhancing agricultural productivity while reducing the cost of environmental externalities To be sure the Food Security Act of will not yield easily to a major overhaul. These policies after all are tied to a long series of legislative precedents deeply embedded goals and objectives and the vested interests of powerful groups. Major opposition will doubtless arise to the reforms outlined here which are in the best interest of the U.S. taxpayer and consumer. Reforming agriculture would lead to huge gains not only here in the United States but in the rest of the world CHAPTER Risk and Responsibility RISK IS A FACT OF LIFE. Every person balances risks of accident and injury against the attainment of other goals and trades off some kinds of hazards against others. Whether to smoke take a particular job travel by automobile or airplane use a safety belt while driving or engage in a dangerous recreational activity are all decisions that involve risk. People are subject to hazards from the actions of other individuals as well. Determination of the proper role of government with regard to personal risk is a complex and important public policy issue Health and safety have improved dramatically in the United States during the 20th century. Life expectancy at birth increased from years in to years in and by had risen to years. Much of this improvement is attributable to the decline in infant mortality but adult life expectancy has also increased. In a 40-year old could expect to live to age This expectation increased to by and rose further to by This represents a gain of years or a percent increase in the expected number of years remaining at age Accident fatality rates have declined at the same time. Chart shows annual fatality rates from motor vehicle and all other accidental causes. The rate from all causes other than motor vehicles dropped from per hundred thousand population in to in Motor vehicle deaths per hundred thousand population generally have been steady since the late 1930s. Automobile travel has increased substantially over this period however and traffic fatalities per hundred million vehicle miles have fallen almost percent from in to in Both the home and workplace have become safer. The home accidental death rate per hundred thousand population decreased from in to in The accidental death rate at work has fallen by more than two-thirds since the 1930s ( Chart ) Work-related death rates differ across industries and one cause of reductions in the overall rate has been the change in employment patterns as production has shifted from agriculture and other relatively danger- Chart Rates of Accidental Deaths by Cause Deaths per Population 2C ill l i i l l l l I l l i l l l ! i l ! l l i I l l l l i I Sources : Public Health Service and National Safety Council cms goods-producing industries to the relatively safer service industries The underlying source of these improvements in health and safety is economic growth and a rising standard of living. Higher incomes enable people to purchase better nutrition clothing and shelter as well as more and better medical care. A higher standard of living enables consumers to purchase safer products safer forms of transportation ( including safer automobiles ) and safer living environments Increased wealth supports improved public health measures from vaccinations to water and sewage treatment. Economic progress has been a major factor leading to advances in science and medicine that have mitigated or eliminated many dread diseases and have improved the treatment of accident victims But accidents injuries and disease can never be avoided entirely Individuals do not seek to avoid all risks and the human lifespan can not be extended without limit. Increases in health and safety often can not be achieved without cost and are only one way in which economic progress can be translated into greater well-being Chart Rates of Home and Work Deaths Due to Accidents Deaths per Persons Work ( per Workers ) " ' ~ --j / " Home ( per Resident Population ) ' I I I I I I I I i i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i i i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I i I i I I Note. A change in classification resulted in a break in the home accident series in Source : National Safety Council PROTECTION AGAINST RISK Every individual can reduce risk by exercising personal care. If responsible adults voluntarily undertake risky activities such as hang gliding their choices must be respected in a society that values individual liberty and autonomy. This general principle of respecting personal choice is compatible however with governmental action to reduce risk in particular circumstances especially when the actions of some increase the risks to others The institutional means for increasing safety and reducing risk are provided through three social arrangements markets the legal system and government regulation. Markets create incentives for safe behavior and allow individual choice in decisions involving risk. Consumers can purchase reductions in risk directly by choosing safer products. Safety is a desirable product characteristic like durability and energy efficiency. Companies that earn reputations for making unsafe products face retribution in the marketplace just as if they charged excessive prices or offered shoddy goods. The market also promotes safety in the workplace. All other things equal employers must pay higher wages for riskier jobs which creates an incentive to reduce occupational hazards Private insurance enables individuals and firms to protect themselves against the costs of various risks. Consumers purchase insurance against losses from death illness and accidents and some kinds of natural disasters. Manufacturers insure against product liability lawsuits and professional practitioners insure against liability for malpractice. By spreading the costs of risk insurance can also undermine incentives for safe behavior ; but where premiums are closely linked to the likelihood of events insured against safety incentives are substantially preserved Markets can not entirely protect an individual from being harmed by the actions of others. The legal system specifically tort law provides victims the opportunity to be compensated. By transferring to those who cause harm the costs they impose on others tort law creates incentives for individuals to behave responsibly GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT OF RISK Government provides the legal and judicial framework for the market and tort systems offers insurance against some risks imposes regulatory standards and operates programs to control risk directly Government protects the integrity of the marketplace by prohibiting dissemination of false or fraudulent information by sellers. Government supports basic health research and informs the public about health and safety characteristics of products Several circumstances may provide a rationale for government regulation. First consumers may lack the information or the ability to assess particular risks accurately. Second individuals or firms fail in some cases to take account of the costs of harm they impose on others. The tort system may not be able to force a person who causes harm to bear these costs if the person 's wealth is insufficient to compensate the victim the cost of using the tort system is too high or the person who caused the harm can not be identified. Third if markets and the tort system can not adequately control externalities such as those leading to environmental pollution government regulation may be warranted. Government regulates risk and safety through agencies such as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) the Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) and the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) Regulatory policy encompasses both risk assessment ( determination of the probabilities of harm ) and risk management. Risk manage- ment should reduce and not merely displace risk. If one dangerous product is banned more harmful ones may be used. Substitutions of this sort can exchange known risks for unknown ones. Effective risk management assesses the relative benefits and costs of actions to reduce particular risks. The benefits of regulation include avoidance of deaths injuries and property damage as well as saving resources that otherwise would be used to mitigate these adverse consequences. Costs of regulation include the resources both public and private that must be devoted to meeting regulatory standards as well as reduced competition in some cases. Government regulation sometimes restricts freedom of individual choice by imposing common standards. Regulation may in addition retard innovation and investment thus slowing economic growth If some regulations show a much lower cost per life saved or accident avoided than others adoption of the more cost-effective ones would save more lives for a given level of risk-reduction costs. Regulatory actions with the highest expected net gains should be undertaken first leading to consistency in cost-effectiveness across regulations. A policy of consistency should apply to all activities of government that affect risk : for example statutes and regulations ; Federal programs that directly affect safety such as air traffic control and the oversight of aircraft maintenance ; and State and local activities such as highway construction and firefighting. Complete consistency however is neither attainable nor desirable. States determine their own regulatory policies in many areas in accordance with principles of federalism. Special significance may be attached to reducing particular types of risks such as those faced by children or risks that are not assumed voluntarily Statutory language sometimes impedes the realization of consistency by setting goals that do not take account of costs. Examples are portions of the Clean Air Act Clean Water Act and Occupational Safety and Health Act as well as the Delaney Clause of the Food Drug and Cosmetic Act. Agencies may also fail to promote consistency in their rulemaking by implicitly assigning widely differing values to saving a life. A recent study shows that the average cost per life saved varies across regulations from as little as $ for NHTSA 's steering column protection rule to $ million for the Food and Drug Administration 's ban on diethylstilbestrol ( DES ) in cattle feed. Some proposed regulations have even higher costs such as EPA 's proposed restrictions on the disposal of dioxins and solvents on land estimated to cost $ billion per life saved The regulatory review and coordination process implemented by this Administration is designed to improve consistency across Federal regulations to the extent permitted by law Regulatory review established under Executive Orders Nos. in and in is meant to ensure that regulations are worth their costs and that the most cost-effective regulatory activities are given priority. The oversight process is based on the principle that government regulations when such interventions are appropriate should maximize the net benefits to society. Where regulation is excessive deregulation is indicated PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY Individuals can mitigate or eliminate many of the most serious risks they face by exercising personal choice. Government can inform individuals about the nature of risks alter incentives that influence individuals ' decisions or require safe behavior. Two risky activities cigarette smoking and automobile use illustrate these points SMOKING : THE GREATEST AVOIDABLE RISK Smoking presents the largest single source of health risk in America. Table lists risks of various activities in terms of the annual fatalities for every million exposed individuals. The fatality risk of smoking is more than times greater than that of work TABLE Estimated risks of various activities Annual fatalities per million exposed persons Activity or cause Active smoking Alcohol Accident Disease Motor vehicles Alcohol-invoived Non-alcohol-involved Work Swimming Passive smoking1 All other air pollutants1 Football Electrocution Lightning DES in cattlefeed Bee sting Basketball All causes All cancers ? Cancer deaths only Note. Activities are not mutually exclusive ; there are overlaps between categories. Differences in fatalities do not imply proportionate differences in years of life lost Sources : Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers Every annual report of the Surgeon General since has identified cigarette smoking as the single most important source of premature mortality among Americans. Studies estimate that of the deaths each year from heart disease result from cigarette smoking. Of the deaths each year from cancer result from cigarette smoking with more than of these from lung cancer alone. A 25-year-old man who smokes one pack of cigarettes per day can expect to live fewer years than one who does not smoke at all and one who smokes two packs per day can expect his life to be shortened by years. Life insurance companies usually charge smokers higher premiums reflecting their greater mortality risk. Some health insurance carriers have also introduced premium differentials based on smoking The issue of smoking goes beyond matters of individual choice ; secondary smoke affects others. The Surgeon General reports that a nonsmoker whose spouse smokes more than one pack of cigarettes per day has a risk of lung cancer to times higher than a nonsmoker whose spouse is a nonsmoker. Passive smoking results in an estimated fatal cancers per year. Children of smokers have more respiratory problems and are more frequently hospitalized for bronchitis pneumonia and respiratory allergies. Smoking-related fires led to deaths and another injuries in It is not clear whether the pleasures of smoking outweigh the health risks and other costs even for smokers themselves. When surveyed more than percent of smokers say they want to quit and the majority of smokers have tried to quit at least once and failed Most smokers begin to smoke as adolescents. Studies of why people start smoking identify the influences of parents siblings and friends as the most important causal factors. School curricula in the past tried to discourage smoking by emphasizing its long-term health effects. Newer curricula targeted at ages through focus on the social influences that encourage the initiation of smoking. Such programs aim at helping children acquire the behavioral skills to resist these influences and at changing perceptions that smoking is mature and sophisticated. Students who participate in these programs have started smoking at rates to percent lower than those in control groups The price of cigarettes also influences whether people smoke Higher prices discourage young people from starting to smoke but have a much smaller effect on habitual users. The Federal excise tax on cigarettes was raised from cents per pack to cents per pack in but was scheduled to revert to cents in Instead the tax was maintained at cents and as a result an estimated million fewer people smoke including more than a million fewer under age Current Federal agricultural policies toward tobacco do not undermine public health efforts to discourage smoking. A system of allotments allows farmers to produce only specified quantities of tobacco and limits the amount they can market. The net effect of the allot- ments plus price supports and other subsidies is to hold tobacco prices slightly higher and quantities slightly lower than they would be in the absence of these programs Evidence suggests that information on the consequences of smoking influences behavior. The largest decline in per capita sales of cigarettes a fall of percent occurred during following publication of two retrospective epidemiological studies that linked lung cancer to smoking and the first laboratory demonstration that the tar in cigarette smoke could cause cancer in animals. During this time tobacco companies competed vigorously by advertising purportedly less harmful brands indirectly reminding smokers of the dangers of smoking. The second largest decline in per capita sales occurred in during the height of the antismoking campaigns on television. The largest decline in the number of smokers followed the Surgeon General 's report The effects of tobacco advertising are complex. There is little evidence that advertising results in additional smoking. As with many products advertising mainly shifts consumers among brands. Evidence from other countries suggests that banning tobacco advertising has not discouraged smoking. Four industrialized countries with market economies Italy Finland Iceland and Singapore have completely banned advertising for tobacco products yet have experienced a rise in the per capita consumption of tobacco Sweden and Denmark enacted partial advertising bans yet achieved greater success in reducing consumption than did Norway and Finland which imposed total advertising bans. After the broadcast advertising ban in the United States cigarette use continued to decline but at a slower rate than before the ban The ban on broadcast advertising was supported by the large tobacco companies. Tobacco advertising expenses were about percent lower in the years following the ban. It is likely that reduced access to public attention made it harder for new brands of cigarettes to enter the market thus solidifying the market shares of existing companies and brands. Moreover with no tobacco advertising on television the antismoking messages required under the Fairness Doctrine were eliminated Increased awareness of the health risks of smoking has brought a change in public attitudes and government policies. Forty-two States and the District of Columbia restrict smoking in public places including government workplaces. Twelve States restrict smoking by public employees and also by those in private businesses. New rules for Federal employees prohibit smoking in nearly all public work areas including general office space and permit smoking only in designated areas AUTOMOBILE SAFETY Many automobile deaths stem from avoidable behavior such as drunk driving and failure to wear a safety belt. In about Americans died in motor vehicle accidents including pedestrians and bicyclists. Nearly half of the fatalities involving occupants of motor vehicles occurred in single-vehicle crashes. Despite this substantial loss of life was the safest year on record for motorists : the death rate per hundred million vehicle miles traveled ( HMVM ) was down from in and in Drunk Driving Alcohol impairs physical coordination and can increase aggressive behavior. Alcohol contributes to many kinds of accidents and injuries and is involved in more than percent of fatal automobile accidents. Drunk driving is the leading cause of death for persons in the 15-to-24 age group. About one-half of all single-vehicle crashes and two-thirds of nighttime single-vehicle crashes involve alcohol-intoxicated drivers. In percent of those killed in alcohol-related automobile accidents were drivers bicyclists or pedestrians who had been drinking. Twenty percent were passengers ( both drinking and sober ) of drinking drivers. The remaining percent nearly people were sober victims Evidence from other countries and recent experience in the United States suggest that programs to deter drivers from drinking by increasing penalties and enforcement tend to succeed in the short run to the extent that they alter drivers ' perceptions of the certainty of punishment. But the ability of such programs to achieve lasting reductions in drunk driving fatalities has not been established. This may be because none of the programs or experiments to date has been able to sustain an increase in the probabilities of apprehending and punishing drunk drivers State and local actions to restrict the availability of alcohol to young people by raising the minimum drinking age have contributed to reduced traffic fatalities. In States allowed people under to buy alcoholic beverages but by only States did. In those years motor vehicle fatality rates fell percent for the general population but percent for drivers aged and under. If the traffic fatality rate for this group had fallen only by the same amount as for the general population approximately additional young drivers would have died in automobile accidents in Higher alcohol taxes would also reduce fatalities. Federal excise taxes on beer and wine have remained constant in nominal terms since As a result of this and other factors the real price of beer fell percent of wine percent and of hard liquor per- cent between and Studies of teenage drunk driving indicate that if the real excise tax on beer were at its level an estimated fewer deaths per year would result primarily of persons aged to Safety Belts Motor vehicle occupants who wear a safety belt are less than half as likely to die in the event of an automobile accident as those who do not. If all occupants of motor vehicles wore safety belts to fewer persons would die annually. Safety belt use is a clear example of how an individual can reduce risk by taking a simple precaution. For this reason some State courts although not going so far as to hold that an accident victim 's failure to wear a safety belt constitutes contributory negligence have reduced the unbelted victim 's damage award on the grounds of failure to mitigate the harm Even though voluntary safety belt use is an extremely low-cost way to reduce deaths and injuries as of only about percent of passenger car drivers were estimated to use them. Usage among teenagers appears to be particularly low. Since States and the District of Columbia have enacted laws requiring use of safety belts ( although two States recently repealed theirs ) Safety belt usage increases after passage of a belt law but the longer term effect does not appear to be as great as the initial response Compliance with child safety seat laws has been much higher than compliance with safety belt laws and has been effective in reducing fatalities among young children. In the first child safety seat law went into effect. Now all States require safety seats for small children. Compliance rates are between and percent. The motor vehicle fatality rate for the overall population fell percent between and but for children under it fell percent Air bags and automatic safety belts are passive restraints that do not require the cooperation of the driver or passengers. Air bags are more costly to install than either automatic or conventional safety belts. Moreover their cost-effectiveness relative to safety belts falls with more widespread belt usage. Even if air bags were required in all new cars they would not come into nearly universal use until about years later. Current Department of Transportation regulations require phased installation of passive restraint systems unless States comprising two-thirds of the U.S. population enact safety belt laws The 55-Miles Per Hour Speed Limit The driver who speeds assumes a higher risk of death and injury but also increases risk for others. It is because of this externality that a maximum speed limit is in the interest of most drivers. The main cost of a lower speed limit is more time spent traveling The primary goal of the National Maximum Speed Limit Act of was energy conservation. Today with low real oil prices debate concerning the 55-miles per hour ( MPH ) speed limit focuses more on safety than energy conservation. From to the overall death rate per HMVM dropped percent from to ( A similar drop of percent in the death rate from to per HMVM occurred between and ) Although drivers have gradually increased their average speed since the 55-MPH limit was introduced they have not returned to the speeds at which they were driving before the Federal limit was enacted. The fatality rate per HMVM however has continued to fall suggesting that factors other than speed are important in the declining fatality trend Variations in fatality rates across States and types of roads suggest that speed limits should be tailored to local conditions. In the automobile accident fatality rate ranged from deaths per HMVM in New Mexico to in North Dakota. The safest roads are the interstate highways in urban areas with a fatality rate of deaths per HMVM. Local rural roads are the least safe with a fatality rate of Driving at night is three times more risky than driving during the day Although it left enforcement of the 55-MPH speed limit to the States the Federal Highway Safety Act of directed withholding a portion ( up to percent ) of a State 's Federal highway funds if it failed to achieve at least percent compliance. As a result States assign their highway patrol officers to enforcing the 55-MPH limit diverting them from other efforts that would be more effective in saving lives. To reach compliance States have an incentive to allocate most officers to work during the day when traffic is the heaviest rather than at night when a majority of motor vehicle deaths occur. State discretion in the regulation of highway speeds could improve safety more than centralized Federal regulation The Unintended Hazards of Fuel Economy Regulation Like the 55-MPH speed limit the Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) regulations are a vestige of the " energy crisis/ ' The CAFE standards ( enacted as part of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of ) established minimum average levels of fuel economy for passenger cars sold by each automobile manufacturer. To meet the standards manufacturers took a number of steps including switching to lighter materials and reducing the weight and size of cars. Market forces also shifted the automobile fleet in the direction of smaller cars while gasoline prices remained high. Automobiles have become safer as design has improved. Other things equal however small automobiles are less safe than large ones In single-vehicle crashes occupant death rates are inversely related to car size. In multiple-car crashes involving cars of the same size occupants of small cars have a death rate higher than occupants of large cars. In crashes between cars of different size the occupants of the larger car have a better chance of survival than if they had been involved in a crash with a car the same size but occupants of the smaller car have a worse chance of survival than if they had been in a crash with another small car There is evidence that drivers of small cars attempt to mitigate their increased risk by driving more carefully. One study indicates that taking age into account drivers of small cars are somewhat less likely to be involved in an accident than are drivers of larger cars Even so the fatality rate associated with small cars is higher than that of large cars The " energy crisis " has passed but Federal regulation of automobile fuel economy persists. To the extent that CAFE has reduced the size of cars driven by Americans it also has indirectly reduced automobile safety THE TORT SYSTEM In addition to self-inflicted injury harm can result from the actions of others. Tort law the civil law governing harms other than breach of contract serves to compensate persons injured by the negligent or wrongful conduct of others and also to deter such conduct Two general rules of liability guide accident law negligence and strict liability. Negligence is determined by reasonableness of conduct. If the injurer acted unreasonably that is failed to exercise due care then ordinarily the injurer would be required to compensate the victim. Strict liability on the other hand focuses on whether a product that caused an injury was defective in such a way as to make it unreasonably dangerous for its intended use. Both standards seek to impose a duty of care ; strict liability however allows demonstration of the breach of that duty by examination of the product itself The product user 's degree of care also can affect the risk of accidents. In certain instances the user can more easily eliminate or reduce the risk of injury than can the manufacturer. The rule of contributory negligence limits the scope of liability so that an injurer is not liable for harm that could have been avoided had the victim not been negligent. Many States have adopted the rule of comparative fault under which an injurer is liable only for that share of the harm corresponding to the injurer 's share of responsibility. Determining the reasonableness of a party 's conduct depends in part on the costs of avoiding the accident. When both parties can affect the probability or seriousness of an accidental injury the rule of negligence ( or the rule of strict liability accompanied by the defense of contributory negligence or comparative fault ) leads both the potential injurer and potential victim to behave reasonably to avoid accidents THE " LIABILITY CRISIS " During the past several years products and services as diverse as vaccines and skating rinks have been withdrawn from the market because of the greatly increased price or unavailability of liability insurance. Investment in product innovations such as new pharmaceuticals has been retarded because of potential liability costs. Some explanations of the " liability crisis " attribute the scarcity of liability insurance to an expansion in liability exposure under tort law. In particular the alleged crisis has been linked to trends in legal rules on fault and causation and to larger jury verdicts for damages In the early 1960s courts began to replace traditional common law rules of negligence with strict liability. It was argued that expanding liability would encourage the supplier of a good to prevent accidents ; in addition the supplier would provide insurance for unpreventable injuries. Some courts went so far as to say that business defendants could spread the cost of compensating victims across all consumers simply by charging higher prices for their goods and services. This viewpoint assumed that society would benefit from replacing personal responsibility for accidental injuries with expanded liability for those supplying goods and services. Carried to its extreme this approach would entirely remove the issue of fault or wrongdoing from the determination of liability The growing trend toward no-fault liability has increased defendants ' expected tort costs and therefore their need for insurance coverage. Historically tort law required a plaintiff to prove a direct cause-and-effect relationship between the defendant 's act and the plaintiffs harm. This requirement of proximate cause eroded as some courts allowed plaintiffs to recover an entire judgment award from any of a number of parties who might have contributed to the harm. This application of joint and several liability to product liability cases increased the potential financial exposure of defendants and further weakened the traditional legal requirements of fault and proximate causation. In practical terms joint and several liability threatens any defendant having substantial financial resources with the risk of having to pay the entire damage award in a lawsuit involving multiple defendants even if this defendant was only slightly at fault for the plaintiffs injury TORT REFORM Many States have enacted or are considering reforms in tort law The Administration has also supported legislation to address the factors that have led to the high price and scarcity of product liability insurance. This legislation would ensure that fault remains a basis for determining legal liability for injury caused by a defective product For a manufacturer to be found liable under strict product liability the product would have to be defective and unreasonably dangerous because of its defect. This reform would limit strict product liability to situations in which the doctrine originally applied before the expansion of no-fault liability Another provision of the Administration 's tort reform proposal would make joint and several liability inapplicable to product liability cases. A manufacturer found liable for damages would be responsible for at most those damages directly attributable to its share of fault for the injury ; the manufacturer could not be held responsible for damages arising from another party 's share of fault. However joint and several liability would still be available where two or more defendants consciously acted together in a common scheme or plan that directly caused the plain tiffs injury These proposals seek to ensure that fault and wrongdoing continue to be essential to determining liability for defective products These reforms should lessen the unpredictability of product liability awards for manufacturers and insurers and by emphasizing the importance of personal responsibility reduce accidents CONSUMER PRODUCTS AND THE WORKPLACE Of the accident fatalities in the United States in about half were caused by motor vehicle crashes percent by accidents at home and percent by accidents at work. In an effort to improve safety the government requires consumers and private firms to devote resources to meeting regulatory standards develops and disseminates information requires controlled testing of new drugs and requires injury compensation insurance for workers. Government rules also modify market incentives for safe behavior CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY Markets generate strong incentives for the production and safe use of consumer products. Safer products may be more expensive because of superior materials product design and quality control Many consumers are willing to pay higher prices for safer products as long as they perceive that the benefits of improved safety exceed the additional costs. Consumers acquire safety information through per- sonal experience and word of mouth as well as from manufacturers specialized testing laboratories and consumer groups. The risks of unsafe products generally are borne directly by consumers with little spillover of hazards beyond the immediate household. Thus market incentives will guide manufacturers to produce products as safe as consumers ' willingness to pay allows The Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) regulates food drugs and cosmetics. Its standard-setting and inspection activities are designed to reduce hazards about which it is difficult to obtain information in the marketplace. Examples include the safety of food additives and the safety and efficacy of pharmaceuticals The Delaney Clause of the Food Drug and Cosmetic Act has been interpreted to ban all food additives found by the FDA " to induce cancer in man or animal. " In effect this restriction has grown more stringent over the years as advances in chemistry have permitted the detection of extremely small amounts of substances in additives. In the FDA proposed that methylene chloride be banned in hair spray but that it be allowed as a decaffeinating agent in coffee because its risk in that use is negligible. This de minimis interpretation of no-risk statutory provisions is intended to reduce regulation that is overly costly. Recognizing the excessively restrictive nature of the Delaney Clause Congress has exempted saccharin from its reach The Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ) has broad authority to set standards and order bans recalls and modifications. Its purpose is to reduce hazards by improving products ' technological safety characteristics. Such activities however may fail to benefit consumers and can have adverse effects. Sometimes safer products are more costly and regulation may impose higher safety levels than consumers are willing to purchase. To reduce the likelihood of this result the law mandates cost-benefit analysis for formal CPSC rulemakings. The CPSC has adopted cost-benefit criteria for its other activities such as implementing voluntary standards Even if a product standard meets a cost-benefit test the market might have achieved an equivalent level of product safety. Moreover even if the estimated costs of regulation match the benefits regulated product standards may not be desirable because benefits that stem from product diversity will be lost. Consumers value safety like other product characteristics differently in part because not all consumers use products in the same way. If a household appliance is to be used by children parents may buy a safer model at a higher price than they would otherwise. Individuals benefit from the opportunity to make their own tradeoffs based on price quality and safety When product regulation reduces competition and thereby increases prices it restricts consumers ' choices. For example in fev.J the CPSC issued a bicycle standard that imposed numerous technical design features that would increase costs and exclude some bicycles from the market. Some of these specifications such as the one that handlebars be between and inches wide were overturned in court for lack of evidence that their absence would pose an unreasonable risk of injury The effectiveness of product regulation in improving safety can be undermined and even reversed by risk displacement. For example manufacturers of children 's sleepwear used the flame-retardant chemical Tris to comply with the flammability standard issued in Later when it was discovered that Tris can be carcinogenic the sale of Tris-coated sleepwear was banned. Some consumers may stop buying products whose prices rise as a result of safety regulation only to substitute alternatives that are more dangerous THE REGULATION OF NEW DRUGS Advances in pharmacology have produced drugs that prolong life and improve health. Many diseases that took a substantial toll in the past such as polio and pneumonia are now inexpensively prevented or treated with vaccines or drugs Regulation of the introduction and use of new drugs poses difficult policy questions. Government oversight of the testing and approval of new drugs has both therapeutic benefits and costs. It is not in the public interest to introduce a drug with side effects or risks more severe than the disease it is intended to treat. The relative efficacy of a new drug compared with existing therapies can not be established without controlled experiments including clinical trials. However the time spent in testing means that some potential beneficiaries of a new drug are not able to obtain it. Unnecessarily stringent regulatory requirements can lead to more deaths and lower health levels The amendments to the Food Drug and Cosmetic Act added a proof-of-effectiveness requirement that expanded the experimental and testing procedures required by the FDA for new drug approval. Some evidence indicates that the result was a delay in the introduction in the United States during the 1970s of certain innovative therapeutic drugs by as much as to years after their introduction in Great Britain. The amendments increased costs to pharmaceutical companies of introducing a new drug and also lengthened the approval process shortening the time that a manufacturer could retain patent protection. Incentives to innovate were thereby reduced Recent legislative and administrative changes have expedited drug review. Legislation in allowed an abbreviated approval process for generic versions of drugs previously proven safe and effective and restored patent life lost during FDA review. In the FDA rewrote approval procedures for new drugs to reduce paperwork and allow expanded use of valid data from foreign studies. The FDA has also allowed controlled use of experimental drugs that show substantial promise in treating fatal diseases. Limited use of azidothymidine ( AZT ) has been permitted for treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) In certain cases the agency also allows use of experimental drugs by patients suffering from serious diseases when there is no alternative treatment OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY Risks of death from work accidents along with other types of safety hazards have declined sharply. Injury rates which are less reliably measured than death rates have also declined but less rapidly As people demanded better working conditions and safety on the job they also sought increased government regulation of workplace safety. Among the many laws and regulations that address job safety the major ones are State workers ' compensation acts and the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act. Both workers ' compensation and the OSHA statute were expected to reduce work injuries but many of their possible effects on costs were overlooked Labor Market Safety Incentives Work-related accidents and diseases impose costs on employees that include premature death and disability suffering loss of earnings and medical expenses. Safety and health on the job are not produced by employers alone but are determined jointly by the actions of workers and employers. Individuals can reduce job risks by acquiring information about job safety and using that information to bargain for safer working conditions as well as by exercising personal care. Workers and employers can enter into contracts or labor agreements that specify safe working conditions or payments to be made in the event of an injury The labor market provides strong incentives for employers to improve safety. In order to make a hazardous job attractive to workers a firm must offer higher wages than it would have to pay otherwise Wage premiums are a critical device for controlling job hazards because they provide employers with incentives to reduce hazards in order to reduce wage costs. Additional incentives for employers to increase job safety include the desire to reduce work accidents and injuries in their firms and the costs associated with job hazards absence from work interruptions in production and employee turnover. The level of workplace safety is determined in a way that equates the marginal cost of additional safety measures with their marginal benefit to employers as indicated by savings in wage premiums and other costs In efficient labor markets wage premiums result in appropriate matching of workers and jobs based on risk and other factors. Workers who are more risk-averse will demand higher wage premiums for risky jobs than workers who are less risk-averse and thus will be less likely to take jobs with relatively high probabilities of injury. Similarly the labor market offers incentives to both workers and employers to implement job matches based on differing personal vulnerabilities to job hazards. For example if short police officers face greater risks of assault smaller people will be less likely to take police jobs for a given wage. To some extent however legal prohibitions against discrimination limit the ability of firms to screen workers on the basis of vulnerability to job risks Imperfect information may militate against fully efficient labor market outcomes thus providing a rationale for regulation or other government intervention. However studies have found evidence that job safety information although not perfect is generally adequate Workers have reasonably accurate perceptions of risks and if they acquire new information suggesting risks greater than they originally had expected their likelihood of quitting increases Workers ' knowledge of health risks is probably less accurate than their knowledge of safety risks. It is more difficult to link disease and work than accidental injuries and work because of the delayed onset of symptoms difficulty of detecting many harmful agents multiplicity of causes and uncertainties in the relationship between exposure levels and health effects. Workers however are often aware of health hazards and in some cases perceive very high risks from possible carcinogens in the workplace Government also has limited knowledge of occupational health hazards but it can improve the information available to both employees and employers by supporting research on job safety and disseminating the results. Government however has no clear advantage over workers labor unions and employers in using this information to determine appropriate levels of workplace safety or the best way to reduce hazards Pecuniary costs of job injuries are commonly shifted to the general public by income transfers such as social security disability payments welfare and food stamps. This reduces firms ' incentives to take safety measures by enabling them to pay lower wage premiums Even where information is not perfect or pecuniary externalities exist however wage premiums serve a useful function in providing safety incentives and in matching workers with jobs Workers ' Compensation Workers ' compensation statutes were enacted in most States early in the 20th century. Before that the principal recourse of workers who suffered job injuries was to sue their employers for compensation. Proving that the employer had been negligent and that the worker had not contributed to the accident was difficult however and damage awards were highly uncertain. Under workers ' compensation employers assumed no-fault but limited liability for work injuries and industrial accident victims gained the right to prompt compensation for a portion of lost wages and medical expenses Except for the largest firms which are allowed to self-insure employers must buy insurance from a private carrier or a State insurance fund to cover their workers ' compensation liabilities. Some State funds are exclusive carriers but others compete with private insurers. Premiums are experience-rated that is linked to past loss experience only for larger firms. The smallest firms generally are rated by industrial-occupational classifications ; the degree of experience rating increases with firm size. Most workers are employed by firms that are either experience-rated to some degree or self-insured Although the impetus for adoption of workers ' compensation was to replace employers ' tort liability with a no-fault system safety incentives were an additional consideration. Workers ' compensation was expected to induce employers to provide greater workplace safety because each firm would assume the costs of its workers ' injuries more predictably than under tort liability. The costs of industrial injuries thus would be included among other business costs and employers would be motivated to reduce them by increasing job safety This expectation of improved safety however overlooked factors that would undermine safety : reduced wage premiums in response to lower but more certain recovery of damages and reduced incentives for employers to increase safety when workers ' compensation premiums are not closely related to the injuries suffered by employees A growing body of research has found that workers ' compensation benefits have unfavorable effects on safety. Higher benefits appear to increase both the frequency of work injuries and the number of compensation claims filed. One explanation for the positive connection is the claim effect. Even if actual injuries remain constant workers are more likely to file claims when benefits are higher thereby producing more reported injuries Lack of experience rating of workers ' compensation premiums reduces an employer 's incentives to invest in safety measures. A firm that is not forced to bear the full costs of compensating its workers for their injuries has a diminished incentive to make expenditures that promote safety. Recent research has found that increased bene- fits produce a smaller increase in injury rates in firms whose premiums are more highly experience-rated than in firms that pay class rates. Employers ' safety incentives could be strengthened by requiring them to make a deductible payment and copayment on each claim. Many insurance companies maintain staffs that help their clients correct occupational health and safety problems such as worksite fire hazards. To the extent that private carriers provide more accident-prevention services than exclusive State insurance funds more of such services would become available by allowing private insurers to compete with or supplant such funds Workers ' compensation has improved the reliability of compensation to injured workers. By replacing lost wages it also has enabled injured workers to recuperate more fully before returning to work There is evidence however analogous to findings on the effects of unemployment insurance that higher levels of workers ' compensation benefits create work disincentives. Recipients whose benefits are relatively high compared with their previous wages have longer durations of work disability. Work disincentive effects can be important : because benefits are not taxable the after-tax rate of wage replacement for some workers exceeds percent of their prior wages Although one goal of workers ' compensation was to reduce the high transactions costs of litigation many workers ' compensation claims are still contested. Workers moreover are making liability claims with increasing frequency against suppliers of inputs commonly in situations where adverse effects on health such as those related to cancer may be delayed. Such suits are not barred under the no-fault workers ' compensation system Regulation of Job Safety The Occupational Safety and Health Act 's sweeping mandate is to ensure that " so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation [ has ] safe and healthful working conditions. " OSHA has issued several thousand workplace standards the large majority of which were adopted soon after OSHA 's formation and formalized existing industry practices. Some of the most obviously ineffective of these have since been revoked. Most of OSHA 's rules deal with safety rather than health hazards. Employers continue to complain that OSHA 's regulations are costly but no comprehensive estimates of compliance costs have been made Compared with the magnitude of safety incentives provided in the market OSHA 's fines and enforcement activities are small. One estimate of wage premiums generated by job risks is approximately $ billion per year which compares with about $ million in OSHA fines. By comparison workers ' compensation benefits are about $ billion annually A number of studies have found that OSHA 's activities have not been effective in promoting workplace safety. Before the establishment of OSHA evidence was lacking that working conditions were safer or healthier in States with stricter regulatory standards. Over recent decades the job fatality rate has declined fairly steadily by more than percent per year. OSHA has not made an identifiable difference in this rate of decline. One recent study however has found that OSHA 's activities have resulted in a small reduction in work injuries. It is more difficult to assess OSHA 's effects on health because of the time lag between a worker 's exposure to a toxic chemical or environmental hazard and the manifestation of disease. This Administration has taken steps to enhance the effectiveness and reduce the burdens of OSHA 's inspections. Inspections are now less confrontational and are targeted toward high-risk firms and serious workplace hazards OSHA 's effects on health and safety may be small because of the type of regulations it has promulgated. Many require specific changes in the physical work environment rather than encouraging safe behavior. For example OSHA has not required the use of automobile safety belts although motor vehicle fatalities account for about onethird of total work deaths ( Chart ) Even in manufacturing motor vehicle deaths are close to percent of work deaths. Executive Order No. issued in requires safety belt use by Federal employees Although precise causation of work injuries is difficult to establish studies show that individual behavior is a major factor in many work accidents. Studies of occupational fatalities have found that to percent are alcohol-related Executive Order No. broadly requires the use of cost-benefit criteria for agency rulemaking to the extent permitted by law. The Supreme Court has interpreted OSHA 's legislative mandate as prohibiting the balancing of costs and benefits in formulating health regulations. OSHA has adopted a restricted cost-effectiveness approach in accordance with this decision allowing lowest cost methods of compliance in achieving a given technical standard. Studies of past OSHA rules show that costs typically exceed expected benefits. The recent OSHA hazard communication standard requiring that workers be informed of workplace hazards is an important exception A major criticism of OSHA is that many of its regulations have unnecessarily increased costs by preventing employers from using flexible means to meet health and safety goals. In contrast OSHA 's hazard communication rule requires that workers be informed about chemical hazards but leaves employers leeway in implementation OSHA regulations have tended to specify technical characteristics of Chart Motor Vehicle Deaths as Percent of Total Work Deaths Percent I l I l I I I I i I I I I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Source : National Safety Council workplace design. Performance standards which define acceptable levels of workers ' exposure to hazards and allow employers to find the most cost-effective ways to meet them are often at least as effective. In the case of the cotton dust standard for example the risk of lung disease could be reduced by allowing the use of disposable masks. OSHA 's preference for engineering controls rather than personal protective equipment is based among other factors on concerns that protective devices may be cumbersome may not be used consistently and may not provide adequate protection over long periods of time OSHA 's preference for engineering controls is particularly costly in the case of noise control. Relatively inexpensive ear plugs can often protect workers as effectively as reducing the noise level which generally can be achieved only through costly modifications in work processes machinery or plant design. It has been estimated that allowing greater flexibility in methods of compliance would reduce the cost of occupational health regulations by to percent Many of OSHA 's standards increase costs and reduce productivity and competitiveness. Where OSHA 's rules increase capital require- ments they also reduce employment opportunities by encouraging the substitution of capital for labor. Where OSHA 's rules specify characteristics of workplace design they impose fixed costs that tend to favor larger firms over smaller ones The evidence on whether workers ' compensation and OSHA have improved safety is mixed at best. Most studies indicate that these programs have failed to reduce job injuries in the aggregate. Although workers ' compensation achieved some of its goals it also may have undermined safety incentives. Both workers ' compensation and OSHA have generated costs and indirect effects that have tended to reduce productivity ENVIRONMENTAL RISK Environmental externalities stem from the release of harmful substances into a common resource such as the air a lake a river or the ocean. Lack of private ownership of such resources makes it difficult for those injured or inconvenienced to charge polluters for the losses suffered. The costs of organizing those harmed by pollution hampers the use of tort remedies. Also the cause of the harm is frequently impossible to identify. The same pollutant may be produced by automobiles utilities industrial plants and natural processes Management of environmental risk entails dealing with large uncertainties in the magnitude of potential losses. Environmental risks frequently involve effects extending over a wide area or across international boundaries and sometimes include effects that may occur far in the future CONTROL OF AIR AND WATER POLLUTION Direct controls have been the most common regulatory strategy for reducing pollution in the United States. Alternatively if emissions were taxed or if permits for emissions were in a form that could be traded emitters would take account of the costs of pollution they produce. Actual or implicit market valuation of these permits would induce firms to include the costs of pollution among their other costs of production. A market in pollution permits would result in a reduction of emissions to the required level at the lowest total cost. The Environmental Protection Agency has begun to implement marketbased control programs including " bubbles " which allow several sources to be considered as a group in meeting emissions targets These emissions-trading strategies ensure that sources having the lowest costs of control will reduce emissions most The United States has devoted considerable resources to reducing pollution. In total public and private expenditures for pollution abatement and control were approximately $ billion ( dollars ) or percent of GNP. Of these expenditures percent was for control of air emissions and percent for water pollution control Measurable improvements in environmental quality have been achieved. Average concentrations of the six atmospheric pollutants subject to National Ambient Air Quality Standards ( NAAQS ) have declined over the past decade ( ) The NAAQS have been reached in almost all parts of the country for sulfur dioxide nitrogen dioxide and lead. In some areas carbon monoxide and total suspended particulates standards have not been met. Surface-level ozone is the largest remaining problem although most people live in counties that meet the ozone standard. Significant improvements in water quality have also been reported. It is difficult to determine however whether these gains carry with them benefits larger than the costs of their attainment Misallocations of capital and reduced productivity result from certain features of current environmental regulation. One example of this sort of distortion is the " new source bias. " New plants must meet more stringent air emissions standards than old ones. Another example is that regions with air that is cleaner than national standards must regulate new sources to achieve " prevention of significant deterioration " of their already superior air quality. The first of these requirements gives an economic advantage to older plants compared with newer ones while the second favors particular regions over others. Both discourage investment in more modern facilities CONTROL OF ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS Management of environmental risk addresses more than the failure of markets to motivate firms and individuals to take account of the effects of their actions on the environment. Insufficient scientific knowledge often makes it difficult to balance the costs and benefits of alternative environmental policies Stratospheric Ozone Depletion Stratospheric ozone has been a focus of research and policy concern since the 1970s. Certain otherwise useful and harmless chemicals primarily chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) released into the atmosphere eventually diffuse to the stratosphere where they may interact with and break down the ozone layer. A reduction in the amount of stratospheric ozone would allow more biologically damaging ultraviolet radiation to reach the Earth 's surface. Increased ultraviolet radiation has been associated with deleterious effects on health including various forms of skin cancer and with reductions in the yields of some crops. CFCs also are greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide which may contribute to global warming CFCs and related compounds are stable chemicals used in refrigeration air conditioning and fire extinguisher systems ; in foam production ; as aerosol propellants ; and in electronics manufacture Annual world output of the two most important CFCs increased almost fivefold from to Worldwide production of these two chemicals peaked in and then declined until primarily because of reduction in their use as aerosol propellants in the United States ( which banned nonessential aerosol applications in ) and a few other countries. Nonaerosol usage accounts for approximately percent of all CFG applications however and total world production of the main CFCs has grown since by approximately percent per year. Because of the long lifetime of the molecules emissions may affect the ozone layer for many years Although the consequences of stratospheric ozone depletion may be extremely serious estimates of the magnitudes of the potential damages are highly uncertain. The largest unknowns involve forecasts of future emissions of CFCs and other greenhouse gases the physical and chemical mechanisms of ozone depletion and the effects of increased ultraviolet radiation on living organisms. The recent discovery of large changes in the seasonal pattern of ozone levels over Antarctica raises doubts about the current state of knowledge about stratospheric ozone dynamics and chemistry. Some scientists claim that CFCs are the cause of these changes but others believe they have a natural cause Ozone depletion is a global issue. Most world CFC production is concentrated in the industrialized countries with the U.S. share slightly over percent in recent years. Unilateral action to control CFCs is not likely to be effective and could even reduce the opportunity for international cooperation by removing some of the incentive for other nations to reduce CFC release. International agreement on controls would prevent the loss of competitiveness that could result if the United States were to act alone to control CFCs further In the United States signed the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer which provides for international cooperation in research monitoring and information exchange. The United States is currently participating in negotiations to implement this agreement and has proposed a near-term freeze on ozone-depleting emissions a long-term reduction of emissions and periodic review of controls. In view of the uncertainties regarding the extent and consequences of ozone depletion it is appropriate that emissions reduction policy provide for periodic reassessment of the levels and effectiveness of controls as new information becomes available Acid Rain Acid deposition known as acid rain when it takes the form of liquid precipitation is another major environmental concern. Acid deposition may have a number of adverse effects on the environment but few are well established. Emissions of some air pollutants contribute to the acidification of certain sensitive lakes and streams but other cause-and-effect relationships are not clearly understood Combustion of many types of fossil fuels produces oxides of sulfur and of nitrogen. These combustion products can be chemically transformed into acidic compounds sometimes after being transported hundreds of miles from their source. Rain is naturally acidic but manmade contributions to acid deposition are much greater than natural sources in industrial regions such as the Eastern United States and Southeastern Canada Air pollutants that are precursors of acid deposition are regulated under the NAAQS. The direct effects of these pollutants such as soot smog and haze as well as their possible hazards to health are distinct from their indirect effects through acid deposition. Thus reducing these primary pollutants would have benefits beyond those associated with the resulting reduction of acid rain The mechanisms of atmospheric transport in the acid deposition process are not well understood. The areas of North America that show apparent effects of acid deposition are generally downwind of the power plants smelters and urban areas that are the main sources of precursor emissions. But it is not known specifically what fraction of acid deposition in the Adirondacks for example originates in particular regions. Further deposition varies from site to site and from year to year at the same site because of meteorological variations Uncertainty also surrounds the effects of acid deposition. Visible damage to U.S. forests appears to be confined largely to trees in the East with most of the damage occurring at higher elevations. The hypotheses that have been advanced to account for the decline of these forests include the effects of climate cycles and other air pollutants as well as acid deposition. The effects of acid precipitation on surface waters are complex. Damage to lakes and streams can occur only if they are sensitive to acidification that is only if they lack naturally occurring neutralizing chemicals in their watersheds. Most large lakes in the Eastern United States are not acidified either because they are not sensitive or are not located in areas of sufficient acid deposition Although higher acid concentrations present a potential danger of dissolving heavy metals in municipal water supplies no such contamination has been established in the United States. Adverse effects of acid rain on crops and soils have been suggested but have not been shown to be significant Transboundary deposition is of major concern to Canada. The usual difficulties of assessing environmental risks and internalizing costs are magnified because some costs and benefits occur in another country. Acid rain has been the subject of high-level discussions between the United States and Canada and the U.S. Government has endorsed a recommendation that it undertake a 5-year $ 5-billion program in conjunction with private industry to develop a more extensive set of commercial control technologies than is now available Some proposals to control acid precursor emissions have been made that go far beyond these demonstration projects. Acid rain control programs that have been proposed in Congress would impose costs of $ billion to $ billion per year. Sulfur dioxide control methods include switching to coal with lower sulfur content removing some of the sulfur before combustion ( coal washing ) or removing the sulfur during or after combustion. Costs tend to be lower for programs that involve switching from high-sulfur to low-sulfur coal but switching would disrupt the regions that mine high-sulfur coal Current regulations and laws might be modified to alleviate acid deposition at relatively low cost. The Powerplant and Industrial Fuel Use Act of for example prohibits use of natural gas in new industrial or electricity-generating facilities without a special exemption. Natural gas combustion releases minimal levels of sulfur dioxide and fewer oxides of nitrogen than coal burning. Use of coal is also encouraged by obstacles to the construction of nuclear power plants More stringent air quality emissions standards for new sources have along with other factors prolonged the useful lifetime of older power plants which produce relatively more acid precursors A large and rapid reduction in emissions nationwide would be very expensive. Low-cost options such as liming of lakes may be able to mitigate acidification in some cases. Identifiable economic benefits of lower levels of acid deposition in the United States appear to be small although reducing acid precursors might benefit urban areas by improving ambient air quality. For any large-scale control effort questions remain as to how best to achieve the desired results. For example better understanding of atmospheric transport mechanisms is necessary to decide whether to target emissions from particular regions. The costs of undertaking an ambitious emissions control program need to be balanced against the relatively low risks of waiting to resolve the scientific uncertainties surrounding the causes and effects of acid deposition Biotechnology Biotechnology is the use of biological systems and organisms in household agricultural and industrial production. In its broadest context it is an ancient practice that includes such familiar applications as the use of yeast in baking bread and brewing beer and the use of cultures in making cheese and yogurt. The most recent advances include genetic manipulation technologies such as recombinant DNA recombinant RNA and cell fusion that allow more precise and predictable methods of producing old products or creating new ones The benefits of biotechnology to society are substantial and include opportunities for new and better medicines and therapies for disease more efficient food production and pollution control. Biotechnology has already provided new drugs and improved existing drugs and vaccines. It has reduced the cost of insulin and interferon Health and safety concerns related to use of living organisms include the effects of accidental release from contained facilities and the side effects of environmental applications. Releases that occur commonly in facilities using low-risk microorganisms to produce products such as penicillin tetracycline or industrial enzymes are not harmful to persons or the environment. More stringent containment conditions are employed for hazardous organisms Introduction of new plants animals and microorganisms into the environment has long been commonplace. It occurs whenever new crop varieties are planted or animals are selectively bred. Microorganisms are released as pesticides and to improve plant growth. For example large numbers of genetically improved nitrogen-fixing bacteria are added to agricultural soils in the United States each year The environmental risk from the release of a genetically engineered organism is that it may have unforeseen effects on plants animals or human beings. Because living organisms are self-replicating it might be difficult to control the spread of an organism whose harmful effects were discovered only after its release. Adverse consequences from bringing an alien species into a new environment however are not confined to cases of genetic manipulation. The kudzu vine was introduced to the United States for soil conservation but rapidly spread becoming a pest in some areas. Other imported species such as the gypsy moth have caused environmental damage A framework for coordinating Federal regulation of biotechnology was established in This framework built on existing legislation and practices but imposed additional levels of Federal review for certain environmental applications particularly of new microorganisms. To the greatest extent possible responsibility for regulating a specific product will be placed with a single agency. Regulatory coordination should reduce uncertainty encourage consistency in the rigor of scientific reviews across agencies and provide the flexibility to modify regulations as scientific knowledge advances. The aim of the Administration 's regulatory policy is to safeguard public health and the environment without blocking the development and commercial use of this highly productive new technology CONCLUSION Government regulation can reduce some risks significantly but it can also reduce productivity personal income and individual choice Risks ordinarily can not be controlled without cost. The resources used to reduce them are not available for alternative improvements in safety or well-being. When government regulates makes public expenditures or requires private expenditures to reduce risk the cost of these actions should be weighed against their likely benefits It is not possible to eliminate all hazards to safety and health nor is it desirable for the government to attempt to reduce risks that could be controlled in less costly ways. In many cases government control of risk is neither efficient nor effective. Markets accommodate individual preferences for avoiding risk and produce information that helps people make informed choices. Markets and the legal system provide powerful incentives for reducing personal hazards ; government regulatory actions should avoid diminishing the incentives for safety that markets and tort law provide. Because many of the greatest risks are subject to personal control government regulation can never replace the need for responsible individual action CHAPTER Women in the Labor Force WOMEN NOW CONSTITUTE percent of the U.S. labor force They provide services that range from teaching air traffic control medicine and legal advice to administrative and technical support Women have always played a major productive role in American society. In this century however they have increasingly shifted their productive activities from the home to the marketplace. This shift was accomplished through market processes without the intervention of government in either job training or job placement activities In the early 20th century about percent of women worked outside the home and those who did were typically single or widowed By the majority of adult women ( two-thirds of those between the ages of and ) worked outside the home and most were married. Female employment increased throughout the century but the pace has accelerated since World War II. In the postwar period the number of women working in the United States has risen from million to million. That this important structural change was accomplished in an environment of rising real wage rates underscores the flexibility and resilience of the U.S. economy. The chapter examines these extraordinary changes from an economic perspective Care and management of the home have always been important to society. One major reason that more women are able to enter the work force today is that household management requires less time than it did in the early 20th century. Previously it required one full-time person ( generally the woman ) to perform necessary household tasks Improvements in technology have increased the number of laborsaving devices in the home and more goods that were formerly produced in the home can now be purchased outside it. Moreover the decline in the birth rate has also reduced work demands in the home and provided more time for work in the market As demands on women in the household were falling women 's wages in the market were rising. The changes in technology that made labor-saving devices in the home widely available also altered the nature of market work and increased the returns to labor. Physical strength became less important in many jobs service sector employment grew and wages and salaries increased Changes in the household and the market meant that the wages women could command outside the home rose relative to the value of time spent in the home. This growing market opportunity encouraged women to enter the labor force. Real earnings of men increased throughout the 1950s and 1960s at a time when married women were rapidly entering the labor force implying that family standards of living would have risen even without the earnings of the wife Thus while higher real incomes for male wage earners meant less financial need for their wives to work the attraction of higher wages and less need for women to work at home drew women into the labor market. In some years in the 1970s however real wages for both men and women fell. Then many married women probably did enter the labor market to maintain family incomes. The 1980s have brought increases in both women 's real earnings and women 's earnings relative to men 's changes that further encouraged work in the marketplace The remainder of the chapter is divided into three sections. The first section describes the increase in women 's labor force participation and the changes in their employment patterns. The second section discusses factors that affect occupational choice and chronicles changes in the occupational distribution of employed women. The third section analyzes earnings differentials and examines the pay gap between men and women EMPLOYMENT The percent of the U.S. labor force that is female has risen from percent in to percent in to percent in Table shows the rapid rise of women 's participation in the labor force since the turn of the century. As women entered the labor force the market responded and a variety of new opportunities were created. The market also accommodated the preferences of many of these women for part-time work or flexible scheduling of hours Dramatically increased participation of women in the labor market is not a phenomenon confined to the United States. A recent study of major industrialized countries shows similar patterns of socioeconomic change : urbanization decreasing birth rates increasing female education and the growth of the service sector But the U.S. economy displayed a far greater capacity than the economies of other industrialized countries to absorb additional workers and create new jobs. Between and job growth in the United States increased by an average of percent per year double the rate for Japan. Over the same time period there was vir- TABLE Labor force participation rates of women by age [ Percent ] Women Year All White All women Black and other Source : There is some controversy over the Census counts of women workers in the time period. Data here for are from Bureau of the Census monograph Gertrude Bancroft The American Labor Force New York Wiley Data for are from Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics tually no job growth in Great Britain or Italy and employment in West Germany fell In recent years a pattern of increased employment of married women with young children has emerged in most industrialized countries. As Table shows for the United States the historical pattern of married women staying home to care for children especially small children has changed considerably in recent decades. Women who maintain families alone have had high rates of market participation throughout the postwar period and although participation rates for these mothers have grown the major increase in female employment in recent decades has come from married women. The sharpest increases have been for wives with very young children. About percent of wives with children under the age of participate in the labor force. The rate for wives with infants is almost percent more than double the percentage in TABLE Labor force participation rates of women by age of youngest child March of selected years [ Percent ] Women maintaining families alone Wives husband present Presence and age of child Total With children under years Under years Under years year and under years years years Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Although marital status and age of children are less important predictors of market participation than they were in the past they still influence behavior most notably for full-time employment. In monthly survey data for percent of married women with children under years of age worked full time but percent of widowed divorced separated or never-married mothers with children in the same age group did so. The proportion of women who worked full time was lowest for those with very young children Among married women with children aged to percent work full time. But among those with children under only one-third work full time Probably because of family responsibilities more women than men work part time ( fewer than hours per week ) Although the number of women who are working part time has increased the proportion of the adult female labor force that wants part-time jobs has not changed since And over this same time period approximately one-third of all women who worked in a year worked part time. However the percent of women with the strongest time commitment to the labor force ( full-time and full-year ) is rising while the percent with the weakest time commitment to the labor force ( part-time and part-year ) is falling. In virtually half of women who worked in the market worked full time for the entire year while only percent worked part time for part of the year UNEMPLOYMENT In the 1950s and 1960s unemployment rates were higher for women than men even though women tended to be employed in industries and occupations where layoffs were less common. Women 's higher unemployment rates can be attributed primarily to their more frequent movement into and out of the labor force. Moreover because men tend to work in industries that are more affected by business cycles differences between male and female unemployment rates widened in upswings and narrowed during recessions. In the late 1960s a period of generally low overall unemployment the unemployment rate for women was about percent greater than that for men. In the 1980s however overall rates of unemployment are higher than in the 1960s and male and female unemployment differences have narrowed considerably. In and the female unemployment rate fell below the male rate for the first time in the postwar period Seasonally adjusted unemployment rates were percent for both men and women in December Equal male and female unemployment rates however reflect the outcome of two opposing forces : a higher proportion of female new entrants and reentrants which in- creases women 's rates relative to those of men and occupational and industrial employment patterns that lower women 's unemployment rates relative to male rates HOME WORK VERSUS MARKET WORK Individuals tend to split their hours between home and market work such that an additional hour spent in each will furnish roughly equal benefits. Urban residence fewer children and labor-saving household appliances decrease the time required to produce a given level of benefits from work in the home and thereby reduce the number of hours necessarily devoted to home work. More education and previous labor market experience raise market productivity and the value of market time providing additional incentives for work outside the home The marginal rate at which income is taxed influences decisions about market work nonmarket work and leisure. Taxes create a differential between the individual return to an hour of market work ( the after-tax wage ) and the productive return to society ( the beforetax wage ) In the top marginal Federal tax rate on labor income was percent and in some special cases was even higher With this marginal rate individuals could have been considerably more productive in market than in nonmarket work but would have been better off working an extra hour in the home than in the workplace because the output was not taxed. Under the Tax Reform Act of the top marginal rate will be percent although a surcharge on certain relatively high incomes will make it percent Therefore the tax reforms that the Administration is implementing should reduce the disincentives against market work built into previous tax rates Although labor-saving devices played an important role in reducing the number of hours women spent doing housework in the 1940s and 1950s working wives still spend substantial time doing housework. Survey estimates from the mid-1970s indicate that wives employed full time averaged hours of work in the home and hours of work in the market each week while husbands employed full time averaged hours of work in the home and hours of work in the market. ( Work in the market includes commuting time. ) As women have increased their market work and reduced their nonmarket work over the past two decades men have done the opposite. Between the mid-1970s and the early 1980s men aged to cut their market work by hour a week and increased their work in the home by almost hours a week while women in the same age group increased their market work by hours and cut their work in the home by a little more than an hour The Role of Wages in Increased Participation Researchers estimate that over half the growth in female employment between and was in response to the real wage increases illustrated in Chart Real wage growth affected market participation both directly through the attraction of more income and indirectly through reductions in the number of births. The indirect effects were estimated to be as large as the direct effects. The peak of the postwar baby boom in was births per woman but over the past decade the rate has been about births per woman Chart Women 's Real Annual Earnings Thousands of Dollars m i i i i I i i i i I i i i i I i i i i i i i i I i i i i I I Note. Data are median wage or salary income of year-round full-time civilian workers ( years and over through and years and over after ) Self-employed persons are excluded. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier figures Data are converted to dollars using the consumer price index for all urban consumers Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers The rest of the growth in female employment is related to factors such as decreases in the time required for household work and changes in husbands ' income. Between and husbands ' real earnings fell about percent and in response wives probably increased their work effort. In addition as work expectations generally increased labor supply decisions were probably based more on long-term individual wage expectations than on year-to-year changes in wages. Finally some of the growth in women 's participa- tion can be attributed to the fact that proportionately more women were single divorced or widowed The Role of Expectations Along with changes in labor market opportunities and in wages people 's attitudes about work have changed greatly. Questions concerning women working appeared in at least six polls in the 1930s and fewer than percent of the respondents in any of the polls approved of married women working outside the home. In a national survey slightly more than one-third of husbands had either favorable or qualifiedly favorable attitudes toward their wives working By the 1980s however the overwhelming proportion nearly twothirds of both men and women reported that it is less important for a wife to help her husband 's career than to have one of her own Table shows how young women 's expectations about future work in the market changed between and In women surveyed in would have been between and years old ; thus the table also shows labor force participation rates for women in these age groups. With the dramatic increase in labor force participation rates more women were working than had expected to work. The differences between expectations and actual later behavior were considerably greater for white than for black women probably because the increase in labor force participation has been so much greater for white women TABLE Young women 's work expectations for age : Trends and current participation rates [ Percent ] Race Percent of young women expecting to work at age sample sample labor force participation rate by age White Black Sources : The data are from the National Longitudinal Survey of women aged years. The data are from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Labor Market Experience a survey of over young men and women aged years ( over women ) The tabulations exclude those answering " do n't know " or " other. " All survey data were weighted to a nationally representative sample. The labor force participation rates are from Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics What and how long women study what jobs they take and what occupations they choose depend in part upon how long and remunerative they expect their careers to be. The dramatic increases in women 's employment were unanticipated. Not surprisingly many women seriously underestimated how many years they would work in the marketplace. As a result women on average were less trained for labor market activities than they would have been had they anticipated their future work histories. Today young women expect to spend a much greater fraction of their adult lives working in the labor market than their mothers did Young women are changing their training and initial job plans as they anticipate greater commitment to the labor force. This is evident in the increased proportion going to college. As Chart illustrates women now receive about half of the bachelor 's and master 's and more than one-third of the doctoral degrees. The sharpest growth in the past decade has been in professional degrees. In women received percent of the degrees in medicine ( up from percent in ) percent in dentistry ( up from percent in ) and percent in law ( up from percent in ) Chart Percent of Earned Degrees Received by Women Bachelor 's Degrees Doctoral Degrees Master 's Degrees Professional Degrees Note. Data are for 12-month period ending June of year shown. Data for professional degrees are for first professional degrees and are primarily in law medicine and dentistry Source : Department of Education Women 's college major choices are converging toward those of men. In percent of degrees awarded to women were in education. Since then the increased commitment of women to the labor force has led them to choose a greater variety of college majors. In the fall of only percent of women beginning college intended to major in education while percent opted for business making it the most popular major for women as well as for men Roughly equal numbers of male and female college graduates now major in the arts and humanities as well as in the biological sciences and management. Although considerably fewer women major in education than before percent of education majors are women Women represent only percent of engineering majors but a decade earlier they represented a mere percent OCCUPATIONAL CHOICE Work performed in the home would under paid circumstances be categorized in the service sector. Women made an occupational shift during the postwar period as many left full-time homemaking. In terms of the proportions of the labor market involved the shift away from homemaking is greater than the migration of the workforce out of agriculture that occurred earlier in this century. Both structural shifts in employment were massive and again the market-oriented U.S. economy accommodated them in an environment of generally rising wages Occupational choices seem to be driven not only by expectations regarding lifetime hours of work but also by tradeoffs among the characteristics of different occupations. For example individuals balance wages against job characteristics such as riskiness effort work environment and fringe benefits. Characteristics such as amount of training required usual hours and rate of skill atrophy are also important. Women who expect to have long and continuous work careers make choices different from those who expect more disruptions in their labor market work because of family demands. Women 's divergent goals are reflected in the differing characteristics of the occupations they choose. And the market provides individuals with the opportunity to choose among occupations with very different features The amount and type of training women acquire signal expectations for lifetime hours of work. Women who plan continuous careers are more likely to choose apprenticeship training or make specific investments in schooling as preparation for a particular occupation The amount of additional training undertaken while employed also depends on the expected length of labor market participation as women who expect lengthy and continuous careers are more likely to undertake career investments that enhance future earnings The type of training also affects working wives ' occupational choices. Some couples invest more heavily in the career of the husband than of the wife ; if the wife chooses to work she must find employment wherever the family locates and is thus less likely to acquire job-specific or nontransferable skills. Similarly occupations in which skills deteriorate or require knowledge of a rapidly changing body of information may not be good choices for women who plan substantial interruptions in their labor market careers for marriage or childbearing. The cost of taking time off is much greater in engineering than in editing because the decay of knowledge is much greater Job characteristics valued by many especially women with children are work-time flexibility and shorter work hours. Women have long dominated elementary and secondary school teaching occupations that allowed them to spend summers and holidays with family Workers in the clerical fields where women have often been employed full time throughout the year generally work fewer hours per week than the average full-time worker Physical strength access to financing societal expectations and legal barriers constrain occupational choices for both men and women. Barriers to entry for women have included Federal regulations prohibiting certain work in the home State " protective " legislation barring entry into occupations requiring heavy or dangerous work certain military occupations ( because of congressional bans on women in combat ) and employer or union discrimination. Employer or union discrimination on the basis of sex race or age is now against the law and virtually all State " protective " legislation has been repealed. Federal regulations still prohibit the manufacture of some types of goods within the home. The Department of Labor in partially lifted the ban and in proposed further liberalization of these rules Some argue that women 's occupational choices have also been affected by what is broadly called sex-stereotyping of occupations. Although occupational choices of women are changing most employed women are still found in a relatively small cluster of occupations Women have often chosen these occupations because they require general skills that were easily transferable and could be used in the home and because the occupations permitted the flexibility in hours or labor force discontinuity that many women wanted. Few legally valid restrictions to occupational choice remain. And as women raise their expectations about their work time in the market they are increasingly entering occupations considered nontraditional OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS Women 's tendency to choose clerical service and social service fields over crafts and manufacturing is a phenomenon not confined to the United States. A study of Great Britain Sweden the United States and West Germany in the 1960s and 1970s indicated that these patterns were strongest in Sweden. Gender differences in occupational choice narrowed only slightly in the United States between and During the 1970s and increasingly in the 1980s women have been choosing a greater variety of occupations. Table shows the percentage of women in the labor force in the six broad census occupational groupings and in a variety of more detailed occupations. Women are increasing their participation in highly skilled occupations that traditionally had been almost exclusively male. For example in when percent of the total workforce was female only percent of lawyers and judges were female By women constituted percent of employed workers under years of age and percent of lawyers and judges TABLE Percent female in selected occupations and [ Female workers as percent of total workers ] Occupation Under years All Percent of employment that is female Managerial and professional Mathematical and computer scientists Natural scientists Health diagnosing occupations Physicians Health assessment and treating occupations Registered nurses Lawyers and judges ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) I1 ) ( i ) g ( i ) ( i ) Technical sales and administrative support Technicians and related support Engineering and related technologists and technicians Sales occupations Administrative support including clerical Secretaries stenographers and typists Mail and message distributing Service occupations Sheriffs bailiffs other law enforcement officers Bartenders Waiters and waitresses Cooks except short-order Precision production craft and repair Precision woodworking occupations Operators fabricators and laborers Motor vehicle operators Bus drivers Printing machine operators Farming forestry and fishing Not available Note. All data are based on the Census job classification system Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Women are also expanding their roles as entrepreneurs. Femaleoperated nonfarm sole proprietorships have grown about twice as rapidly as all such proprietorships since In female entrepreneurs operated percent of nonfarm sole proprietorships up sharply from earlier periods. Most of these businesses are in areas such as retail trade insurance and real estate but an increasing number are in areas considered nontraditional EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS Differences in earnings arise partly because of differences in demand for the goods and services provided by particular jobs and partly because of differences in the number of qualified individuals willing to take those jobs. Different skills that stem from past training work histories motivation and talent all contribute to variation in earnings. Continuous work histories and longer job tenures with particular employers lead to higher earnings. Jobs that begin with comparatively more on-the-job training also pay less at first than jobs that offer no training ; individuals seek jobs with training because of the potential for future wage growth Within race and sex categories individual characteristics ( hours of work education age union membership urban location etc. ) explain some of the variation in earnings. Adding those factors to other readily measured characteristics such as actual work experience interruptions in work experience tenure with employer and occupation job or industry characteristics explains about half of the earnings variation The average employed man has more work experience fewer interruptions in that work experience and longer tenure with his current employer than does his female counterpart of a comparable age However these differences are now beginning to narrow. For example in women 's median years of tenure with their current employer were years less than men 's ; years later in the difference was years. For women to years old the tenure differences were years and years respectively Just as unexplained earnings differentials exist among men or among women whose readily measured characteristics are identical unexplained earnings differentials also exist between men and women. These pay differences can result from the failure to measure all of the gender differences that affect market productivity or from discrimination or from both One example of a characteristic that is not generally measurable is anticipated future market work time. Such information however is available from the survey of young women discussed previously in this chapter. Because the survey was longitudinal and the same basic question was asked each year it was possible to compare the earnings of women who had consistently expected to be working at age with those who had not. Recent analysis of these data shows that the earnings in of women who had answered the question in the affirmative throughout the first years of the survey ( through ) were almost percent higher than the earnings of women who had not but who were comparable in other respects. No doubt many of those who expected to be working continuously chose different occupations and made greater investments in their skills and careers than those who believed otherwise TRENDS IN THE PAY GAP Two data series illustrated in Chart are often used to compare male and female earnings. The first series the ratio of female to male median wage or salary income for year-round full-time workers was percent in ( not shown ) rose to percent in the mid1950s and then fell to percent in the mid-1960s. From the mid1960s to it drifted in a narrow range. Since it has begun to climb reaching percent in The ratio for the second data series median usual weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers shows a similar pattern for the available time period. Since it has risen steadily reaching percent in Although both series are for full-time workers gender differences occur in hours worked even for full-time workers. In full-time women workers averaged percent fewer hours than full-time male workers Chart Ratio of Female to Male Earnings for Full-Time Workers Ratio Usual Weekly Earnings- ^ Annual Wage or Salary Earnings & tr I I I I I I I l I _y Median usual weekly earnings of all full-time workers years and over. Excludes selfemployed persons whose businesses are incorporated. For details on data consistency see Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin February -2/ Median wage or salary income of year-round full-time civilian workers ( years and over through and years and over after ) Self-employed persons are excluded Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers Recent research has examined the reasons why the ratio of median earnings did not rise until the 1980s. The 1950s 1960s and 1970s were decades of increasing female participation in the labor force The sharp increases in market participation by women with little previous market work experience depressed the average experience level of women workers for much of the postwar period widening the experience gap between the typical male and female worker. A modest reduction in the experience gap occurred in the 1970s particularly among younger workers but by a typical employed female had only a few months more experience than in Education played a somewhat similar role as the schooling levels of male workers increased relative to female workers in the 1950s and 1960s stimulated in part by the GI bill. As the work experience of women relative to men as well as the educational differential between working men and women widened the median earnings ratio fell. Because both experience and educational differences are now narrowing the ratio is rising as Chart shows. And the underlying trends in women 's work commitments discussed in this chapter suggest that the ratio should continue to rise The pay gap is smaller for younger workers. Table shows the ratio of female to male earnings for full-time year-round workers in different age groups. Earnings ratios are not only higher but are increasing rapidly for younger workers TABLE Earnings of females as percent of earnings of males by age and [ Percent ] Age of workers Year years years years years Note. Data relate to median usual weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics As mentioned above employed men and women differ in many of the basic characteristics that influence earnings such as labor market experience and employee tenure. When these differences in characteristics are accounted for almost half of the gap between men and women is explained. In general studies that sample only younger workers or those in similar jobs find smaller pay gaps. Some recent research incorporating work expectations of men and women into an analysis of the pay gap suggests that as much as percent of the differences in male and female earnings can be explained when gender differences in work expectations are included in the calculations. Accurate measurement of work expectations however is extremely difficult and these results should be considered tentative Discrimination Some observers attribute all or almost all of the unexplained portion of the wage gap between women and men to discrimination Other observers attribute all or almost all to unmeasured or difficult-to-measure differences in characteristics between men and women. There is no consensus on the magnitude of discrimination Discrimination is illegal. The Equal Pay Act of and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of contain remedies for discrimination. The Equal Pay Act requires equal pay for equal work and thus outlaws gender wage discrimination. The legislation prohibits gender barriers to entry and thus outlaws discrimination in hiring or promotion Discrimination also reduces gross national product. Resources are allocated most efficiently when prices are determined by the free interplay of supply and demand. Barriers to entry based upon characteristics such as sex age or race impede the workings of the market reduce allocative efficiency and retard economic growth. These barriers are also costly to business. A firm that hires or promotes a less competent man over a more competent woman has higher costs of production than one that hires or promotes the most competent person Barriers may include unequal educational opportunity or occupational union and trade association restrictions. Breaking down barriers that remain and promoting equal opportunity are commitments of this Administration The Earnings of Black Women The relative constancy of the ratio of median earnings for all fulltime workers disguises the sharp increases in earnings experiencedby black women in the postwar period. Since black women 's earnings are not available in separate series until the late 1960s Chart illustrates the earnings ratio of black and other women to white women from the mid-1950s to the present. ( In years when black and other female earnings and black earnings are both available the two series are virtually identical. ) While Chart showed sharp real increases in the earnings of all women Chart shows that the earnings of women in the black and other category were growing considerably faster than the earnings of all women There are at least three important reasons for this extraordinary increase in black women 's earnings. First black women had high labor force participation rates throughout the postwar period and the increases in their participation were much smaller than those for white women. The median work experience of employed black women grew during the period because it was not diluted by a high proportion of new entrants and this contributed to the growth in black women 's earnings Chart Ratio of Black and Other Women 's Earnings to White Women 's Earnings Ratio ril i i i i I Note. Data are median wage or salary income of year-round full-time civilian workers ( years and over through and years and over after ) Self-employed persons are excluded Black women constitute the great majority of the category black and other women Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers Second and more important schooling levels of black women workers increased sharply throughout the period. In only about percent of black women over the age of had completed high school. By the percent had almost tripled and today it is about percent. Finally in the early postwar period a great majority of employed black women worked in only two occupations private household worker and farm laborer. While in more than percent of black working women were in these two occupations by the fraction had fallen to below percent. By the fraction was below percent ; today it is about percent The increase in black female education and the changes in their occupational distribution in the past years have been dramatic Real wage changes for black women have been larger than those for any other group. In the earnings ratio depicted in Chart was ; by it was ; and since the mid-1970s the ratio has fluctuated between and percent The growth in the real earnings of black and other women was as rapid in the late 1950s and the early 1960s as it has been since The increases in black women 's schooling and their movement out of the occupations of private household worker and farm laborer contributed significantly to the growth in these earnings CONCLUSION This chapter tells two stories. The first is about women and their shift from work in the home to work in the market. The number of women in the labor force has tripled women 's real earnings are rising and women are increasingly entering higher paid occupations Women have successfully integrated work in the market with work in the home making important contributions to both their family 's income and the Nation 's output The second story which underlies the story of women 's economic achievements is about the adaptability and flexibility of U.S. labor markets in accommodating such a major structural change. Not only has the economy created over million additional jobs filled by women since World War II but it has also created jobs that interest and attract women : in business and the professions science and technology and the service sector. The market produced these jobs while still providing rising real wages and incomes for both men and women The success of the responsive and flexible U.S. labor markets has not been confined to adapting to increasing numbers of women. Last year the Council of Economic Advisers chronicled the labor market success of immigrants. Since the United States has absorbed about million legal immigrants. During the same time million workers left farming and found other jobs. The market provided nonfarm jobs for those who left agriculture as well as jobs for immigrants who often knew neither the English language nor American customs. It did this without major government programs to force accommodation The central conclusion that can be drawn from this chapter as from many other sections of this Report is clear. The success of the markets is reflected in their adaptability. In the labor market as with all markets it is important to retain this ability to respond to change Regulations to mandate wages or benefits would even if enacted with the best of intentions restrict this flexibility and inhibit the ability of markets to adapt. In contrast free and flexible labor markets provide employment opportunities for new workers even in the face of enormous and rapid structural change As this Report demonstrates the success of the U.S. economy in creating employment opportunities increasing national income and raising real living standards begins with reliance upon private enterprise and a competitive-market system. The incentives for individual effort and initiative generated by this system provide the essential stimulus for economic progress. By facilitating the operation of this system government policy most effectively contributes to the goals specified years ago in the Employment Act of : " .maximum employment production and purchasing power. " Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Beryl W. Sprinkel Chairman Thomas Gale Moore Member Michael L. Mussa Member Council Members and their Dates of Service Name Edwin G Nourse Leon H Keyseriing John D Clark Roy Blough Robert C Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H Jacoby Walter W Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C Wallich Walter W Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M Okun James S Duesenberry Merton J Peck Warren L Smith Paul W McCracken Hendrik S Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v N Whitman Gary L Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G Malkiel Charles L Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E Gramley George C Eads Stephen M Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum William A Niskanen Jerry L Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L Mussa Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Separation date Oath of office date Position August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide economic analysis and advice to the President and thus to assist in the development and implementation of national economic policies. The Council also advises the President on other matters affecting the performance of the Nation 's economy Beryl W. Sprinkel and Thomas Gale Moore continued to serve as Council Members in with Dr. Sprinkel as Chairman. Michael L Mussa the William H. Abbott Professor of International Business of the University of Chicago became a Member of the Council on August MACROECONOMIC POLICIES As is its tradition the Council devoted much of its time during to assisting the President in formulating economic policy objectives and designing programs to implement them. In this regard the Chairman kept the President informed on a continuing basis of important macroeconomic developments and other major policy issues This included briefings on various international issues in preparation for the Tokyo Economic Summit The Council chaired an interagency forecasting group also including the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget which developed economic projections that were presented to the President and used in the Federal budget. The Council also actively participated in discussions of macroeconomic policy issues before the Cabinet-level Economic Policy Council including the economic effects of tax reform the causes of and remedies for trade and payments imbalances and the need for international policy coordination including the need for budget reform in the United States and for stronger internally led economic growth abroad The Chairman of the Council continued to serve as the Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The Council also actively participated in other OECD fora working on a variety of issues including an analysis of macroeconomic performance in a multinational context problems of international policy coordination and payments imbalances and barriers to economic development including structural rigidities The Council maintained particularly close attention to economic developments in Japan. The Council participated in the ongoing U.S.-Japan Sub-Cabinet Meetings and the newly formed Structural Dialogue and held its annual discussion with its Japanese counterpart the Economic Planning Agency in Tokyo MICROECONOMIC POLICIES A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during the year. The Council actively participated in the Cabinetlevel Domestic Policy Council and the Economic Policy Council dealing with such issues as international trade policy and remedies for unfair trade practices problems in the agricultural sector including farm credit privatization alternatives to Federal regulation antitrust reform catastrophic health insurance welfare reform tort reform energy policy and security financial markets and institutions airport landing rights and other transportation regulatory issues communications regulatory issues and tax policy The Council also participated actively in various OECD committees working on a variety of issues including agricultural policy and trade tax policy international financial market integration and a variety of labor issues PUBLIC INFORMATION The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Annual distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress and has a distribution of approximately Information is also provided to the public through speeches and other public appearances by the Council Chairman Members and senior staff ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President. This role is performed through personal discussions with the President Cabinet-level meetings with the President and written reports to him on economic developments. The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the Economic Policy Council and Domestic Policy Council daily White House senior staff meetings weekly issues lunches with the President and at many other formal and informal meetings of senior government officials. The Chairman guides and oversees the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the Members and the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS Members of the Council are involved in the full range of issues within the Council 's purview and are responsible for the regular supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for initiating issues for Council attention The small size of the Council permits the Council Chairman and Members to work as a team on most policy issues. There was however an informal division of subject matter in Dr. Mussa has been primarily responsible for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis and economic projections. Dr. Moore has been primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis and regulatory issues PROFESSIONAL STAFF The professional staff of the Council consists of the Special Assistant the Senior Statistician senior staff economists staff economists junior staff economists and research assistant. The professional staff and their respective areas of concentration at the end of were : Special Assistant to the Chairman Margot E. Machol Senior Staff Economists Richard H. Clarida Stephen J. DeCanio J. David Germany Arlene S. Holen Steven L. Husted Carol A. Leisenring Randall P. Mariger Aline O. Quester Gordon C. Rausser J. Gregory Sidak Peter M. Taylor Susan E. Woodward Macroeconomics and International Finance Energy Environment and Regulation International Finance and Macroeconomics Labor Health and Regulation International Trade and Finance Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Public Finance and Taxation Labor Education and Welfare Agriculture Trade and Finance Law and Economics Macroeconomics and Forecasting Financial Markets and Institutions Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Staff Economists Edward T. Gullason General Microeconomics and Labor Ellen L. Hughes-Cromwick Macroeconomics and Money Junior Staff Economists Diana E. Furchtgott-Roth Douglas A. Irwin Marjorie B. Rose Darrell L. Williams Public Finance and Privatization International Trade Finance and Agriculture International Finance and Macroeconomics Industrial Organization and Finance Research Assistant Lisa E. Bernstein General Economics and Regulation Mrs. Furlong manages the Statistical Office assisted by Natalie V Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Deborah D. Miller. They administer the Council 's statistical information system overseeing the publication of the Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report as well as the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches Joseph Foote provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report Three former staff members returned in January to assist in the preparation of the Report : S. Dean Furbush ( junior staff economist ) Rhonda L. Philopoulos ( research assistant ) and Hannah R Hopkins ( student aide ) David K. Carlson ( research assistant ) also continued to provide support through the Report 's preparation. Sarah E. Jeffries ( research assistant ) Daniel J. Mullarkey ( student intern ) and Dorothy Bagovich ( statistical assistant ) joined the staff in January to work on the Report SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office which provides general support for the Council 's activities consists of Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant The secretaries for the Council during were Lisa D. Branch Bonnie D. Brown Audrey L. Carlson Mary E. Jones Sandra F Medwid Sheila J. Moat Margaret L. Snyder Suzanne M. Tudor and Alice H. Williams DEPARTURES The Council 's senior staff economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or are from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Many of the senior staff economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are : Dallas S. Batten ( Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis ) Robert G. Chambers ( University of Maryland ) John H. Mutti ( University of Wyoming ) and Martin B. Zimmerman ( University of Michigan ) Others went on to new positions They are : Lincoln F. Anderson ( Bear Stearns and Co. ) Joseph R Antos ( Department of Health and Human Services ) Robert E Keleher ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) and Charles E. Stuart ( Nationalekonomiska Lund Sweden ) Staff economists usually have recently completed their dissertations and spend a year at the Council as preparation for their professional careers. Junior staff economists generally are graduate students who spend year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are : David S. Bizer ( Stanford University ) Catherine A. Bonser-Neal ( University of Chicago ) Phillip A. Braun ( University of Chicago ) S. Dean Furbush ( University of Maryland ) and James V. Stout ( University of Maryland ) Anne Caple research assistant resigned to continue graduate studies at Southern Methodist University In addition a number of other staff provided support to the Council during the year. Kim Finethy ( Bates University ) served as an intern during the spring of and David S. Clapp and John H Neumiller ( Lawrence University ) served as interns during the fall of David K. Carlson ( University of Maryland ) served as a research assistant during the summer and fall of and Rhonda Philopoulos ( Mt. Holyoke College ) served as a research assistant during the summer of Donald R. Brown served as an administrative aide during the winter of Lorraine A. Ambrosio served as a student aide during the spring of and Hannah R. Hopkins served as a student aide during the summer of Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : Page B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-12 B-l3 B-14 B-15 B-l6 B-17 B-18 B-l9 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross national product by industry Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfmancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Gross and net private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars Relation of gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : Page B-30 B-31 B-32 B-33 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 Population by age groups Population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Unemployment by duration and reason Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Unemployment rate Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-45. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B-46. Industrial production indexes market groupings B-47. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-48. Capacity utilization rates B-49. New construction activity B-50. New housing units started and authorized B-51. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-52. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories B-53. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-54. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders PRICES : B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 B-59 B-60 B-61 B-62 B-63 Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-64. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures B-65. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets B-66 B-67 B-68 B-69 B-70 B-71 B-72 Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Commercial bank loans and securities Bond yields and interest rates Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-73. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years B-74. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years B-75. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years B-76. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-77. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type B-78. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-79. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts B-80. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-81. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation B-82. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors B-83. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-84. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-85. Corporate profits by industry B-86. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-87. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-88. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-89. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-90. State and municipal and business securities offered B-91. Common stock prices and yields B-92. Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-93. Farm income B-94. Farm output and productivity indexes B-95. Farm input use selected inputs Page B-96 B-97 B-98 Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Balance sheet of the farm sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-99. U.S. international transactions B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-103. International investment position of the United States at year-end B-104. International reserves selected years B-105. Exchange rates B-106. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-107. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-108. Growth rates in real gross national product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies during NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter p : IV : IV II Ill IV : II III IV II Ill IV " Gross national product Nonresidential Total DuraNonble durable Services goods goods : See next page for continuation of table Total Total Total Structures Producers ' Residur- dential able equipment Change in business inventories TABLE B-l. Gross national product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter " : IV IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : | | III IV P Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total " ? ! $ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Total Nation- Nonal dedefense fense State and Final sales local Gross national product ibis g'.o Final sales TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product p : IV : IV II Ill IV : I | | III IV : I II Ill IV P Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total See next page for continuation of table Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " IV : IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV II III IV P Federal Net exports Exports mports Totai Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Net exports of goods and services Nation- Nonal dedefense fense State and local Final sales Gross national product Final sales ~ 2J TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment J Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter I960 " IV IV II Ill IV : II III IV II Ill IV Gross national product 1Q7.9 HIT Nonresidential Total Durable goods _mL ___iQia Nondurable Services goods -m -8K See next page for continuation of table Fixed investment Total JOO " Total J&7 gfe Structures Producers ' durable equipment _98JL ~ 8J Residential IQ&3108.2 TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Export ; and imports o f goods and ser /ices1 Year or quarter Exports I960 " : IV IV II Ill IV ! : | | III IV II Ill IV Wl.3 Imports Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense I " : : " : : " " i. " " " : : : : ' " " : : : = : : " " " ' " " 4l'.8 " State and local Final sales Percent change from preceding period GNP implicit price deflator " " Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter I960 " IV : IV | | Ill IV Personal Gross connational sumption product expenditures : II III IV II Ill p IV Gross private domestic investment1 Fixed investment Total Nonresi- Residen- Exports dential tial Government purchases of goods and services Export s and imports ( ) f goods and ser Imports Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Percent change from preceding period GNP fixedweighted price index Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Year or quarter " : IV IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Chain price index Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Chain price index ~ 3.B Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Total Total Durable goods Final Inven- Final tory sales change sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output ~ 4> p 7i : IV : IV 1984-.I II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final Inven- Final tory sales change sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output _5 7'.1 " : IV : IV : II Ill IV : : II Ill IV " _3 -1L5 -1L5 II Ill IV -5.'2 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter p : IV : IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV " Gross national product Business ' Total Total ! Nonfarm l Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Farm Statistical discrepancy Households and institutions Government Total Federal L6.2 State and local Rest of the world TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm l Farm Statistical discrepancy " : IV : IV : II Ill IV | | III IV : II Ill IV P Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Households and institutions Government Total Federal State and local Rest of the world " le -L8 l ! o TABLE B-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year Gross FiGovernManufacturing KcSl nation- AgriTrans- Whnlo nance ment Statist ! Poet wnoieportation sale insurand of the al culture pal Concai prod- forestry Mining struction Dura- Nonand and ance Services govern- discrep- world Total uct ble durable public retail and ment and ancy entergoods goods utilities trade real fisheries estate prises Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year AgriGross national culture forestproduct ry and fisheries Manufacturing Transpor- Wholetation sale ConMin- strucNon- and and ing tion Total Dura- durable public retail ble goods goods util- trade ities FiGovern- StaRest nance ment tisof the insur- Servand ance ices govern- tical Resid- world dis- ual and ment enter- crepreal estate prises ancy ~ 4l6 -L8 liS Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter p : IV : IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital Total consumption adjustment Net domestic product Domestic income Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Indirect Combusipensaness Total tion of tax employ- Total etc.1 ees Profits Profits Profits before tax tax liability Total U Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory valuation Divi- Undis- adjustdends tributed ment profits Profits after tax Capital Net con- intersump- est tion adjustment ~ LO ~ L1 _2 '.3 TABLE B-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross d< ) mestic produ rt nf nonfin ancial corpc rate busirless ( billio ns of doll ; rs ) Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc.3 Compensation of employees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Net interest Profits tax liability Profits after tax Output Compenper hour sation of all per hour employof all ees employ ( ees dollars ) ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars 16.S86 * IV : IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill " Output Total is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Furniture Motor and vehicles household and parts equipment Other Nondurable goods Food Clothing and shoes 7LO '.8 * IV IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : I II Ill IV See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Services Nondurable goods cont 'd Year or quarter Gasoline and oil Fuel oil and coal Household operation Other Housing Total Electricity and gas Other Transportation Medical care Other W.3 | " : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " IV : IV. : | | III IV II Ill IV II Ill IV ' Gross private domestic investment Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter p : IV IV : II Ill IV : II III IV II III IV P Gross private domestic investment Equals : Net private domestic investment consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Net fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total B2.2 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE B-17. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories * Nonfarm Quarter Total2 Fourth quarter : Farm Total Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Retail trade Final sales3 Other Total Nonfarm : IV IV : I II III IV II Ill IV : | | III IV P p End of quarter Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories * Quarter Fourth quarter : Nonfarm Total Farm Total Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Retail trade Final sales3 Total Other Nonfarm p IV : IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P End of quarter Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts from foreigners Year or quarter Exports of goods and services Total Total Merchandise Services Payments to foreigners Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) Imports of goods and services Transfer payments ( net ) Merchandise From persons ( net ) Total Total Services Total Interest paid by From governgovern- ment to ment ( net ) foreigners Net foreign investment I960 '.7 A p ! ! i \ IV IV : II III IV : | | III IV. ? | | III IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Total Total Durable goods Imports of goods and services Services Merchandise Nondurable goods Total Factor income x Merchandise Total Other Total Durable goods Services Nondurable goods Total Factor income * Other P : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P. Factor income exports less factor income imports equals rest-oMhe-world product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Plus : Less : Less : consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy less current surplus of government enterprises Equals : National income j _1 * _.l _1 _5 _4 _1 : IV : IV II Ill IV : | | III IV II III.. " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis o TABLE B-22. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " : IV : IV II Ill IV II III IV II III IV P National income GovernWage ment Contribu- accruals transfer Personal Personal Business tions for transfer less payments interest dividend payments social income income to insurance disbursements persons Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Equals : Plu S : Le SS : Corporate profits with inventory valuation Net and interest capital consumption adjustments _i '.0 _ -'.5 Personal income ! ; ! | TABLE B-23. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter I960 P IV IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV National income l Total Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Supplements Wages to and wages salaries and salaries Nonfarm Farm Total Total Proprietors ' income3 Capital consumption adjustment _ ~ -'.2 _9 -U ^ Total Proprietors ' income4 Inventory valuation adjustment Capital consumption adjustment _0.1 _ ! i _5 _5 -'.B _2 _7 _3 -'.3 -A -'.3 -.'l National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-21 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-23. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital cons adjustmer t Year or quarter Total I960 * IV : IV : H III IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Rental Capital conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Total Total Profits Prnfitc before tax tax liability T7.2 Profits after tax Total With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Divi- Undisdends tributed profits Inventory valuation adjustment l'y -39'.5 Capital Net consumption interest adjustment _5 '.2 A TABLE B-24. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements l Personal income Year or quarter Commodityproducing industries Total Total " : IV IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : | | III p IV ! GovernOther Distrib- Service ment and labor utive income1 indus- indus- governtries ment Manutries enterfacturing prises Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-23 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-24. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons Personal Personal with Year or quarter capital dividend interest income income consumption adjustment * : IV : IV II Ill IV : | | Ill IV : | | III IV Transfer payments Total Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployand ees ployment Veterans health insur- benefits retireinsurance ment ance benefits benefits benefits Aid to families with depend- Other ent children ( AFDC ) '.3 " Less : Personal contribu- Nonfarm personal tions for income social insurance Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and farm net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-25. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Equals : Personal Dispostax and able nontax personal payments income Total Personal consumption expenditures Interest paid by consumers to business .'7 p LO IV IV : | | III IV II Ill IV II III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Personal transfer Equals : pay- Personal ments saving to foreigners ( net ) Percent of disposable personal income Personal outlays Total Personal consump- Personal saving tion expenditures A A ! e TABLE B-26. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars I960 " IV IV : I II III IV : | | III IV I... II Ill IV dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) dollars Current dollars dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) * Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-27. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter Total IV : IV | | III IV. : II Ill IV II. Ill IV P Total Personal saving Gross hnci ness saving Gross investment Government surplus or deficit Capital grants ( ) national income and product accounts received by the State United States Federal Total and ( net ) local -m i ! o Gross Net private Total domestic foreign invest-3 invest- ment ment Statistical discrepancy ~ L5 ~ -lie Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-28. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net investment in Less : Net increase in debt Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Total Checkable deposTotal its and currency Securities Time and Money sav- market Govern- Corpoings fund ment rate de- shares securi- equiposits ties ties3 : II... III. IV. : I : I II.. III. IV. II.. III. Other financial assets Consumer durables Noncorporate business assets8 Owneroccupied homes " ' " Insurance and Other pension securireties4 serves5 _2 ^ ~ L3 -'.8 Saving Mortgage debt Con- Other on sumer non- credit debt farm homes by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Corporate and foreign bonds and open market paper Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-29. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years Pers ( ) ns belc w poverty Families Below poverty level Year Number ( mil- Median income lions ) Female householder Total Number ( mil- Rate Rate WHITE * $ Number ( mil- YearAll round persons full-time workers Rate lions ) Females Males All persons lions ) lions ) ALL RACES I960 Number ( mil- Median income of persons zyears old and over with income $ $ $ $ Yearround fulltime workers BLACK J The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Beginning data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-30. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) Total July Under and over ? * 14'800 16'851 18'521 37'657 | ! Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-31. Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Labor EmployCivilian force ment non insti- Resi- includ- including dent tutional Armed ing popula- Forces * resident resident tion1 Armed Armed Forces Forces Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Unemployment rate UnemNonployagricultural ment All Civilian work- work- Total3 Civilers2 ers ian4 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Labor force participation rate Thousands of persons years of age and over I9605 s s s : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June J/y Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-31. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Labor Employforce Civilian ment noninsti- Resi- includ- including dent tutional Armed ing popula- Forcesl resident resident tion1 Armed Armed Forces Forces Civilian labor force Employment UnemNon- ployAgriagriTotal cultural cultural ment Total UnemployLabor force ment rate participation rate All Civilian work- work- Total3 Civilers2 ers ian4 Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar Percent May'. " ' " " ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec ft : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec way- : Jan Feb Mar Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population population including resident Armed Forces Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows-. Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagricuIturaI employment Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population and labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-31 through B-38 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-32. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment Civilian employment Females Males Year or month Total Total I9601 * l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue sept : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan l Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 59J89 years years and over Total years See footnote Table B-31 Note. See Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics years and over Total Total years Total years years and years and over over Females Males TABLE B-33. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Reason for unemployment Duration of unemployment Year or month Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over AverMedian age ( mean ) duradura- tion in tion in weeks weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Reentrants New entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Job leavers Thousands of persons years of age and over I960 Jan Feb Mar * Apr May June July Auc Job losers TABLE B-34. Chilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment/population ratio2 Civilian labor force participation rate1 Year or month I960 Total Males Fe- males Both sexes years Civilian White Males Fe- males Both sexes years White Black and other Black " " " " '53J 5Q. May ! ! " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Total : Jan Feb Mar Black Black and other Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified. See Table B-31 for total labor force participation rate Employment as percent of noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-35. Unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Unemployment UnemployFemales Males All ment rate civil20 ian all 16work- work- Total years Total years and and years over ers * ers years over rate civilian workers Both sexes years Black White and Black other Experienced wage and salary workers Mar- Women who ried men mainspouse tain famipresent lies " " " " " " io.4 " : Jan Feb Mar MPay " ; " ! June... July Aug Sept Oct Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June- July Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec... Unemployed as Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Black Males years Males Females years Total and over years years Total Total and over ? Jan Feb Mar years years and over I960 Females years Total and years over fc = : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr fay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec fi Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Civilian employment/population ratio [ Percent * ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Black Males Total years Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over i : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; J monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Females Males years years Total and over years years Total Total and over years Females years Total and over years years and over Males : Jan Feb Mar ft June R " ) Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar July Auc Sept Oct.. ft June July Aug sepf : oct : : : : : Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-31 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-39. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured Total unemploy- benefits ment paid ( weekly ( millions of average ) > dollars ) Thousands Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept " : Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Insured Insured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Weekly average ; thousands ment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal Supplemental Compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source-. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-40. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry ( Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total Total Goods-producing industries Manufacturing ConNondurMining struction Total Durable able goods goods I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr ( : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : itfay.. : June July Aug Sept Oct NoV Dec * : : : : ; ; r : r r : : r : See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-40. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Transportation Year or month Total and public utilities p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec P Wholesale trade Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services State Total Federal and local Note. Data in Tables B-40 through B-42 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-31 through B-38 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-41. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers,- monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average gross hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month Total private non- agricultural Manufacturing Con- struction Retail trade Total private non- agricultural ConManufacturing struction Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural Daioil trade Index = Percent change from a year earlier * Current dollars dollars3 Current dollars dollars p $ $ $ $ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June., July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... May " ! '. ! June... July Aug... Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec P. Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-40 Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry -3'.1 employment shifts Current-dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Monthly percent changes are computed from indexes to two decimal places and are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table B-40 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-42. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjustea except as noted ] Average gross weekly earnings Total private nonagricultural1 Year or month Current dollars " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec $ dollars $ Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ Also includes other Earnings in current Construction ( current dollars ) $ private industry groups shown in Table B-40 dollars divided by the consumer price index on a = base Based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table B-40 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Retail trade ( current dollars ) $ Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagriculturar Current dollars dollars _2 TABLE B-43. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Output Hours of 2all persons Compensation per Real compensation hour3 per hour4 Unit labor costs implicit price deflator5 Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-44. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Ynar nr quarter Output Output per hour of all persons Business sector Hours of 2all persons Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Compensation per hour Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Implicit price deflator5 Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector ^ ~ 5.B _2 '.B '.S 2'.0 ~ ! l _3 L4 : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill _2 Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Data relate to all persons engaged in the sector. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-43 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-45. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month proportion " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept od ' : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : " : : : : : : : Nov " Dec " Total industrial production Manufacturing lltili ing ties Dura- ble durable Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Uin Non- Total * TABLE B-46. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Materials Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods Total AutoTotal motive products Equipment InterDura- Non3 De- mediate ble fense products Total goods durable goods and space Home goods Total Business proportion 1986p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " Includes clothing and consumer staples not Two components oil and gas well drilling shown separately and manufactured homes are included in total equipment but not in detail shown Includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-47. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total proportion I960 ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Iron and steel Fabricated metal products NonElectrieleccal trical machinmachinery ery Transportation equipment Total Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Motor vehicles and parts Lumber Apparel Printing and and prod- publishproducts ucts ing Chemicals and products Foods TABLE B-48. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Primary processing Advanced processing Industrial materials Utilities Mining N&y ! '. ! '.'.'.'.'.' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar MPary " l " " " : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec p p : Jan Feb Mar Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-49. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings ' Total Nonresidential buildings and other construction1 New Total housing units Total Total Federal State and local5 Com- Industrial Other '.B mercial '.I New sprips I960 New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-49. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings Total Nonresidential buildings and other construction l New Total housing units Total Total Commercial3 Industrial Federal State and local5 Other * June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Includes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-50. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized New housing units started Private and public Year or month l Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Total ( farm and Nonfarm nonfarm ) l Type of structure Type of structure Total unit to units Total units or more unit 2to4 units units or more '.4 * ] 59C ) ) ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates " ) ! : Jan Feb Mar Apr June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec Jan.. Feb Mar Apr May June May : : : : : : : : : : : : ; : : : ' : : July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec : ; ( Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-51. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Addenda Industries surveyed quarterly Manufacturing Year or quarter II Ill IV : II III IV II All industries Total Nonmanufacturing Dura- Nonble durable Total goods goods ComMin- Trans- Public mercial and ing porta- utilities other tion Total nonfarm busi-2 ness Monu facturing Nonmanufacturing Total Surveyed quarterly Surveyed annually : : : : : : Excludes forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; medical services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate which effective with the April-May survey are no longer surveyed quarterly. See last column ( " nonmanufacturing surveyed annually " ) for data for these industries " All industries plus the part of nonmanufacturing that is surveyed annually Consists of forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; medical services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in late October and November corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-52. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May. June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total manufacturing and trade ] InvenSales tories2 Ratio Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Sales Inventories2 Ratio Sales Monthly average for Seasonally adjusted Retail trade InvenInventories2 Ratio Sales ! tories2 Ratio year and total for month end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-53. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories2 Shipmentsl Year or month : Jan Feb Mar May " ! '. ; ; June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! JuneJuly... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Work in process Nondurable goods industries Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods TABLE B-54. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unfilled orders2 New orders * Unfilled orders shipments ratio3 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept : : : : : : Oct Nov NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries tries nondefense Total Monthly average for Seasonally adjusted NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries year and total for month end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-55. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Food and bever ages Year or month : Jan Feb Mar fez June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fez June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All items Total Food Housing Total " " ' " iboio " HouseOther hold Apparel TransEnterFuel and furnish- and portation Medical ainment goods care and Shelter other ings upkeep services and utilities operation Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Series beginning not comparable with series for Energy earlier years See Tables B-56 and B-57 Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-56. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ = ] Shelter Food and beverages Food Year or month : Jan Feb Mar May ' " " ' " " " ' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Fuel and other utilities Renters ' costs Household fuels Other utilities Home- MainteFuel oil Gas nance ( piped ) Total and At Away Total Total Rent owners ' and Total Total coal Total home from and pubfic resi- costs repairs and dential home bottled elec- services tricity gas " i03 " b " See next page for continuation of table ' " ibis " " ib'o'.b " TABLE B-56. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Cct Nov Dec Total Total New cars Used cars Motor fuel u l Includes Includes Includes Automobile maintenance and repair Other " " ibo.b " Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services alcoholic beverages not shown separately direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-55 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-57. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ = ] Commodities Year or month : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... JuneJuly... Aug... Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... MayJune. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. All items '30.2 All commodities Food All Special indexes Services Commodities less food All NonDurable durable services Medical care services Services less medical care All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy Energy Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-55 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-58. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items less food All items Voar nr mnnth Dec to Dec.1 Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All iterris less food and ene rgy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food energy and shelter Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year I960 Change from preceding month Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Jan fc : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar : : ~ W&y " '.l " '. ! '. ! ! '. " " ' June July Aug Sept ocf. : : : : " " Nov Dec Unadjusted Sea- sonally adjusted Unadjusted '.4 '.2 '.5 _ '.1 A '.3 '.2 '.2 '.3 ~ '.o Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Feb Mar Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted '.4 '.2 '.2 '.3 '.3 '.2 '.4 '.2 '.3 '.2 '.5 o ' '.2 ie '.3 '.5 '.3 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data arefor urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-55 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-59. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] Commodities All items Total Year Dec to Dec.1 _5 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Commc ) dities less Fnnrl Food Year to year -'.9 ! Dec to Dec.1 Year to year _g L5 Energy Services Dec to Dec.1 Changes Year to year Medical care services Total Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year -'.A from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Fuel oil coal and bottled gas ; gas ( piped ) and electricity ; and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-55 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Total Crude Finished goods excluding consumer foods Processed Consumer goods Total Total Non- Durable durable Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June June July l Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May : : : : " : : : : : : : : : : : : : : See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-60. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Materials and components Other Crude materials for further processing Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug J Sept Oct Nov Dec " ibb'.b " ibb.b Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-61. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Excluding food energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Consumer Cap- goods ital excludequiping ment foods and energy Crude materials for further processing Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June fc = June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-62. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power l Chemicals and allied products l : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.2 Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : : rr Prices for some items in this grouping are lag jed and refer to month earlier than the index month ; the lag for refined petroleum items was eliminated beginning with the June data See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-62. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp NonMetals Machinery Furniture Rubber Lumber paper and metallic and and and and and metal equipment household mineral plastic wood allied durables products products products products products Year or month Aug Sept : : : : : : " : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Say : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : r : : : June July Aujt sept Oct Nov Dec Miscellaneous products I960 : J a n Feb Mar Apr May June July Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment : : : : : : " Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-63. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Total finished goods Year or month Finished consumer foods Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Finished goods excluding foods and energy Total Consumer Capital goods equipment Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec.1 to year Dec.1 to year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to year _4 -is -li3 5i8 il Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Season- S Unadjusted justed : Jan Feb Mar fc June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Mayiiiiii June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec -'.2 ie _4 -li4 _ is o ' Season- S Unadjusted justed -To -i7 Season- % Unadjusted justed i7 lio Changes Season- Unadjusted -i4 '.6 -io Unadjusted justed justed Season- lio is o ' Season- % Unadjusted % justed justed Season- _4 is from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source-. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-64. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml M2 M3 L Debt1 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Ml plus overnight RPs and Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and small time deposits M2 plus large time deposits term RPs term Eurodollars and institutiononly MMMF balances M3 plus other liquid assets Debt oh domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average ) December : " : Jan Year and month Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Percent change from year or months earlier2 Ml M2 M3 Debt Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local government and private nonfinancial sectors ; data from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December and monthly changes are from months earlier at an annual rate Note. The nontransactions portion of M2 is seasonally adjusted as a whole to reduce distortions caused by substantial portfolio shifts arising from regulatory and financial changes in recent vears especially shifts to MMDAs in A similar procedure is used to seasonally adjust the remaining nontransactions balances in Ml See Table for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-65. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Currency Travelers checks Demand deposits Overnight repurchase agreeOther ments checkable ( RPs ) deposits net plus ( OCDs ) overnight Eurodollars NSA Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances General purpose and broker/ dealer Institution only Money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) NSA NSA NSA Savings deposits December : 'A " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept... : : : : : : " : : " : : Oct Nov Dec * See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-65. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] December : Small denomination time deposits * Large denomination time deposits * Term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) Term Eurodollars NSA Year and month NSA Savings bonds Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances Commercial paper I960 o p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p & Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted See also Table B-64 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-66. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month December : I960 p Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr June July Auc Sept Oct Nov p Dec Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements * Reserves of depository institutions NonborMonerowed NonborTotal Required tary base plus rowed extended credit allay : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Total Extended credit Seasonal Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act and other regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-67. Commercial bank loans and securities [ Monthly average billions of dollars seasonally adjusted M Loans and leases Year and month December : Total loans and securities Total Commercial and industrial loans U.S Government securities Other securities P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Oct Nov Dec Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of current and previous month-end data for foreign-related institutions. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-68. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) l 3-month 6-month Constant maturities 3year year Highgrade Newmunici- 'home Commercial pal bonds mortgage paper yields ( Stand- ( FHLBB ) < months ards Poor 's ) Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Prime rate charged 6by banks Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve rate Bank of New York " " " l'.78 ZZZ " " Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec High-low : ' High-low Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities Series excludes public utility issues for January through by the Treasury Department October due to lack of appropriate issues Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-68. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3-month 6-month Constant maturities 3year 10year Highgrade Newmunici- home Compal mortgage mercial bonds paper yields ( Stand- ( FHLBB ) months5 ard & Poor 's ) Corporate hrmHc uonas ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Prime rate charged 6by banks Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve Bank of rate New York High-low Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June. July.. Aug Sept Oct... Nov... Dec... High-low Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the8 one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-69. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfina ncial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item | Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors... Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n e e Open-market paper Other 97'.1 U S Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector : Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U S. Government loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Foreign funds At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-69. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ BilKons of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item II III IV III II Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors U.S. Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector- Total State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds .Bank loans n e e Open-market paper U.S. Government loans.. Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets At banks Credit market instruments U.S Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Credit market instruments Foreign funds Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market Fund shares Security repurchase ageements Foreign deposits Deposits and currency Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors TABLE B-70. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties All properties End of year or quarter Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family proper- properhouses ties ties to 4-family houses Total l Total VA FHA guarinsured anteed Total l-to4family houses : | | III IV : II Ill IV. : II Ill Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-71. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Savings banks Commercial banks ' Life insurance companies Other holders Federal Individand uals and related others agen2 cies : II Ill II Ill IV IV II Ill Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and new Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) as well as Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Public Housing Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-72. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month Total consumer credit December : Total Automobile Installment credit l Mobile home3 Revolving2 Other Noninstallment credit * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usualrv to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes openend credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-73. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period Receipts Outlays Off-budget On-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Total Held by the public Addendum : Gross national product * A l'.3 L8 Transition quarter Not strictly comparable Annual rate with later data Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B-74. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description 1&79 ^ ^ RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-74. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimates Actual RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government agencies Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy.. Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health. Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government General purpose fiscal assistance Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget Note-Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-75. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Total on-budget and off-budget receipts Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Timing adjustments Geographic exclusions.. Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts EXPENDITURES Total on-budget and off-budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Geographic exclusions. Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note. See Note Table B-73 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " categories for description of these Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-76. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " : IV IV II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts /- ^ State and local government Federal Government Total government Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts _i ! o -LI Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-77. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Expenditures Net interest paid In- Year or quarter p : IV : IV II Ill IV : II III IV II Ill p IV Total ' direct PerPurContrisonal Corpo- busi- butions chases Transtax rate ness of tax for Total ! goods fer and profits and paynontax tax ac- non- social and ments re- cruals tax insurservance ceipts ices accruals ^ Total Less- InterInter- est reest ceived by paid government Less : Dividends received by government Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises _2 Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments _i TABLE b-/o. reaerai Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year or quarter Total Expenditures Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate tax and profits tax and for nontax tax nontax social Total receipts accruals accruals insurance Purcha ses of goods and serv Total Transfer payments To To forNational persons eigndefense ers Grantsin-aid to Net State nterand est local paid govern- ments Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Fiscal : ~ il5 Calendar : " : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : Ill " " " IV'. Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-79. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter I960 IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV Total Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-m- Total nontax social aid tax nontax receipts accruals accruals insurance is Subsi- Surplus or dies deficit Trans- Net Purless ( ) chases fer interest current national paid surplus payof income less goods ments diviof and to and per- dends govern- product services sons received ment accounts enterprises Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ~ '.9 TABLE B-80. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General expenditures by function2 General revenues by source2 Fiscal year * Total Sales and Property gross taxes receipts taxes Individual income taxes Corpo- Revenue from ration All Federal net income Govern- other taxes ment Total Education Highways Public welfare All other4 Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development sanitation other than sewerage financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other governmental administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years which ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-81. ^ Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Total interestbearing public debt securities Self : : : : : : : : Total U,375,619 '1,411,469 '1,487,226 fci : June July AUB Oct Nov Dec Marketable Treasury bills Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total Nonmarketable Foreign governU.S ment and bonds public series2 7r153 Government account series Other Beginning October includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately : $ million in October $ million in November through January $ million in February through May $ million in August and $ in September through December Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-82. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Within lyear Ito5 years to years Average length to years years and over Millions of dollars Years Months Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June July Aug... Sept Oct Nov... Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. June July Aug Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source-. Department of the Treasury TABLE B-83. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month : June Dec Total Commercial banks2 Individuals3 Total Total Insurance Other Savings securri- compabonds " ties nies market Corporafunds tions State and local governments6 Foreign ana international7 Other investors8 June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept DK : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept U.S savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and3 Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investment of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored agencies Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-84. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments I960 : IV : IV II Ill IV : Year or quarter | | III IV : II.. Ill Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total TABLE B-85. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial * Nonfinancial Year or quarter Total * IV IV II. HI IV | | III IV | | III Total FedTotal eral Re- serve banks Other Total Manu- fac- Transporta- Wholetion sale and turing public utilities and retail trade Other _7 '.3 Rest of the world Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-86 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-86. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing I960 " : IV IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill Total Primary metal industries Fabri- Machin- Electric Motor and ery cated elec- vehicles Other and metal except tronic prod- electri- equip- equipcal ment ucts ment Food Chemi- Petrocals leum and and and kindred allied coal prod- prod- products ucts ucts Total Other o lie ' $ Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-87. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter I960 : IV New series : IV Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes J taxes Stockholders ' equity II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes taxes Stockholders ' equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations, ' Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-88. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent * Year or quarter IV New series : : IV II III IV : II Ill IV II Ill manufacturing Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note TaWe B-87 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-89. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses Internal Year or quarter Total Total External Inventory Domes- aluation Capital tic and con- Foreign undis- capital sumption earn- Total ributed conallow- ings profits umption ances adjustments Credit market funds Discrepancy Capital ncrease ( sources in Securi- Loans Total expendiinancial ess uses ) ties tures and Other * assets Total and shortmort- term paper gages 1/7 IV.. : II... III.. : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. Foreign branch profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad Consists of tax liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-90. State and municipal and business securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter : First three quarters : II Ill IV : II Ill State Business securities offered for cash l and Type of security municipal Industry of issuer securities offered Total Electric for cash offerings Common Preferred Bonds CommuniManufac- gas and Transporand ( princication stock2 stock turing3 tation5 pal notes water4 amounts ) Other Business securities offered include securities offered by corporate and non-corporate business enterprises such as limited partnerships. Beginning excludes private placements Common stock combines the conventional ownership shares of corporate business and securities issued by non-corporate business e.g. limited partnership interests voting trust certificates and condominium securities Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Beginning business security offerings exclude private placements Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and business securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-91. Common stock prices and yields Common stock pricesx Common stock yields ( percent ) New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Year or month Composite Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July AUR sept.... : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec. Industrial Transportation Utility Standard Dow & Poor 's Jones composite Dividendindex price Finance industrial ( 1941ratio8 average = ) * Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Earningsprice ratio7 : " l4 May are averages of weekly closing prices Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources-. New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-92. Business formation and business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( ) New business incorporations ( number ) Seasonally adjusted Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Business failure rate2 Business failures * Amount of current liabilities Number of failures ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Liability size class Total Total Under $ Under $ $ and over $ and over Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data for based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data Data for are subject to revision due to amended court filings Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation AGRICULTURE TABLE B-93. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Net farm income Gross farm income Year or quarter Cash marketing receipts Total ' : | | III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes _2 ! i _3 Production expenses Current dollars dollars 'Cash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-qf-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the GNP implicit price deflator ( Department of Commerce ) Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-94. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Crops2 Year Total1 Total3 Feed grains Food grains Oil crops Livestock and products2 Farm output per unit of total input Crop production per acre4 Farm output per hour of farm work Total Crops Livestock and products I960 " Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-95. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population Aprill Year As perNumcent ber of ( thou- total sands ) population2 Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Farm employment ( thousands Hired workers Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) FamiTotal workers Total Farm labor Feed Meseed Agriand Farm chanical cultural power livereal and estate machin- chemi- stock cals purery chases6 " 'Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-31 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides " Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Includes agricultural service workers working on farms Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-96. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec Oct... : : : : : : : : " ' : : All farm products Crops Livestock and products All ities services interest taxes and wage ratesl Prices paid by farmers Production items Tractors and selfFuels FertilTotal2 and proizer energy pelled machinery Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre3 Includes items used for family living not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through for February for through for April for through and for February for Source-. Department of Agriculture TABLE B-97. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] [ jcports Year Total i Food grains ( ) ( ) ( Feed grains Oilseeds and products ni mports AniTobacco Cotton ( ) ( ) Animals and and vegetabfes Total products products Cocoa beans Coffee and products ( ) ? ( ) i ni g mi ( ) ni ? I. } Jan-Nov : Agricultural trade balance ( ) I and mals Crops fruits Total includes items not shown separately Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Hess than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-98. Balance sheet of the farm sector [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Other physical assets End of year Total Real estate Livestock * Machin- ery and Crops motor vehicles Household equipment and furnishings Financial assets Depos- its and currency U.S savings bonds Investments in cooperatives Total Real estate debt Other debt Proprietors ' equities " Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data include operator households. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-99. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Merchandise * Year or quarter Exports Imports Investment income Net Receipts Payments Net Net travel Other Balance Net military serv- on goods and transac- transpor- ices and tions tation net services * receipts Remittances Balance on pensions current and other ac- unilateral transfers > count -2,1'47 : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill " % % 25Q45 ^ ^ 5',449 -2i864 2i552 -25i959 -3',458 ] % Excludes Adjusted military from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts ( and the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts ) although the series differ because of different handling of certain items ( gold capital gains and losses etc. ) revisions etc See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-99. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets6 Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Statistical discrepancy Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy U.S private assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SlIRs ) Other U.S Government assets Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] I960 l',139 ' " Z | | III IV -U86 II Ill IV : II Ill " Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Note. Quarterly data for U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Nonpetroleum products Indus- Capital Agricultrial Total tural goods supplies except Auto- Other Total products Total and automo- motive matetive rials Petroleum and products Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Auto- Other Total and automo- motive matetive rials : : II Ill " II Ill IV II Ill IV : Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Item Exports Industrial countries. Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC23 Other Eastern Europe Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC23 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated first quarters at annual rate1 International organizations and unallocated Imports Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data for statistical month ] Merchandise exports Total Year or domesFood month tic and beverforeign Total tz ages and exports tobacco General imports5 Food Crude Manumateri- factured Total2 beverages als and goods * and fuels3 tobacco F.a.s. value Merchandise trade balance Merchandise imports Domestic exports Crude materi- Manu- Total c.i.f als and factured value6 fuels3 goods Exports less imports customs value Exports Exports less less imports imports c.i.f f.a.s Customs value F.a.s. value " * * * * * * Customs value Jan Feb Mar.... June... July.... Aug.... Sept... Oct Nov.... Dec : fc : Jan... Feb... Mar.. fc June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded through and included beginning from total exports Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery, transportation equipment chemicals metals, and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments through and exclude them thereafter Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data beginning include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands except that for Virgin Islands exports are reflected only in the figures for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports and trade balance * Data for for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports total general imports and trade balance include trade of the Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration Office of Trade Information and Analysis Trade Statistics Division ) TABLE B-103. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States.. U S assets abroad U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. Government assets other than official reserve assets U.S loans and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. shortterm assets U S private assets Direct investment abroad Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks.. U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Foreign assets in the United States Foreign official assets in the United States U.S Government securities U.S. Teasury securities Other Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States Direct investment in the United States U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-104. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country All countries Industrial countries J November '30,386 Germany Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Norway Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries : ^ Data refer to October Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are-. and ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-105. Exchange rates [ Cents per unit of foreign currency except as noted ] Period Belgian franc Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen March : | | III IV I II Ill IV Netherlands guilder Swedish krona Swiss franc United Kingdom pound Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real1 March II III IV : II Ill IV Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-106. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada European Community1 Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) " II Ill IV II HI IV Consumer prices ( = ) : II Ill IV : II III IV Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom West Germany Portugal and Spain. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in Data for Portugal and Spain which became members on January are excluded prior to All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources-. Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade Information and Analysis Trade Statistics Division ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-107. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( percent ) : I II III IV : II III IV Manufacturing hourly compensation ( = ) I960 Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France West Germany and United Kingdom should be ivilian d as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Beginning changes in the Italian survey resulted'in a large increase in persons enumerated as unemployed. However many also " reported that they ~ had not actively sought work in the past days. Such persons have been provisionally excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts ; their inclusion would about double the rates shown for Italy Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-108. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] annual average annual average Developed countries United States Canada Japan European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom USSR Eastern Europe China annual average Developing countries Communist countries annual average Area and country i ( ) Preliminary estimates For data as reported by the Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) see Table B-2 Includes Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Greece Ireland and the Netherlands not shown separately Includes North Korea and Yugoslavia not shown separately Not available Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund country sources and Council of Economic Advisers