Tifcn ^ tted.totheQ Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER T H E U.S. ECONOMY : PERFORMANCE AND PROSPECTS CHAPTER RISING EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTIVITY AND INCOME... CHAPTER ADJUSTMENT AND GROWTH IN A CHANGING WORLD ECONOMY CHAPTER EXPANDING TRADE AND AVOIDING PROTECTIONISM CHAPTER KNOWLEDGE MARKETS AND ECONOMIC PROGRESS... CHAPTER AIRLINE DEREGULATION : MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION RELATING TO * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ( Ill ) INCOME ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES : My first Economic Report issued in after a year in office could look only to the future for encouraging economic news. The task of rebuilding the economy was just beginning and hard choices were being made. Inflation had begun to come down from double-digit rates but America was mired in recession its second in as many years. Today however we can point to real solid economic progress. The policies of this Administration have spurred and sustained a record economic expansion the longest in U.S. peacetime Fifteen million new jobs have been created during this expansion with strong gains widespread across industries and demographic groups. Real gross national product ( GNP ) has risen nearly percent during these years of growth And the accomplishments are not all in the past. Our policies will continue to contribute to rising standards of living in the years ahead. By enhancing private incentives and opportunities for work investment and entrepreneurship we have laid the groundwork for growth far into the future. To ensure that the renewed energy of the private sector remains a force for growth we must continue our efforts to bring down the Federal deficit through restraint on spending to resist the siren song of protectionism to support policies that foster noninflationary economic growth and to rein in government when it threatens to make our markets less open our industries less responsive or our economy less flexible THE ECONOMIC EXPANSION Since November the U.S. economy has grown without interruption and without a resurgence of inflation. Only twice before in our Nation 's history but never during peacetime has recorded economic growth continued for so long. During the current expansion a strong increase in employment combined with low rates of inflation and higher productivity growth have meant rising standards of living for the American people Employment has increased dramatically and all demographic groups have benefited. While overall employment has risen about percent since November employment of blacks has increased by more than percent and employment of Hispanics by more than percent. Correspondingly unemployment rates especially among minorities have fallen rapidly although those rates are still unacceptably high. I believe that all who want jobs should be able to obtain employment commensurate with their skills and abilities As the unemployment rate has declined by almost one-half some have claimed that the new jobs are low-quality dead-end positions while others have argued that booming employment has put us on the verge of another round of inflation. Neither view is accurate. The facts show that the strongest job growth has been in the higher paid high-skill occupations. The bulk of the new jobs created have been full-time positions in occupations that pay well. While it is true that the number of jobs in manufacturing has risen more slowly than in the service-producing sector of the economy this is a reflection of the innovation of American business and the skill of American workers not a sign that the United States is " deindustrializing. " The share of manufacturing output in total output actually has risen over the course of the expansion and it is now above its postwar average However rapid increases in manufacturing productivity have meant slower growth in employment in this sector. This strong productivity growth in combination with the downward adjustment of the dollar 's exchange rate has lifted the competitiveness of our products on world markets. Around the globe products " Made in the U.S.A. * ' are becoming more common and more sought after Moreover I do not believe that our economy has yet reached its full potential or that our economic growth threatens price stability Growth can and should continue. With sound and stable economic policies saving and investment will be encouraged and the Nation 's productive capacity will continue to expand. I remain committed to the goal of price level stability and I view the decline in inflation during my Administration as a major accomplishment. I would not take lightly the prospect of a resurgence of inflation. But economic growth itself will not lead to a spiral of worsening inflation ; only irresponsible economic policies would do that Our economic projections show inflation slowing during the coming years even as output grows at a robust average annual rate of percent. But continued economic progress requires that policymakers adhere to forward-looking principles pursuing the long-term best interests of the Nation through a sustained commitment to growth and stability. The prospects for growth in the immediate future have been diminished somewhat by last year 's plunge in the stock market as well as by the increase in interest rates and tightening of monetary policy during Nevertheless I anticipate that the U.S. economy will continue to post gains in as the expansion moves through its 6th year The past years have marked an outstanding period of economic growth in the United States. It has been unusual in its longevity unusual for the fact that inflation has remained subdued and unusual relative to the performance of other industrial economies. Between and American businesses large and small created two and one-half times as many new jobs as Japan and the major industrial countries of Europe combined. In this trend appears to have continued as the U.S. economy again generated new jobs at a remarkable rate. The U.S. unemployment rate has fallen percentage points and now stands well below those in most other major industrialized countries where unemployment rates have yet to recover fully from the last recession. Overall we have not lost jobs because of foreign trade. Instead growth-oriented policies of lower and fairer taxes reduced interference by government and free and open international trade have been a source of strength for the economy Indeed the U.S. economy has flourished and the outlook is full of promise THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN THE ECONOMY It is hard to believe that at the beginning of the 1980s the prevailing attitude toward the economy could best be described as despair Inflation and interest rates had ratcheted higher with each successive business cycle and as the economy suffered through its second recession in years the goal of sustainable growth appeared increasingly elusive. Amid double-digit inflation and unemployment rates there were calls for the Federal Government to do more and more thereby compounding the failed policies of the past. Instead I took government policy back to the basics and the last years of economic growth testify to the vitality of free markets and the productivity of the American people. Government intrusions in the Nation 's economic life have been reduced and the private sector has responded with an explosion of activity creating new products and new jobs at a very rapid rate The Federal Government has an important role to play in the Nation 's economy but it is a limited role. As a general proposition economic decisions should be left to the private sector which has been our economy 's strength throughout its history or to State and local governments when the issues can not be handled satisfactorily by the private sector. Only in issues truly national in scope is there a role for the Federal Government We have made efforts to restrain Federal spending to limit it to only the government 's vital functions and those efforts have borne fruit. Last fiscal year for the first time in years Federal outlays after adjustment for inflation declined. Government spending on goods and services absorbs resources that might be used better by the private sector and any Federal outlay must be financed eventually by inflation or taxes. Because there is no free lunch we must make the hard choices funding only those programs that are in the best interest of the Nation not those that happen to have the most influential lobbyists. For example while a strong national defense is rightly the responsibility of the Federal Government a continued proliferation of pork-barrel projects is not. America 's sense of fair play is violated when hard-earned tax dollars are needlessly turned over to powerful special interests In the conduct of macroeconomic policies we have turned away from the stop-and-go policies of the past. My Administration has adopted a long-term view that fiscal policy determines the division of economic activity between the public and private sectors and is not meant to respond to every rise and fall in the economic data. Similarly monetary policy should provide adequate liquidity for sustained noninflationary growth. Together these policies create a stable environment in which individuals and businesses can plan for the future and make the most of their economic opportunities For too long the Federal Government has interfered unnecessarily in private economic decisions. There is a legitimate although limited role for the Federal Government in certain industries for example in ensuring the safety and soundness of the Nation 's banking and payments systems. But many government regulations impede the operation of markets inhibit competition or impose costs on firms and raise the prices faced by consumers without providing commensurate benefits. Regulations that interfere with the efficient use of labor investment and raw materials ultimately reduce our productive potential making this country worse off While my Administration has been successful in reducing many regulations and intrusions into markets much remains to be done We must lessen remaining disincentives to work diminish the burden of Federal regulations and dismantle government programs that needlessly subsidize inefficient producers. In particular we must release financial institutions from outdated legal restraints eliminate the remaining controls on interstate trucking deregulate natural gas and repeal mileage standards for new automobiles. We must resist appeals for even more government intervention that would introduce additional inefficiencies such as requiring advance notification of layoffs and plant closings. With few exceptions the private sector is best able to allocate resources to their most highly valued uses and it should be allowed to do so without excessive paperwork and restrictions. That is why privatization deregulation and private sector initiatives have been important elements of my economic program. I be- lieve in the inherent dynamism of the private sector and I believe that the most constructive thing government usually can do is simply get out of the way THE INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT This Administration has been a force for economic change in the United States and by our example in the world at large. Our proven market-oriented policies are being adopted in more and more countries around the globe as they recognize the high costs of big government and the harmful effects of stifling the entrepreneurial spirit In order to enhance growth and economic opportunity many nations have followed our lead undertaking reductions in sky-high tax rates that diminish incentives to work save and produce. In addition tax reform is becoming a worldwide movement. Just as in the United States tax reform abroad promises to end many distortions and inefficiencies allowing businesses and individuals to make decisions about production and investment in order to increase their economic well-being rather than simply to reduce their tax bills From continent to continent the benefits of privatization and deregulation are becoming appreciated. Even China and perhaps now even the Soviet Union appear to be edging toward freer economic systems. Instead of viewing private enterprise as the adversary many governments now see it as their best hope for progress and prosperity. Developing as well as industrialized nations are reducing market rigidities and interferences thereby expanding economic freedom and opportunity for their citizens In those developing countries that encourage investment and private enterprise the ensuing economic growth should contribute to lessening their debt problems. The debt burden carried by developing countries is not just their problem ; we all have a vital interest in finding solutions that promote growth and protect open international financial markets. And we will continue to work with all who display a real determination to deal with this difficult issue The United States has been a constructive force in the world economy not only by demonstrating the benefits of private enterprise but also by our commitment to free trade and international economic cooperation. In addition this Nation 's strong demands for imports helped support output growth abroad during much of this decade The world economy has become increasingly interdependent as trade has multiplied and financial markets have become essentially global To continue to reap the benefits of an open international trading system we are committed to reducing further the barriers that interfere with the free flow of goods services and capital. To this end the United States has entered into and will continue to seek out bilateral and multilateral agreements to lower impediments to international commerce. The Free-Trade Agreement recently negotiated with Canada is an historic accomplishment. Once the necessary implementing legislation is passed it will establish the largest international free-trade area in the world. At the same time in the Uruguay Round of the multilateral negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade we have been working to lower trade barriers worldwide. In that forum we have placed special emphasis on eliminating spiraling subsidies to agricultural production and harmful barriers to agricultural imports on establishing and enforcing adequate protections for intellectual property on liberalizing trade in services and on ensuring evenhanded treatment of foreign investment Through these avenues and others we will continue to pursue the goal of free and fair trade which can only expand opportunity and prosperity both at home and abroad THE CHALLENGES AHEAD The American people elected me to this office with a vision of a reinvigorated economy and I have watched that vision become reality. The resurgence of America has confirmed my optimism. The accomplishments of the last years should inspire us but not blind us to the important challenges that remain Foremost among our challenges is the continued high level of Federal spending and the budget deficit. Federal receipts last year were $ billion above their level in ; nevertheless the deficit has nearly doubled since then bloated by a $ billion increase in outlays. Although we have succeeded recently in slowing the growth of spending and the deficit declined by $ billion in the last fiscal year the deficit is still too large Recent progress in controlling Federal outlays notwithstanding as a percent of GNP outlays remain well above the postwar average The government continues to spend too much absorbing resources that could be put to better use by the private sector. There are several essential functions of the Federal Government such as providing a strong national defense and ensuring an appropriate safety net for those in need but in many areas the government 's presence is oppressive and unnecessary Tax increases are not the key to eliminating the deficit. Some taxes are unavoidable the necessary functions of the Federal Government must be paid for. But tax reform and the cuts that have been instituted in income tax rates represent successful efforts to find less distorting less burdensome and more equitable means of financing government. Undoing tax reform through tax increases would affect eco- nomic activity adversely by raising uncertainty about government policy and reducing incentives to work and produce. Rather in coming years we should look to ways to enhance incentives for investment in future productive capacity including reducing the tax rate on capital gains The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law and our recent agreement with the Congress on a 2-year budget-trimming package have charted the course for additional deficit reduction. Those are steps in the right direction. But the budget process itself remains a major obstacle to eliminating the deficit. And I am not the only one to have noticed that the budget process is a disaster ; a recent survey of Members of Congress identified it as a major source of frustration. The process is not working and it must be reformed ; discipline and responsibility must be restored Current budget practice is to deliver a pair of mammoth bills that must be passed and signed in a matter of hours or the government has to shut down. This is not responsible government and I will not sign another of these behemoths. This budget process does not serve the best interests of the Nation it does not allow sufficient review of spending priorities and it undermines the checks and balances established by the Constitution So that such massive appropriations bills do not have to be an allor-nothing proposition I have asked for the line-item veto a power that State Governors already have. With a line-item veto future Presidents could pare away waste and enforce budget discipline. In addition expanded rescission powers would allow the Executive to cut unnecessary spending on programs that in many cases have outlived their usefulness. Finally to ensure that balanced budgets become a permanent feature of our fiscal landscape the legislatures of States have asked for and I endorse a constitutional amendment to force the Federal Government to live within its means These steps must be taken because the current budget process is impeding budget progress. By its very nature the democratic process is often messy and unfocused. But we know that democracy works and that tough decisions can be made. We must rise to the challenge again and prove that we can craft sound budgets through a sensible process We also must resist efforts to push the Nation into protectionism Our foreign trade deficit is very large but it has turned the corner in real terms. Last year foreign trade contributed significantly to our economic growth. Moreover further improvements are on the way At this point especially it would be a tragic mistake to attempt to close the trade gap by closing our markets. Isolating U.S. markets could only lead to a global downward spiral in trade and economic activity My Administration is committed to working diligently with the Congress to draft responsible trade legislation but if that legislation is not free of harmful protectionist measures I will veto it. Our goal is to see the trade deficit reduced in an environment of sustained economic growth and low inflation. To this end we are working with the other major industrial countries to coordinate economic policies that sustain noninflationary economic growth encourage an orderly reduction of international imbalances and thereby foster stability of exchange rates We must maintain the confidence of foreigners and our citizens alike in the ability of the United States to generate profitable investment opportunities and to follow responsible economic policies. The vitality of free and open markets full of opportunity and promise is the best foundation for investment. We must see to it that our tax structures and regulations do not discourage saving and investing We must encourage investment not only in plant and equipment but also in the American people themselves. Education skills research and development these are some of the most fruitful areas for investment ; expanded knowledge enhances the productive potential of our most valuable resource our people CONCLUSION America is blessed with great gifts abundant land and natural resources a diverse and hard-working people an unshakable tradition of democratic values. My confidence in America has been shown to be well-founded over these past few years. The economy has been revitalized and the record peacetime economic expansion has brought with it renewed opportunities and enhanced well-being. We set ourselves a formidable task : to reduce and to rationalize the role of government in the economy. That effort has been richly rewarded During our watch the U.S. economy again has shown its strength But our job is not finished. The Federal budget must be controlled in order to build a solid foundation for future economic growth. And I will not be satisfied until all Americans share in this prosperity ; there are still too many enmeshed in poverty and without jobs. We must rise to our remaining challenges heartened by our triumphs and inspired by the resilience of a resurgent America THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Beryl W. Sprinkel Chairman Thomas Gale Moore Member X Michael L. Mussa Member C O N T E N T S Page CHAPTER THE U.S. ECONOMY : PERFORMANCE AND PROSPECTS Overview of the Report The Macroeconomic Setting Employment Productivity and Income External Imbalances Opening Markets and Avoiding Protectionism Knowledge and Progress Airline Deregulation The U.S. Economy in Sources of Demand Inflation and Relative Price Changes Industrial Composition Macroeconomic Policies Fiscal Restraint Monetary Policy The Break in the Stock Market The Crash The Economic Implications The Policy Response The Economic Outlook Forecast for Projections for Determinants of Growth ; Conclusion CHAPTER RISING EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTIVITY AND INCOME... Employment and Output The Breadth of Employment Gains Changes in Job Quality Shifts in Sectoral Output and Employment Changing Patterns of Demand and Productivity Income and Productivity Increases in Living Standards Labor Compensation and Per Capita Income Determinants of Productivity Growth Sectoral Differences in Productivity Growth Problems of Productivity Measurement Page Competition and Adjustment in Manufacturing Unemployment and Inflation Frictional Unemployment Inflation and Unemployment Tradeoff..... Prospects for Reducing Unemployment Conclusion CHAPTER ADJUSTMENT AND GROWTH IN A CHANGING WORLD ECONOMY The Significance of External Imbalances Measures of the External Balance Growth of Employment Strength of Manufacturing Growth of Foreign Debt The Level of National Saving Demand Growth and the Saving-Investment Balance The Macroeconomic Character of the External Deficit Differential Demand Growth The Role of the Federal Deficit Exchange Rates and Relative Prices The Extent of Exchange-Rate Movements The Dollar and Relative Export Prices The Dollar and Relative Import Prices Profit Margins and Import Prices The Adjustment Process Conclusion CHAPTER EXPANDING TRADE AND AVOIDING PROTECTIONISM... Expanding Trade Opportunities Abroad Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement The United States-Mexico Framework Understanding General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade The Protectionist Threat at Home Protectionist Textile Legislation Embracing Protectionism The Omnibus Trade Bill.. Conclusion CHAPTER KNOWLEDGE MARKETS AND ECONOMIC PROGRESS... Human Capital Investments in Education Training and Experience Rationales for Government Support Policy Issues Science and Innovation Expenditures and Returns Role of Government Intellectual Property Rights Work Page Incentives in Government Research Market Flexibility. Market Barriers and Distortions Labor Market Flexibility Policies for Labor Adjustment Conclusion CHAPTER MOMENTUM AIRLINE DEREGULATION : MAINTAINING THE The Regulatory Environment Results of Deregulation Lower Fares Efficient Routing : The Hub and Spoke Effects on Labor Increases in Productivity Profits and Welfare International Consequences Managing the Increased Demand for Airspace Safety Delays Making the System More Responsive and Efficient Concerns About Market Organization and Monopoly The Viability of New Entrants and Smaller Airlines Mergers and Consolidation at Hubs Computerized Reservation Systems Airport Capacity Limits Conclusion APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Growth of Real GNP and its Components Economic Outlook for Administration Economic Assumptions Accounting for Growth in Real GNP Changes in Employment and Unemployment by Selected Demographic Groups Growth in Real GNP per Capita and Productivity Growth in Value Added per Hour Paid Measures of Changes in Compensation and Wages List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Regional Unemployment Rates Selected Years Unemployment by Reason and Duration Selected Years Economic Growth Saving and Investment as Percent of GNP Selected Real Net Exports Growth in Real Domestic Demand and Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries Canadian and U.S. Bilateral Tariffs by Sector Agricultural Subsidies for Producers and Consumers Selected Countries Principal U.S. Trade Law Provisions Relation of Income and Education Selected Years ' Charts The Dollar and Real Net Exports Wages and Prices Federal Receipts and Outlays as Percent of GNP Interest Rates and Velocity of Money Weekly Interest Rates Real Output and Employment Shares in Manufacturing Real Hourly Earnings and Compensation Wage Inflation and Unemployment Net Exports and the Current Account Balance Unemployment Rates in the Seven Summit Countries Components of the Saving-Investment Balance Relative Prices of Exports and Imports and the Exchange Rate U.S. and Foreign Exporters * Price-Cost Ratios and the Exchange Rate Shares of U.S. & Canadian Merchandise Trade in U.S. Agricultural Exports Contracting Spiral of World Trade Trade Interventions Years of Schooling of the Labor Force Earnings by Age and Education Research and Development Expenditures Labor Force Shares by Industry Airline Accident Rate CHAPTER The U.S. Economy : Performance and Prospects THE LONGEST PEACETIME EXPANSION in the history of the U.S. economy entered its sixth year in Growth was vigorous with the economy 's real output rising by nearly percent last year Three million additional jobs were created in beyond the million generated earlier in the expansion. The unemployment rate dropped almost a percentage point to its lowest level in years Significant improvement in the real trade deficit contributed importantly to growth of output and employment for the first time since The inflation rate remained in the percent range that has characterized most of the expansion well down from the double-digit rates at the start of the decade. Dramatic progress was made in reducing the Federal budget deficit. Judged by these accomplishments leaving aside the extraordinary events in financial markets the U.S economy enjoyed a good year in OVERVIEW OF THE REPORT The past years of sustained and vigorous growth in production income and employment did not occur by accident. It was shaped by government policies explicitly directed toward fostering the inherent dynamism of the private sector. In reviewing the record of the current expansion and looking to the future this Report highlights the appropriate role for government in the economy its macroeconomic responsibilities such as fiscal and monetary policy as well as its microeconomic responsibilities which concern particular markets and industries. This chapter begins with a summary of the Report THE MACROECONOMIC SETTING Nineteen eighty-seven was a year of robust economic growth strong increases in employment and despite a temporary acceleration early in the year continued moderate inflation. The composition of demand changed in a welcome direction as the foreign trade sector contributed to overall growth. But late in the year the plunge in the stock market and a sharp buildup in inventories raised ques- tions about the outlook. With appropriate economic policies however growth should continue through albeit at a more moderate rate than in A more balanced and sustainable pattern of growth in then will set the stage for a resumption of more rapid growth in the future together with gradual reductions in both the unemployment and inflation rates Chapter first reviews the macroeconomic performance of the United States in and the factors that shaped it. In particular the chapter discusses the role of fiscal and monetary policy in fostering noninflationary growth and economic adjustment. During macroeconomic policies turned toward restraint : growth of the monetary aggregates slowed sharply interest rates climbed and the Federal budget deficit was cut by one-third. Partly as a result inflation remained low and progress was made in reducing the trade deficit Important adjustments occurred in the U.S. economy last year Real exports rose by nearly percent helping to turn business fixed investment around and to produce large gains in output and employment in the manufacturing sector. Consumer expenditure growth slowed significantly from the rapid pace set during the first years of the expansion restraining the increase in imports. Last year the U.S. economy enjoyed both trade deficit reduction and good growth ; with appropriate policies this combination can be expected to continue into the future EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTIVITY AND INCOME The most important measures of economic progress concern people : the number of people with jobs ; the productivity of each person ; and real income per capita. Chapter reviews the record of the current economic expansion with respect to such measures of well-being and finds that in both quantity and quality terms the past years of growth have been good ones. Genuine economic progress has been made with benefits widespread across major demographic groups and across regions. Since the U.S. economy has created million new jobs the strongest record of employment growth among the major industrial countries. Unemployment rates have dropped substantially for all major demographic groups with especially large improvements for blacks Hispanics and youths The bulk of new jobs have been full-time and in higher paying occupations. Along with the rapid rise in employment growth rates of both productivity and real per capita income have picked up after a period of slow growth in the 1970s. Manufacturing has experienced particularly strong productivity growth while retaining its traditional share in the value of total output. The Nation 's industrial base remains strong Moreover the expansion 's accomplishments should continue to build provided the Administration 's growth-oriented economic policies are followed in the future. The unemployment rate has not reached a natural barrier beyond which further reductions necessarily imply serious risk of accelerating inflation EXTERNAL IMBALANCES Since late the Nation 's large trade deficit has been narrowing in real terms contributing to output and employment growth in the United States. Chapter discusses the significance of external imbalances the problems they do and do not pose for the United States and the world economy. It then examines the forces behind the evolution of worldwide imbalances as well as the processes that are under way to reduce them In assessing the significance of the country 's external deficit the chapter finds that because of strong demand growth within the U.S economy the widening trade gap did not impair overall employment growth. Nor did it cripple the manufacturing sector. Moreover U.S investment was aided by substantial net inflows of foreign capital which offset a relatively low national saving rate. The buildup of net foreign claims on the United States remains modest relative to U.S income and wealth and future problems arising from a continued rapid buildup can be forestalled by adequate progress in reducing the external deficit To sustain such progress it is essential that the fundamental macroeconomic causes of worldwide imbalances continue to be addressed. A substantial reduction in the foreign exchange value of the dollar has helped to restore the international competitiveness of U.S industry and it is a major factor in the turnaround and expected further improvement in the real trade deficit. To maintain noninflationary growth in the world economy while external imbalances are being corrected it is vital that Federal deficit reduction continue in the United States that internal growth in foreign countries remains strong and that markets function freely and flexibly to bring about necessary structural adjustments here and abroad. It is equally vital that national markets remain open to international trade and that the world avoid a descent into protectionism OPENING MARKETS AND AVOIDING PROTECTIONISM Chapter amplifies the conclusion of the preceding chapter : protectionism is not the answer. Instead economic progress here and around the world is enhanced by the benefits of further liberalizing international trade During significant progress was made toward a more open trading system. Chapter discusses the steps taken in three important areas : the Free-Trade Agreement ( FTA ) with Canada ; the United States-Mexico Framework Understanding ; and the Uruguay Round of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) When approved the FTA will culminate years of efforts to establish free trade as the guiding principle governing what has become the world 's largest commercial trading relationship between any two nations thereby providing substantial and enduring benefits for businesses and consumers in both the United States and Canada In the Uruguay Round the United States is vigorously pursuing the proposals it has made to strengthen the free and fair trade principles of GATT and to broaden their application in services investment intellectual property and agriculture At the same time however threats to trade liberalization have emerged within the United States. Pending legislation while including some useful features also contains numerous protectionist provisions. Enactment of these protectionist provisions would violate U.S obligations under GATT increase costs to consumers damage relations with our trading partners and invite retaliation. The United States has a choice : it can continue to lead the movement toward freer world trade building on the progress of the last year or it can turn inward embracing protectionist measures that point only toward economic stagnation KNOWLEDGE AND PROGRESS Chapter examines three of the major factors that underlie rising living standards in the longer term and considers the role of government in supporting and sustaining economic progress. The chapter first examines investment in human capital reviewing trends in schooling training and work experience as well as their effects on earnings and output. It then discusses expenditures on research and development and their relationship to economic growth. Finally the chapter reviews the importance of economic incentives and flexible markets in supporting economic progress by assuring that resources are directed toward their most highly valued uses The government has a constructive but limited role to play in ensuring that these building blocks of economic progress are strong. In education government plays a large direct role primarily at the State and local level where it can be most responsive to community needs For investment in human capital and in research and development government support is most effective when it relies on private incentives that guide such investment toward its most productive uses. To maintain economic incentives government has an important respon- sibility to protect the rights of individuals to benefit from their own labor investment innovation and entrepreneurship. Beyond this the best role for government is often a minimal one ensuring that it does not interfere with the efficient use of resources or introduce market barriers and distortions that impede productive economic activity AIRLINE DEREGULATION The success of deregulation is well illustrated by the airline industry. The final chapter of this Report focuses on the effects of the Airline Deregulation Act of which led to a surge in air travel as a result of lower fares and greater choice. Recently however more complaints about service and on-time performance as well as safety concerns have prompted calls for reregulation Reregulation would be a mistake. The benefits of having removed regulation of entry and pricing in the airline industry are clear. They are also sizable on the order of $ billion per year. Despite airline mergers and fears of monopoly pricing competition remains vigorous. More air travel a reflection of the very success of deregulation unquestionably has meant more crowded skies and busier airports. However the answer to this congestion is not less reliance on market forces but more. Deregulation should be expanded to allow a greater role for market forces in the management of the Nation 's airspace and airport services Concerns that air safety is being undermined by the increased competition of a deregulated environment are not supported by the facts. The rapid increase in airline business in the last years has led to no deterioration in the safety of air travel ; instead the record is good and compares favorably with the period before More people are flying to more places than ever before and they are traveling more safely THE U.S. ECONOMY IN U.S. economic growth strengthened in and the sources of growth shifted markedly. Starting in the fourth quarter of real gross national product ( GNP ) growth began to exceed domestic demand growth as for the first time in years the foreign trade sector contributed on a sustained basis to economic growth in the United States. On the inflation front the increase in consumer prices moved up into the percent range early in spurred largely by the rebound in world petroleum prices. Non-oil import prices which had tended to restrain inflation during the first half of the 1980s also contributed upward pressure on consumer prices. But this accel- eration which largely reflected a one-time shift in relative prices proved short-lived and inflation in the second half of the year fell back to the percent rate that has characterized most of the current economic expansion SOURCES OF DEMAND The economic expansion continued through and in October it claimed the record as the longest period of uninterrupted growth that the United States has experienced in peacetime. Ironically the record was set just as the stock market 's optimism was shaken and the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped more than percent in a single day. Clearly some stresses and imbalances had emerged during the expansion but data on the real economy indicated that favorable adjustments were occurring and that they were occurring within a context of continued growth. The trade deficit was narrowing in real terms the Federal budget deficit had dropped by onethird and business fixed investment was rebounding from its decline Real GNP grew percent from the fourth quarter of through the fourth quarter of rising more than half again as fast as in the preceding year. But this acceleration was by no means uniform across components of demand. In fact the largest component personal consumption expenditures slowed almost to a standstill posting just a percent rise after consecutive years of 4-plus percent increases ( Table ) Similarly investment in housing declined for the first time since While the growth of government purchases picked up slightly last year to percent the primary source of the acceleration in GNP was the rebound in three components that had been a drag on growth in : net exports business fixed investment and inventories The strengthening of exports the turnaround in business fixed investment and the slower growth of consumer spending all were part of a welcome pattern of economic adjustment necessary to redress the major imbalances of the U.S. economy. The figures presented on the composition of output growth in were influenced importantly by the weakening of consumer expenditures and business fixed investment in the final quarter of last year but the fundamental pattern was not altered. Combined with continued strong growth of production the drop in consumer and nonresidential fixed investment demand at the end of meant a large increase in inventories which consequently accounted for one-half of the total increase in real GNP last year Growth of real consumption expenditures was dampened by slower growth of real personal income in As a result of the faster rise TABLE Growth of Real GNP and Its Components IV IV to IV Item IV to IV1 to IV Average annual percent change Real GNP Domestic demand Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential fixed investment Government purchases of goods and services Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services [ Contribution to real GNP growth in percentage points2 Total change in real GNP Final domestic demand Change in inventories Net exports of goods and services Preliminary Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis in consumer prices last year the growth of real disposable personal income slowed to percent. Within consumer expenditures only spending on services recorded an increase. After rising percent in real services expenditures increased percent in By contrast spending on durables and nondurables fell. Consumer spending on motor vehicles dropped percent in reversing half of the percent rise in the year before. With so many households having recently bought automobiles fewer remained interested in and able to make a purchase in In general purchases of motor vehicles have been highly volatile in recent years as manufacturers have instituted on-again ofF-again incentive plans. These huge fluctuations in car sales routine percent annual rates of increase or decrease in a quarter have induced large swings in the pattern of consumption expenditures despite the fact that motor vehicles account for less than percent of total consumer spending The housing sector was affected adversely last year as interest rates climbed. Real residential investment dropped percent a reversal from when it had soared percent as interest rates on new 30-year mortgages had moved into the single digits for the first time in the 1980s. Early in mortgage rates continued to ease to a 9year low of percent but then they turned higher and in mid-October peaked at nearly percent. The plunge in the stock market then changed the financial landscape and mortgage rates ended the year about percentage point below their October highs. The impact of higher rates during most of last year was softened somewhat by a shift toward adjustable-rate financing which accounted for more than half of all mortgage originations by early autumn. In addition by most indications inflation expectations picked up at times last year so that the increase in real ( inflation-adjusted ) rates was not so large as that in nominal interest rates. In the multifamily sector however high vacancy rates and tax code changes that reduced the attractiveness of multifamily homes as tax shelters acted as added deterrents to new construction During business investment appeared influenced primarily by the strength of the economy especially improved export prospects Business fixed investment rose percent reversing most of the percent decline of the preceding year Improved export demand was evident in sales production and employment figures. Real exports grew almost percent last year finally rebounding above their peak levels of The increased international competitiveness of U.S. products owing to the drop in the dollar 's exchange rate rising manufacturing productivity and moderate wage increases lifted export sales. As a result the external sector contributed significantly to GNP growth last year. Growth of imports while well below the rates recorded during the early years of this expansion remained relatively rapid. Imports increased more than percent in real terms last year as U.S. domestic demand picked up Although real domestic demand grew at a percent rate last year substantial progress was made in reducing the real external deficit. The improved net export performance stemmed primarily from relative price changes that made U.S. goods increasingly attractive both at home and abroad ( Chart ) In coming quarters these relative price changes should continue to improve the external balance But even faster progress will be made if demand abroad strengthens and if growth of U.S. domestic demand slows preferably as a result of Federal spending restraint that narrows the budget deficit INFLATION AND RELATIVE PRICE CHANGES The consumer price index ( CPI ) rose at more than a percent annual rate during each of the first months of but this initial acceleration did not herald a sustained resurgence of inflation. Last year the economy had to contend with significant increases in the prices of imports and energy two categories that earlier in the economic expansion had tended to act as restraining influences on inflation. In addition aided in part by the accommodative monetary policy of the economy was moving through a fifth year of growth capacity utilization was rising and the unemployment rate was continuing to fall. In similar circumstances in the 1970s inflation had accelerated. But in most broad measures of inflation al- The Dollar and Real Net Exports Index March = Dollar Exchange Rate Lagged Six Quarters Billions of dollars Dollar Exchange Rate ^ / ( Inverted ) ( left scale ) iIt111r11 11111111111111111r11 LU llJ-200 -/Nominal multilateral trade-weighted value of the dollar against the currencies of the other G-10 countries plus Switzerland Sources : Department of Commerce and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System though up from when oil prices had dropped sharply remained close to their averages for the first years of the current expansion For example the GNP fixed-weighted price index rose percent compared with an average of percent during In crude oil prices had fluctuated wildly dropping from more than $ per barrel for West Texas Intermediate at the beginning of the year to a low of less than half that in July then climbing back up to more than $ per barrel around the end of the year. During the price of oil was less volatile ending the year only a little below its level at the beginning of the year. The deflationary impact of the earlier drop in oil prices was completed at the retail level during as the energy component of the CPI declined almost percent over the year. The inflationary effect of the subsequent rebound in oil prices however was strongest during the first months of when the energy component of the CPI rose at a percent annual rate. Thereafter the energy component increased at about the same rate as the aggregate CPI In early the higher relative price of oil gave a one-time boost to the aggregate price level with no apparent effect on the economy ^ underlying inflation rate. Similarly the rising import prices of recent quarters are a relative price adjustment which should produce only transitory upward pressure on inflation. But in the case of imports the relative price adjustment is likely to be a more drawn-out process. Prices of non-oil imports have been rising more rapidly than overall inflation since the end of and they likely will continue to do so for several more quarters as the dollar 's drop on foreign exchange markets gradually affects prices. A fixed-weighted index of non-oil import prices has increased at a percent annual rate during the last years Although the passthrough effects of the lower dollar can be expected to take some time rising import prices nevertheless represent a one-time change in relative prices and are a necessary factor in reducing the Nation 's trade deficit. Only if macroeconomic policies are unduly expansionary and wage increases fully reflect the increases in import prices will the increased relative price of imports turn into a sustained higher rate of inflation The increase in measured inflation early in in combination with the economy 's stronger growth may have contributed to slightly higher wage demands later in the year ( Chart ) Data on wage costs and average earnings indicate that wage increases bottomed out during the first half of the year and began to edge up during the second half. The acceleration was modest however and the 12month change in wages remained in the to percent range. By most measures the increase in wage costs last year was among the lowest of the postwar period and the rise in unit labor costs at percent was also relatively low At times during inflation expectations appeared to flare up Early in the spring both the price of gold and interest rates rose sharply apparently reflecting higher inflation expectations as broad indexes of commodity prices surged. Throughout much of the year the strong growth of industrial production also raised demand for inputs and put upward pressure on the prices of intermediate and crude goods especially metals. In the months through December the producer price index for crude materials rose percent but this increase had little effect last year on the price index for finished producer goods which rose just percent INDUSTRIAL COMPOSITION Along with the shifts in sources of demand and in relative prices last year the sectoral composition of output also changed. After more than years of sluggish increases industrial output rose a Chart Wages and Prices Percent change from year earlier / / * \ > Employment Cost Index \ ( Wages and Salaries ) t " t _ i Fixed-Weighted Price Index for Personal Consumption Expenditures * l t l i ' M i i t i | i i i I i i i t i i i t i i i i i i * ^ _ I i i ] I I I I Note. Data for fourth quarter are preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor healthy percent in the months through December Some industries benefited from the surge in exports and the renewed competitiveness vis-a-vis imports while others were aided by the strength of equipment investment. The rebound in oil prices encouraged activity in energy-related industries. And the agricultural sector appears to have improved aided by government support as well as by stronger exports In the growth of goods production outpaced that of services by the widest margin since Similarly after years of declining employment an additional people were put to work last year in goods-producing industries. However the predominant increase in employment remained in service-producing industries where more than million new jobs were created Among industries there were some remarkable reversals. Iron and steel production increased by nearly percent in the months through November having fallen about that much during the preceding years. Similarly the output of construction mining and farm equipment rose percent through November back to levels last reached in Oil and gas well drilling was another very strong component of industrial production in ; it increased by percent thereby retracing about half the drilling decline that had followed the collapse in oil prices at the end of After a number of years of severe financial stress agriculture may well have turned the corner. Farmland prices and net worth on farms rose in after declining in each of the preceding years. Agricultural exports turned higher crop prices rose and huge stockpiles declined. In net farm income was at a high level as a result of record government transfers to farmers high livestock prices and low production expenses. In net income rose further supported in addition by the strength of exports As the economic expansion continued through certain industries and sectors that had not fully participated in the recovery or that had suffered setbacks more recently were caught up in the spreading cycle of growth. Earlier in the expansion the high exchange rate had stymied export growth ; but by after the dollar declined roughly percent on the Federal Reserve Board 's tradeweighted index from its peak in the first quarter of export-dependent industries ( and those that compete with imports ) regained some ground MACROECONOMIC POLICIES Both fiscal and monetary policy turned toward restraint last year The Federal deficit narrowed by one-third in fiscal and even on a cyclically adjusted basis that is abstracting from the deficit-reducing effect of faster economic growth the restraint was clear Moreover measured either in real terms or as a share of GNP Federal outlays fell below the level of the previous fiscal year. At the same time rising interest rates and sharply lower money growth rates indicated a tightening of monetary policy during much of FISCAL RESTRAINT In fiscal the reduction in the Federal budget deficit was remarkable. The deficit was cut $ billion or percent of GNP in a single year. This salutary development reduced the government 's demands on credit markets while restraint on Federal spending released more resources for use by the private sector and by holding down growth of domestic demand contributed to the improvement in the Nation 's real trade gap. Despite the contractionary impulse from fiscal policy last year equivalent on a cyclically adjusted basis to roughly percent of GNP economic growth did not slow. The economy performed well in supported in part by the monetary stimulus of the preceding years and in part by the strong export growth that stemmed from a lower dollar A portion of the deficit decline was made up of one-time occurrences such as loan asset sales small changes in the timing of receipts and expenditures and higher revenues due to the phase-in of the Tax Reform Act but much was real substantive deficit reduction The Federal budget as measured by the national income and product accounts which exclude some of these special factors showed a $ billion narrowing in the deficit infiscal1987 The growth of total Federal outlays ( both on- and off-budget ) slowed to just percent in fiscal which translated into the first inflation-adjusted decline in years. Similarly as a share of GNP Federal outlays dropped to percent down from percent in fiscal ( Chart ) Boosted by stronger economic growth and roughly $ billion in additional revenues brought in by tax reform total Federal receipts rose percent infiscal1987 Federal revenues thus rose to percent of GNP percentage point above the average Chart Federal Receipts and Outlays as Percent of GNP Percent of GNP n \ Receipts I i I I I i i I i I t Fiscal Years Note. Includes on-budget and off-budget items Sources : Department of Commerce and Office of Management and Budget i I i i I i i I I The fiscal deficit of $ billion came close to the $ billion target specified in the original Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ( GRH ) legislation passed in After the method of imposing automatic spending cuts in that law was found to be unconstitutional amendments to GRH with new enforcement mechanisms and new deficit targets were signed into law in September The amendments extended the deadline for a balanced budget by years to and they eased the deficit reduction requirements for fiscal and by providing " safe harbors " in the form of caps on the amount of cuts mandated. For fiscal the amendments exchanged a $ billion target as specified in the original act for a new $ billion target with a maximum automatic cut of $ billion In October as fiscal opened the Federal budget for the year remained far from settled. A short-term continuing resolution kept the government operating while lawmakers worked on appropriations and reconciliation legislation that would allow them to avoid the across-the-board spending cuts mandated by GRH. But the likelihood of agreement on a satisfactory budget package appeared to diminish as October progressed making automatic cuts more likely Automatic cuts are preferable to some alternatives such as no deficit reduction at all or higher taxes that undo the benefits of tax reform but they have a serious drawback : they do not recognize priorities. In other words programs that may legitimately merit more funds are cut just as much as those programs that may have outlived their usefulness. For fiscal automatic cuts were avoided eventually but not until the stock market break had encouraged the parties involved in the budget-making process to reach an agreement MONETARY POLICY During the Federal Reserve continued the eclectic approach that has characterized decisionmaking within the Nation 's central bank in recent years. The creation of new deposit instruments wide fluctuations in market interest rates the deregulation of deposit rates and the accelerated process of general financial innovation had raised questions about how movements in money and credit aggregates should be interpreted. As the 1980s progressed the Federal Reserve had watched the historical relationships between money and income and interest rates apparently break down in response to these influences and it came to rely less on the monetary aggregates and more on a wide range of economic and financial variables as indica- tors of emerging trends. Finally in the Federal Reserve refrained from specifying an annual growth range for Ml the measure of money which in the past had been related most closely and reliably to income growth. Thus for the first time since when the Federal Reserve began to set money targets publicly neither a target nor a monitoring range for Ml was announced. And while target ranges for M2 and M3 ( broader measures of money ) were specified the Federal Reserve 's midyear report to the Congress explicitly recognized that * ' [ in certain circumstances ] some shortfall from the annual ranges might well be appropriate. " In view of heightened uncertainty about the behavior of the monetary aggregates the sharp slowing in money growth in did not alarm the Federal Reserve as it continued to tighten policy through September. Annual rates of growth in the second and third quarters of averaged between just 2V2 and 4x/2 percent for Ml M2 and M3. When measured from the fourth quarter of the growth rates were somewhat higher : through September Ml grew at a percent annual rate M2 at a percent rate and M3 at percent Nevertheless even these rates represented substantial decelerations from those in the preceding year and left M2 well below and M3 just below their target growth ranges. MIA which consists of currency and checking accounts that can not pay interest increased at less than a percent annual rate through September after having risen percent in Background The lessened reliance on money as an indicator was an outgrowth of the experience of the 1980s but especially of The Federal Reserve had begun to ease policy in the second half of reversing its earlier restraint in order to support the flagging economic expansion and more than years of falling interest rates and rapid money growth followed. From their peaks in mid-1984 most interest rates declined to percentage points by the end of and many short-term rates were cut in half. The monetary aggregates especially the narrower aggregates soared in and accelerated further in Over the four quarters of even the slowest growing of the commonly cited aggregates M3 rose percent while the fastest growing measure Ml ballooned percent. By comparison nominal GNP increased just percent during the same period. In other words by any measure velocity ( the ratio of nominal GNP to the money supply ) dropped steeply in The decline in the velocity of Ml at percent was particularly steep and provided additional evidence that the relationship between that measure of money and income had shifted. The relationship between nominal GNP and Ml as summarized by velocity apparently veered off track in the early 1980s ( Chart ) Rather than trending higher at a rate of roughly percent a year as it had during the preceding years velocity declined on balance after There always had been some cyclical variations in velocity with changes in interest rates altering the " opportunity cost ' * of holding idle balances. But the experience of the 1980s clearly was different. Ml velocity appeared to be responding far more emphatically than in the past to changes in market interest rates while M2 velocity although also affected remained closer to its historical behavior The two most likely explanations for this increased interest rate responsiveness of money balances are deregulation and the sharpest disinflation since the late 1940s. The drop in inflation early in the 1980s fed through to expectations : as the public expects lower inflation they tend to become more willing to hold money. Thus to the extent that falling interest rates reflected declining inflation expectations the disinflation/more-stable-purchasing-power argument provides an additional link between lower interest rates and increased demand for money Financial deregulation had its effect by changing the composition of the monetary aggregates. Interest-bearing transaction accounts were permitted and interest rate caps were eliminated on all types of accounts except demand deposits on which interest payments remained prohibited. In the case of Ml the shift in composition was profound : by interest-bearing deposits had grown to nearly one-third of Ml from a negligible share just years earlier. As a result the decline in market interest rates meant that by the end of that period the opportunity cost of a major component of Ml dropped below one-half percent. This opportunity cost measured as the 3-month Treasury bill rate less the interest rate paid on negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts was the lowest for any transaction account in years. Such a narrow spread is clearly atypical ; it developed in part because deposit rates on NOW accounts and other variable-rate accounts have adjusted relatively slowly to changes in market interest rates. This rate-setting behavior has accentuated the effect of variations in market rates on the demand for money Chart Interest Rates and Velocity of Money Percent per annum Treasury Bill Rate is Two-Quarter Moving Average Ratio A 3-Month Treasury Bill Rate ( left scale ) V 'V ulo Percent per annum Ratio Treasury Bill Rate is Two-Quarter Moving Average 3-Month Treasury Bill Rate ( left scale ) nJo olinlinlin & Ratio of GNP to M1 or M2 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Reserve Actions in : Before October In monetary policymakers continued to face uncertainties concerning the strength of the economy the extent of the inflationary threat and the interpretation of movements in the monetary aggregates. Evaluating financial and economic indicators and predicting the precise effects of policy moves remain inexact sciences. On the domestic front financial markets indicated that inflation expectations may have surged at times although inflation itself exceeded the percent range only briefly early in the year. And on the international front the value of the dollar came under pressure several times Throughout the year however U.S. economic activity remained robust and the unemployment rate dropped nearly a percentage point As began the deciphering of economic and financial market trends was complicated by a year-end surge of transactions prompted by a change in tax laws. Because many provisions of the Tax Reform Act were to take effect at the turn of the year individuals and businesses rushed to complete real estate transactions mergers sales of equities car purchases etc. before the end of In the process they generated huge demands for money and credit ; for example Ml rose at a percent annual rate in December and business loans increased at a percent rate In view of the difficulty in separating tax effects from underlying economic trends during this period the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) the Federal Reserve 's principal monetary policymaking body chose not to make any substantive changes in its instructions to the Open Market Desk which implements policy on a day-today basis. Thus the thrust of the directive that had been in place since the last discount rate cut in August remained in force. At the same time however the FOMC indicated its bias toward future tightening and noted that at least with regard to Ml money growth would have to slow from the pace in order to sustain progress toward price stability As the year-end bulge in the monetary aggregates dissipated and the economy continued to grow at a moderate pace the Federal Reserve made no explicit changes in monetary policy until late April Then in April and again in May the market for bank reserves was tightened as policymakers responded to downward pressure on the dollar in exchange markets and a perceived ratcheting upward of inflation expectations. News on the real economy was generally good : growth was maintained and the unemployment rate was dropping substantially. But the rebound in energy prices with some help from higher import prices had boosted the inflation rate above percent and expectations of inflation were heating up. While oil prices had roughly stabilized broad indexes of commodity prices rose sharply in April and early May as did the price of gold. Long-term interest rates also appeared to reflect an increase in inflation expectations : the rate on 30-year Treasury bonds increased Vz percentage points in months to a peak of percent ( Chart ) The dollar also told a similar story about expectations during this period losing nearly percent of its value on a trade-weighted basis in those months Chart Weekly Interest Rates Percent per annum tg. _ Mortgage Commitment Rate ; 30-Year Mortgages ) 30-Year Treasury Bonds ( Constant Maturity ) \ Jan n v \ i n Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation The Federal Reserve actions complemented by measures taken abroad to ease policy generally were successful in reassuring the domestic financial and foreign exchange markets. The dollar appreciated through mid-August and interest rates remained below their highs of the spring. Meanwhile the economy showed signs of additional strength inflation dropped back from the elevated levels of early in the year and wage increases remained subdued Under the influence of higher interest rates and tighter Federal Reserve policy growth of the monetary aggregates continued to weaken. Ml rose at just a percent annual rate in the months through July and MIA fell slightly while M2 growth remained well below and M3 just below their 5V2 to percent target ranges. To some this sharp slowdown in money growth raised concerns about potential economic weakness In early September the Federal Reserve again tightened policy both by restricting reserve availability further which it did " in light of the potential for greater inflation associated in part with weakness in the dollar " and by raising the discount rate one-half percentage point to percent. In the preceding weeks the dollar had dropped nearly percent on a trade-weighted basis and interest rates had begun to move up very steeply in the last few days of August. Once again foreign exchange markets apparently were reassured by the Federal Reserve 's actions. The dollar stabilized but this time interest rates continued to climb The spur for the dollar 's drop and the bond market 's weakness appears to have been the release in mid-August of the June foreign trade figures which showed a $ billion deficit substantially worse than the markets had expected. With the trade deficit thus narrowing more slowly than anticipated the financial markets surmised that further adjustments were required either a lower dollar reduced demand in the United States or increased demand in our major trading partners. Against a background of rising interest rates abroad and with little additional action expected to be taken to reduce the U.S. budget deficit or to augment demand abroad attention focused on the foreign exchange market and U.S. interest rates Specifically a rise in U.S. interest rates appeared increasingly likely perhaps reflecting expectations that further dollar depreciation would add to inflationary pressures. Higher rates also would have been expected to result from an effort to dampen business investment and consumer spending and thereby U.S. imports which would reduce the extent of the needed dollar decline The trade figures for the next months also were worse than generally expected and financial markets reacted adversely. On October when the August data were released the Dow Jones Industrial Average posted a 1-day drop of percent and the rate on 30-year Treasury bonds rose basis points ( percentage point ) The dollar also declined but by less than percent. On balance between September ( when the discount rate was increased ) and October the trade-weighted value of the dollar remained unchanged the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped percent and interest rates rose basis points The extent of Federal Reserve tightening through mid-October was most dramatic as measured by the sharp deceleration of money and reserve growth. In view of the relative looseness of money-GNP relationships in recent years however other indicators provide addi- tional evidence on the stance of Federal Reserve policy. Judging by the level of the Federal funds rate in early October the progressive tightening of monetary policy had effectively reversed most of the easing that had occurred during At their peaks short-term interest rates had increased roughly basis points since the beginning of the year and long-term rates had risen a bit more than that. Although these nominal increases were offset in part by higher inflation expectations real interest rates which adjust for inflation expectations also appear to have risen during albeit by a more modest amount than during some other periods of real rate increases in the 1980s. Two other variables that sometimes can be used as indicators of monetary policy did not appear to point to a tightening last year. In particular the dollar 's exchange rate declined on balance and the yield spread between long- and short-term securities widened somewhat rather than narrowing or even turning negative as it tends to do in periods of severe monetary policy restraint Nevertheless the balance of the evidence points to a tightening of monetary policy last year There is little question that a turn toward some restraint in was desirable ; continued growth of money at the high rates experienced in and would have had inevitable inflationary consequences. With output growth apparently well-maintained and inflation expectations building at times the Federal Reserve acted to forestall a resurgence of deep-rooted inflation and to retain hardwon gains toward price stability. As always because monetary policy actions affect the economy with sizable lags the tightening of policy last year had implications for future growth and price performance THE BREAK IN THE STOCK MARKET As the third quarter ended preliminary evidence suggested and data later confirmed that the U.S. economy was growing strongly The unemployment rate continued to edge down reaching its lowest level since late and the index of leading indicators pointed to sustained economic growth. However the outlook for further substantial improvement in the Federal deficit was clouded by an apparent deadlock between the Congress and the Administration over the budget for fiscal which began October In financial markets the Federal Reserve had tightened monetary policy in September. Interest rates both short- and long-term rose further in the first weeks of October THE CRASH In mid-October the stock market posted a string of large declines culminating in a 1-day plunge of unprecedented magnitude. The stock market had soared more than percent in value from the start of the year through its August peak but by the close of business on October nearly half of that gain had been erased. And the following Monday October after stock markets elsewhere in the world had posted sharp declines the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost percent in a single day. Trading volume was enormous the markets were chaotic many stocks opened very late and the word " panic " aptly described the atmosphere. It was a worldwide phenomenon with potentially worldwide consequences On that day the total value of the stock market dropped by roughly half a trillion dollars. The next day again amid an enormous volume of transactions market conditions worsened. Trading in many stocks and index futures halted for a time but the market managed to recover and closed higher. In subsequent days and weeks investors remained nervous but they drew reassurance from the Federal Reserve 's prompt provision of liquidity and the large number of corporations announcing stock buy-backs. During the remainder of the year the market settled into a trading range that left the Dow at the end of quite close to its year-earlier level A wide range of explanations for the crash has been offered and many factors may have contributed. However no political or economic event occurred between the market 's close on Friday and on Monday that appears capable of explaining such a huge revaluation of the net worth of U.S. corporations. To an extent the stock market appeared to be reacting simply to itself ; in increasingly heavy trading on the preceding Wednesday Thursday and Friday the Dow had lost a total of points and on October as more individuals and institutions became aware of the deepening plunge in stocks that day and tried to sell the decline cumulated A survey regarding the factors that had propelled stock prices downward was included in The Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms which reviewed the stock market break. A majority of the market participants and other interested parties that responded to the survey viewed technical and psychological factors especially " sheer panic " as the cause of the intense selling pressure on October By contrast fundamental factors such as rising interest rates overvaluation of the market and the large trade and budget deficits were described as the primary cause of the preceding week 's decline Some commonly watched measures of stock values lend support to the proposition that stocks were overvalued before mid-October. Dividend yields on stocks were well below their postwar average while price/earnings ratios had soared to highs attained only briefly in recent decades. Since the beginning of stock prices had skyrocketed amid reports of escalating corporate earnings and robust economic growth. But while stock prices were soaring bond prices were dropping creating an unusual divergence between the two markets. In a sense on October the stock market caught up with the bond market Rising interest rates certainly were a factor in the stock market 's decline. As noted above rates had risen sharply in the weeks preceding the crash and one major bank announced another half percentage point hike in its prime rate on the Thursday before the plunge Moreover the outlook for even higher interest rates had been bolstered by the lack of improvement in the monthly U.S. trade figures The slower-than-expected turnaround in the trade deficit implied to some that further adjustments either to exchange rates or to foreign or domestic fiscal or monetary policies would be necessary to stimulate U.S. exports and reduce U.S. import growth Several additional factors may have played a role in the market 's decline. In particular publication of the large trade deficits appeared to strengthen the position of those supporting protectionist trade legislation the passage of which would seriously impair the ability of U.S. firms to do business abroad and would signal the abandonment of a longstanding U.S. commitment to an open trading system. There also were other indications that international economic policy cooperation might be endangered. In addition the House Ways and Means Committee had just approved a tax package containing several items adversely affecting business including a measure that would increase the cost of corporate takeovers THE ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS The damage to the financial system as a direct result of the stock market break was remarkably minor. Several brokerage firms closed their doors or merged with larger better capitalized companies a number of Wall Street firms announced layoffs and the demand for portfolio insurance which was supposed to provide a hedge against declining stocks dropped off amid evidence that such insurance had failed to perform as expected Recent studies have provided much useful information concerning the events surrounding October These studies deserve and will receive serious and careful attention. In response to the crash however it is important to avoid precipitous actions that might make financial markets less efficient and less flexible. The resilience of the financial system in the face of the unprecedented dive in stock prices can be read as eloquent testimony to the general adequacy of gov- ernment regulations in this area. Regulatory authorities and market participants worked together effectively to ensure that despite the large declines in stock prices the financial system continued to function The implications of the market break for the economy however are harder to gauge and may ultimately be more serious requiring a careful balance of macroeconomic policies to avoid the threat of an economic downturn. The stock market is a good but not infallible predictor of economic trends. While it is sufficiently reliable to be included in the Department of Commerce 's index of leading indicators it represents only of components in that index. The stock market tends to be overly pessimistic erroneously predicting several additional recessions in the postwar period. But in those circumstances when a stock drop has not been followed by an economic downturn it is often because economic policies have shifted direction effectively preempting a recession. For example in after the stock market had declined more than percent the Federal Reserve did an about-face reversing much of its earlier tightening. The economy responded to the support and a recession was avoided Stock prices are a leading indicator because they distill expectations about future corporate earnings and because they affect decisions about spending and investment. Until October when the break in the stock market affected attitudes surveys had shown steady increases in consumer confidence during Thereafter consumer sentiment dipped sharply and although it has largely recovered consumer spending behavior appears to have become more cautious The stock market is a barometer of confidence in the outlook and it is a major component of the Nation 's wealth. At the end of September the market value of corporate equities totaled roughly $ trillion about $ trillion of which was held directly by the household sector. This $ trillion represented nearly one-sixth of that sector 's total net worth of $ trillion so a large change in the value of stocks could be expected to have an impact on household spending. Some econometric models have estimated that a $ decline in the value of the stock market reduces consumer spending by about cents over a horizon of roughly year. Thus a $ billion drop in stocks would mean about a $ billion ( or percent ) reduction in consumer expenditures by the fall of The repercussions for consumption should be mitigated however by the fact that the lost wealth this time had been so recently acquired. While many individuals and institutions were badly hurt financially by the plunge in prices the decline reversed only about year 's gain in stock values. Even after October the Dow Jones remained more than double its mid-1982 level. Nonetheless in the at- mosphere of uncertainty that followed the crash there were convincing reasons to postpone decisions to spend and invest The stock market crash was not as one observer put it " a necessary marvelous correction " but it may have had its silver lining. In particular as discussed below it helped move macroeconomic policy in the direction of a more balanced posture by adding impetus to efforts to reduce Federal spending and the deficit. In addition by drawing an explicit parallel to the Great Depression the stock market decline highlighted the serious dangers associated with protectionism thereby undercutting support for protectionist trade legislation and encouraging the reduction of trade barriers. Moreover the crash may have made enactment less likely for ill-considered Federal legislation that would inappropriately restrict the market for corporate control If the plunge in stock prices also causes consumers to become slightly more cautious in their spending patterns a gentle rise in the personal saving rate and consequent added improvement in the trade balance will ensue. In this case however it is not true that if a little consumer retrenchment is good a lot is better. And it is the responsibility of policymakers to watch closely and to take additional actions if it appears that a downward spiral is threatening. With appropriate policies the market break notwithstanding need not herald the end of the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history THE POLICY RESPONSE In the days and weeks following October U.S. macroeconomic policies were reassessed. The Federal Reserve reacted promptly indicating by word and deed that ample liquidity would be provided to help the financial system and the economy weather the stresses associated with the market break. The fiscal policy response required more negotiation and more time but month after the plunge in stock prices the Administration and the Congress concluded an agreement to continue efforts in the direction of restraint by cutting the fiscal and budget deficits by $ billion and $ billion respectively from a specified baseline Fiscal Policy Deficit reduction through Federal spending restraint was and is a high priority of the Administration. The stock market drop added urgency to Administration and congressional efforts to forge a budget that consolidated and built upon the deficit reduction progress made in fiscal At the " budget summit ' * set up in the wake of the stock market drop participants agreed to a 2-year $ billion deficit reduction package ; the resulting legislation rendered GRH automatic spending cuts unnecessary for fiscal The spending cuts and revenue increases enacted preserve the progress on the deficit made in fiscal and set the stage for further gains While deficit reduction is a very important objective it is not paramount. For example GRH wisely allows for suspending the targets should the economy weaken markedly. In current circumstances with the deflationary impact of the stock market decline not yet clear progress on the fiscal deficit should continue to be made but cautiously. The Federal Government 's budget has the attractive property of providing the economy with automatic stabilizers moving in the direction of deficit when the economy sinks and in the direction of surplus when it soars. These stabilizers should not be overridden in the pursuit of deficit reduction. Nor should the deficit reduction imperative run roughshod over considerations of economic efficiency by raising taxes that undo the benefits of tax reform and reduce incentives to work produce and invest Without question in the long run the potential for growth in this country will be enhanced by moving toward a balanced Federal budget. Over the medium term a tighter fiscal policy would play a major role in improving the balance between income and spending in the United States. As the government significantly reduces its demands on resources there is an increased likelihood that the external imbalance can be righted without impairing the growth of private sector investment expenditures. If instead investment expenditures were to be stunted by a combination of loose fiscal policy and tight money America 's potential for future growth might be jeopardized by an increasingly outdated capital stock Monetary Policy The stock market crash required and received an immediate monetary policy response. By the end of the day on October billions of dollars of financial wealth had been lost and fears of a possible collapse of the financial system and ultimately of the economy were palpable. The Federal Reserve responded promptly and unequivocally to these threats by issuing a brief statement the next day that emphasized its willingness to support the system with adequate liquidity. This statement was buttressed by open market operations that satisfied increased demands for liquidity and eased money market conditions. In the weeks immediately following the crash borrowing from the Federal Reserve declined to a level not seen since the initial tightening of policy in the spring excess reserves soared to nearly double their usual amount and the Federal funds rate dropped back to the % percent range that prevailed during the summer The stock market plunge changed the circumstances faced by monetary policymakers in an important way. The market break caused an abrupt loss of wealth and consumer confidence removing some of the impetus for higher growth and higher prices. The balance of risks shifted as the possibility of recession increased and the general level of uncertainty about the outlook was heightened enormously. In these circumstances it was appropriate for the Federal Reserve to respond by making reserves freely available After its initial response however monetary policy began to take a more cautious tack. Amid signs that the economy had strong momentum going into the fourth quarter and with few clear indications of economic retrenchment in reaction to the crash the Federal Reserve took no further moves to ease policy keeping the discount rate at percent. Most monetary and reserve aggregates weakened over the balance of the year. Ml MIA and total reserves each ended the year below their pre-crash levels and M2 remained well below its target growth range rising at just a percent rate for the year as a whole Immediately following the 508-point drop in the Dow the Federal Reserve 's operations were exemplary. It was in the right place at the right time supporting the financial system with ample liquidity While it was appropriate for the conduct of policy to change subsequently ( once constant reassurances to the markets were no longer needed ) the stance of monetary policy at the end of may have underestimated the risks to adequate economic growth. At the end of the year interest rates were down from their October highs but they remained above the levels of January through August while monetary aggregate growth remained weak. More recently declining interest rates and increased money growth suggest that the Federal Reserve has been more supportive of economic growth THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK The Administration 's economic forecast anticipates that the rate of economic expansion will slow this year from the rapid pace set in Subsequently growth is projected to resume at a rate that more fully reflects the economy 's long-term potential and that promises further reductions in unemployment. Improvement in the U.S real trade balance is expected to contribute to output and employment growth in coming years as it did in ; this contribution will play an especially important role in Increases in the workingage population in labor force participation rates and in the education skill and experience of the work force together with an expanding capital stock and improving technology are projected to sustain growth of the economy 's output at a rate sufficient to meet rising domestic and international demand. The inflation rate is projected to move gradually downward from the percem range charac- teristic of the current expansion toward the long-term goal of price stability. Underlying this outlook are economic policies that are assumed to support these developments FORECAST FOR Real GNP is forecast to rise percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of somewhat slower than the percent increase in Nevertheless output growth in is expected to generate employment growth sufficient to match increases in the labor force and to keep the unemployment rate at about its current level. As a result the average unemployment rate during is likely to be the lowest in years The expected slowing of real GNP growth in also widely anticipated by private forecasters reflects economic developments during especially those during the last quarter of the year. The low rate of personal saving and the slow growth of real disposable income through the third quarter of last year already suggested some prospective slowing of growth in consumer spending even before the stock market crash lowered household wealth and consumer confidence. Interest rates declined significantly after the market break but they remained above their levels at the beginning of the year Slow growth of monetary aggregates throughout points to some possible weakening of economic growth in The buildup of inventories at the end of also indicates a likely need to reduce production growth relative to final sales growth in the new year Weighing on the other side gains in disposable income at the end of and tax rate reductions taking effect in January are likely to support consumer spending. Declines in mortgage interest rates promise a future boost for residential construction. Perhaps most important prospects for continued strong growth of U.S. exports look excellent. All told however real GNP growth in appears likely to lag behind the rapid pace of Probably the most immediate concern is the fast pace of inventory accumulation during the fourth quarter of In particular nonfarm inventories appeared to rise at an unsustainable rate. To correct this situation production will have to decrease relative to final sales. Final sales are expected to show renewed growth in after being essentially flat in the final quarter of Consequently an outright decline in production can be avoided. The inventory adjustment can be achieved through slower production growth relative to final sales growth. This essentially reverses the situation in As discussed earlier inventory building accounted for one-half of overall economic growth last year more than offsetting deceleration in other domestic components of GNP. In inventories are expected to accumulate at a slower and more sustainable pace. This slowdown will have a negative impact on real GNP growth possibly with much of the effect felt in the first half of the year. Modest gains for most other domestic components of demand and strong gains for the U.S. trade sector are expected to keep real GNP growing Real net exports will be one of the main sources of growth in the economy in providing nearly half of overall output growth Rapid productivity gains in manufacturing moderate wage increases and the effects of past exchange-rate adjustments will continue to help U.S. businesses expand exports in foreign markets and compete against imports at home. In addition anticipated slow growth of final demand within the U.S. economy and the possible effect of the inventory correction on imports are expected to restrain growth of imports and to contribute to net export gains In growth of real consumption slowed to a percent rate from the rapid pace set earlier in the expansion and it actually fell at a percent annual rate in the fourth quarter. The personal saving rate finished the year percentage points above the year-earlier rate due entirely to the drop in consumer spending and a strong gain in disposable income during the last quarter of the year. Given the high rate of auto purchases in the third quarter of the low personal saving rate for most of the year and the likely effects of October 's stock market decline it was widely anticipated late last year that there would be some downward adjustment in consumer spending. It appears that much of that adjustment occurred in the fourth quarter. Accordingly as indicated in Table real consumption spending is forecast to rise at a modest percent rate during slightly below the projected growth rate of real disposable income and substantially below the V percent annual growth rate of real consumer spending during the first years of the current expansion Despite slower growth of aggregate output this year fixed investment is expected to accelerate somewhat. As reported in Table nonresidential fixed investment is forecast to increase percent during the current year up from percent last year. The improving trade picture which is lifting capacity utilization rates in many manufacturing industries will provide much of the motivation for increased investment. The need for additional capacity to meet demands both for exports and for import substitutes should continue to stimulate investment in equipment and nonresidential structures Lower interest rates in partly as the result of slower economic growth and lower expected inflation should strengthen housing demand. Residential investment after falling in is forecast to increase percent in TABLE Economic Outlook for forecast Item Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real gross national product. Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases of goods and services State and local purchases of goods and services. GNP implicit price deflator. Compensation per hour2 Output per hour2 Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Note. Based on seasonally adjusted data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers The deficit reduction agreement concluded by the Congress and the Administration together with earlier efforts to control Federal spending will contribute to a decline in real Federal purchases in the current year. Increases in State and local spending are expected to offset much of this decline leaving a small negative contribution to GNP growth from the government sector as a whole As discussed in Chapter the United States has been notable among industrialized nations in its ability to create jobs both to meet the needs of an expanding labor force and to reduce unemployment During the current expansion million jobs have been created. Between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of when real GNP rose percent million new jobs were created and the unemployment rate dropped from percent to percent Even though slower real growth in the current year is not expected to bring further immediate reductions in the unemployment rate it is anticipated that some IV2 million new jobs will be created as employment growth keeps pace with an expanding labor force Higher oil prices and higher import prices increased the inflation rate ( as measured by the CPI ) above the very low rate recorded in Higher import prices also are expected to contribute to consumer price inflation in However after a year of slow growth of monetary aggregates and in view of the expected slowing of real GNP growth acceleration of inflation is not seen as a likely danger in On a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis the CPI is forecast to rise percent in a small decline from the rise in The GNP deflator which is not affected directly by import prices is forecast to rise percent in The increase from primarily reflects a shifting of weights attached to different component prices used to calculate the deflator. It does not signify an acceleration of inflation The Administration 's forecast for takes account of the favorable effects of tax reform i.e. full implementation in January of the reduced marginal tax rates mandated by the Tax Reform Act of and continued confidence in the preservation of tax reform 's incentives for growth and efficiency. Embodied in the forecast is the expectation that the budget compromise agreed to by the Administration and the Congress will be followed and that rates of demand growth in other industrial countries will be sufficient to sustain world output growth while the U.S. trade deficit is being reduced. Also critical for the forecast is the assumption that monetary authorities will provide sufficient liquidity to support real growth without fueling an acceleration of inflation PROJECTIONS FOR The Administration 's medium-term projections show real GNP growth strengthening after with growth averaging percent annually for the period through This projection is based on the assessment that recent events in financial markets and slower growth in will not materially alter the longer run growth potential of the U.S. economy. Table presents yearly estimates for major components of the medium-term projections. These estimates are not intended to be year-to-year forecasts ; rather they are meant to reflect underlying economic trends and Administration policies Implicit in the Administration 's medium-term projections are important economic policy assumptions similar to those underlying the forecast for First tax increases that would dull incentives to work invest and produce and that would impair the efficient allocation of resources are avoided and the benefits of tax reform are preserved. Second continued progress is made in reducing the Federal deficit primarily by restraining the growth of Federal spending while allowing Federal revenues to rise with the growth of the economy Third government regulation continues to be directed toward legitimate interests of public policy and does not again become an excessive and unnecessary burden to enterprise and growth. Fourth monetary authorities supply adequate liquidity to sustain economic expansion while fostering progress toward the long-run goal of price level stability. Fifth protectionist pressures which could provoke retaliation and hamper U.S. access to foreign markets continue to be TABLE Administration Economic Assumptions [ Calendar years ] Item Percent change year to year Real GNP.. Output per hour1 Consumer price index2 Real compensation per hour1 Annua level Employment ( millions ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Nonfarm business all persons For urban wage earners and clerical workers Includes resident Armed Forces * Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Source : Council of Economic Advisers resisted successfully. This last assumption is especially important in view of the contribution that an improving U.S. trade balance is projected to make to overall U.S. economic growth in the medium term It is crucial that American businesses be permitted to compete in markets that are as free as possible from the distorting effects of trade barriers The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of requires that the Economic Report of the President together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers include an investment policy report and a review of progress in achieving goals specified in the act. Business fixed investment grew percent in and it is expected to continue expanding over the next years in response to a growing economy. Strong growth of manufacturing output and increases in capacity utilization in manufacturing industries provided an important stimulus to investment growth in This development was related to strong growth of U.S. exports which is expected to persist in and later years and thus support future investment growth More generally it is the view of the Administration that the best way to promote investment is to maintain a stable growing and flexible economy that can profitably employ an ever-larger stock of physical and human capital. The Administration has sought by means of tax reform deregulation privatization and other policies to provide such an environment. Chapter of this Report discusses in greater detail the proper governmental role in promoting economic efficiency and investment particularly investment in human capital and in research and development The Administration 's estimates of important measures that address goals specified in the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act are summarized in Table Projected increases in output and employment higher real income and productivity growth and lower inflation and unemployment will move the economy along the path to the targets set by the act. As was discussed earlier million jobs have been created during this expansion in an environment of decelerating inflation and more can be accomplished in coming years. Chapter documents in more detail the progress made so far in attaining the goals specified in the act and outlines the prospects for future gains DETERMINANTS OF GROWTH The long-run improvement in the Nation 's standard of living implied by the Administration 's economic projections hinges on the continued expansion of the economy 's capacity to produce. Important determinants of this capacity are the supply of labor its level of utilization and its productive ability. The supply of labor is influenced by the size of the population and its demographic characteristics by incentives to undertake employment in the market economy and by the cyclical state of the economy. The level of utilization of the labor force of course responds primarily to fluctuations in the level of economic activity. The productivity of labor depends on the education experience and skills of the labor force on the supplies of physical capital and other cooperating factors of production on the technological efficiency of production processes and on the economic efficiency of resource allocation. Except for the level of utilization of labor the behavior of the determinants of the economy 's productive capacity is governed mainly by long-term developments in the economy and is influenced by government policies that affect these longer term developments. Favorable longer term trends and policies directed at improving growth are projected to maintain the momentum that the economy has developed during the 1980s returning it to the trend rate of growth of the postwar era The sources of growth in the economy 's productive potential that underlie the Administration 's medium-term projections are organized into an accounting framework in Table In order to focus on trends in the economy and to avoid the complications of cyclical fluctuations the first two columns of the table show growth rates from business cycle peak to business cycle peak for historical periods. The third column displays growth from the peak of the last business cycle through and the final column presents growth rates over the projection period which extends through TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GNP [ Average annual percent change ] IV to III Item IV to III III to IV1 IV1 to IV GROWTH IN : ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUS : Civilian labor force participation rate ) EQUALS : Civilian labor force ) PLUS : Civilian employment rate ) EQUALS : Civilian employment ) PLUS : Nonfarm business employment as share of civilian employment ) ) ) ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business employment PLUS : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) EQUALS : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) PLUS : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business output ) LESS : Nonfarm business output as share of real GNP ) EQUALS : Real GNP Data for are preliminary Note. Based on seasonally adjusted data. Detail may not add to totals due to rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Growth of the labor force is expected to be somewhat slower during the projection period than earlier in the postwar era. As Table shows labor force growth is determined by growth in the adult population and by increases in labor force participation ( the fraction of the adult population in the labor force ) The gradual decline in the growth rate of the adult population that has occurred since the baby-boom generation reached adulthood in the 1960s and 1970s is expected to continue into the next decade. Also strongly rising rates of labor force participation that have existed since the 1970s are expected to continue in coming years. Increases in overall participation likely will reflect continued entry of women into the work force higher participation by youth as they make up a smaller proportion of the population and a slowing of the decline in participation by people over Significantly lower marginal tax rates on labor income are expected to encourage labor force participation in the years ahead. Furthermore maintenance of a stable growing economy with expanding employment opportunities encourages increased labor force participation. Overall the civilian labor force is projected to rise percent per year during the projection period Civilian employment is projected to grow slightly faster than the labor force from to reflecting further modest declines in the rate of unemployment. The percent annual increase in the employment rate documented in the last column of the table reflects the estimated decline in the unemployment rate from current levels to percent by ( Chapter discusses the prospects for reductions in unemployment in coming years. ) The estimate of civilian employment growth is adjusted to cover the nonfarm business sector in order to match published statistics for productivity. A further adjustment to account for a slight projected decline in the length of the workweek yields the growth rate of total hours available for production indicated in Table The sum of the growth rate of total hours and the growth rate of output per hour ( productivity for nonfarm business ) determines the growth rate of nonfarm business output over the medium term. After adjustments are made for the effect of relatively stronger growth in the nonfarm business sector than in other sectors in the economy the rate of growth of real GNP is arrived at on the final line of Table The table shows that the average growth rate of the economy through is projected to be almost the same as the average rate of the postwar era despite slower growth of the adult population Growth of nonfarm business output averages percent annually for the projection period slightly higher than the percent average for the period. Slower population growth is projected to be offset by continued strong increases in labor force participation and a higher rate of productivity growth Critical to these projections is the assumption of a continued pickup in productivity growth from the low rates experienced during the 1970s and early 1980s. This assumption recognizes a number of favorable trends in the economy that are lifting productivity growth as well as policy initiatives that should promote technological change and growth in physical and human capital. Aging of the baby-boom generation implies a trend toward a more experienced more educated and more skilled work force that should translate into improved productivity growth in coming years. Furthermore labor productivity growth should rise as the result of increasing the ratio of the stock of physical capital to labor. Slower growth of the labor force will facilitate this process of " capital deepening " in coming years. Continued stability and gradual decline of the inflation rate also should contribute to stronger productivity growth by removing a major cause of distortions in the allocation of capital. Oil and energy prices are expected to remain lower than in the late 1970s and early 1980s implying that firms will have more resources to spend on investments that enhance general productivity rather than having to focus so heavily on investments that reduce energy costs Government policies also should contribute to increased productivity growth. Partly as a result of government initiatives research and development expenditures as a share of GNP are expected to remain higher than in the 1970s thus promoting innovation and technologi- cal change. Government initiatives to improve education and to promote investment in knowledge and human capital also should lift productivity growth. Tax reform has lessened the distortions to investment decisions by establishing more equal effective tax rates across investment activities. This effect coupled with policy initiatives to lower market barriers and distortions will allow capital and labor to realize more fully their productive potential CONCLUSION The current economic expansion entered its sixth year in and became the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. economic history Real GNP recorded a strong percent gain last year million new jobs were created and the unemployment rate dropped by nearly a full percentage point. Early in the year inflation rose temporarily into the percent range due primarily to rising energy prices. For the year as a whole however inflation remained in the percent range characteristic of the current expansion. An important transition was made from an expansion led by growth of domestic demand and with a deteriorating trade position to one in which improving real net exports made an important positive contribution to growth. The manufacturing sector in particular benefited from the improving trade situation recording substantial gains in employment and output. Dramatic progress was made in reducing the Federal deficit with a cut of one-third achieved in fiscal However some of the developments in particularly in the last quarter suggest a slower pace of economic advance in Interest rates rose persistently through the first three quarters of due primarily to the vigor of the expansion to increased worries about higher inflation and a lower dollar and to a tightening of monetary policy after years of relative ease. After the stock market drop on October interest rates declined significantly but still closed the year above the levels at which they had started it. The decline in stock prices cut the market value of equities back essentially to the level at the end of This loss of wealth together with the,effect of the stock market break on consumer confidence was widely anticipated to dampen the growth of consumer spending somewhat. In the fourth quarter of output continued to grow strongly but it ran well ahead of final demand leading to a buildup of inventories. Correction of this situation implies a period in which output grows more slowly than final demand. During strong growth of exports some recovery of consumer spending and anticipated growth of fixed investment should enable this inventory correction to be achieved in the context of continued economic expansion In sum the longevity of the current expansion and the robust growth exhibited in its most recent year testify convincingly to the dynamism and resilience of the U.S. economy. Inevitably no economic expansion proceeds at an absolutely even pace. The economy had a good year in better than in and certainly much better than in past years of recession or high inflation. This year does not promise to be quite as good as However the mistakes of the past are not being repeated. Inflationary pressures are not being built up that will once again distort the economy and impair its growth ultimately bringing on the wrenching readjustments of disinflation before a stable foundation for economic progress can be reestablished. Further progress toward the long-term goal of price level stability is in prospect. The Federal deficit has been reduced substantially and agreement has been reached on further reductions that do not undermine the benefits of low and stable marginal tax rates. The real trade deficit has begun to decline and its further narrowing promises to be an important source of strength for the U.S. economy. The present economic expansion and the substantial benefits it brings can continue through and beyond CHAPTER Rising Employment Productivity and Income " MAXIMUM EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION and purchasing power " are the fundamental goals of economic policy established by the Employment Act of These goals are among the most important criteria by which the success of the Administration 's economic policies must be assessed. The overall record of the last years is good. Since the longest peacetime expansion began in November million new jobs have been created ; production as measured by real gross national product ( GNP ) has increased by almost percent ; living standards as measured by real GNP per capita have grown at an average annual rate of percent ; and inflation is down from double digits to a percent annual rate Despite these accomplishments questions have been raised about the breadth of U.S. economic growth the strength of the industrial base and the rate at which incomes and productivity are rising. And as the unemployment rate recently approached its lowest levels in years people have wondered if further reductions in unemployment will accelerate inflation as has happened in the past Many of these concerns are based on misconceptions about recent trends in employment productivity and income growth. These trends indicate that ( ) most major demographic groups have shared in the employment and income gains realized during the current expansion ; ( ) employment growth has been strong particularly in highpaying occupations ; ( ) the U.S. industrial base remains strong and has not lost ground to other sectors of the economy ; ( ) incomes and productivity have rebounded after a period of slow growth in the 1970s ; and ( ) as U.S. economic growth continues further reductions in the unemployment rate can be sustained without the damaging effects of accelerated wage and price inflation These features of the current expansion have not only ensured increased employment production and income ; they also have improved the prospects for future growth. By virtue of its longevity and steadiness the recent economic expansion has simultaneously improved both living standards through increased employment and incomes and competitiveness through improved productivity. These gains in competitiveness can be expected to generate further gains in employment and incomes in the future EMPLOYMENT AND OUTPUT Strong employment growth is one of the outstanding features of the current expansion. Since the expansion began in November total employment has increased by million and the unemployment rate has fallen by percentage points to percent. By December the proportion of the working-age population employed reached a record percent and the unemployment rate stood at its lowest level since July and within percentage point of its lowest level since These employment gains exceeded the average rate of growth experienced in other postwar expansions and they far surpassed the growth rates of other major industrial countries. Employment has risen at a percent annual rate as compared to a percent rate in past expansions. The U.S. economy has added three times as many workers as the six other economic summit countries combined as measured from either or This accomplishment is remarkable considering that the combined working-age populations of these countries are more than one and one-half times the workingage population of the United States. This difference in growth reflects not only the rapidly growing U.S. labor force but also the more than tripling of unemployment rates in France Germany and the United Kingdom since the mid-1970s These strong gains in U.S. employment have been associated with a brisk rate of growth in real output. The real value of goods and services produced in the U.S. economy has increased at an annual rate of percent since the expansion began a pace that is comparable to the average rate of growth in other U.S. postwar expansions but exceeds the rate of growth experienced by many other major industrial countries. Only two other postwar expansions the first beginning in and including the Korean war and the second beginning in and including the Vietnam war have had faster real output growth over a 5-year period The recent strength of GNP growth in the United States as compared to other industrial countries marks a break from past trends Between and real GNP growth in the United States lagged behind output growth in the other six economic summit countries except the United Kingdom. In contrast since only output growth in Canada has exceeded growth in the United States THE BREADTH OF EMPLOYMENT GAINS Increases in employment and reductions in unemployment during the current expansion have affected all major demographic groups and virtually all areas of the country. During the current expansion unemployment rates for men and women have fallen by and percentage points respectively recording their largest declines of any expansion in the postwar era. This progress reflects both the depth of the recession and the durability of the current expansion. Moreover during this expansion the unemployment rate for women has fallen to nearly the same level as the unemployment rate for men in contrast to earlier periods when the rates for women were significantly higher than those for men Gains in employment and reductions in unemployment rates have been particularly large for minority groups. Employment of black workers has risen by million since November with black female employment rising by million and black male employment rising by million. As shown in Table these employment gains are significantly larger than those for other workers. As employment has risen unemployment rates for black males and black females have fallen by and percentage points respectively. Both the gains in employment and reductions in unemployment rates are substantially larger than those recorded during the expansion TABLE Changes in Employment and Unemployment by Selected Demographic Groups Unemployment rate Employment Demographic group1 to to to to to to Percentage point change Average annual percent change ALL CIVILIAN WORKERS Females Males Both sexes Black Females Males Both sexes Hispanic Persons years of age and over except as noted Note. Changes are measured from business cycle trough in March to business cycle peak in January from peak in January to trough in November and from trough in November to December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Civilian employment of Hispanic workers has risen million since the expansion began. In percentage terms the employment of Hispanics has risen much faster than the rest of the work force although more slowly than the rapid pace set during the late 1970s The rapid pace of Hispanic employment growth during the 1970s was partially due to rapid growth in the Hispanic labor force which between and grew by percent per year. Since the rate of Hispanic labor force growth has fallen by about one-third and this slowdown accounts for the difference in employment growth during these two expansions. In recent years the pace of Hispanic employment growth has exceeded the rate of growth in their labor force thus allowing their unemployment rate to fall by percentage points Youth employment has risen relatively slowly during the current expansion reflecting slower growth of the population between and years of age than during the 1970s. Yet employment gains for black youths have been among the strongest of all demographic groups. During alone employment of black teenagers increased by nearly the same amount as it did during the entire expansion. At the same time unemployment rates especially for black youths have declined dramatically. For all youths the unemployment rate declined by percentage points between November and December to reach its lowest level in years. For black youths the unemployment rate declined by percentage points to reach its lowest level in years. Unemployment among black youths is however still unacceptably high Gains in employment and reductions in unemployment rates also have been widespread geographically. Between November and November total employment increased in all but three States It increased by more than percent in States and by more than percent in States. During this period unemployment rates decreased in all but States declining by at least percentage points in States and by at least percentage points in States. Most States with small employment gains and small unemployment rate reductions were energy producers that were affected adversely by the decline in energy prices especially during The large and widespread gains in employment and reductions in unemployment rates during the past years are primary benefits of a long and vigorous economic expansion. These gains demonstrate the principle that economic growth benefits all groups who participate in the economic system. And conversely as shown in Table virtually all groups are injured during periods without economic growth as occurred between and CHANGES IN JOB QUALITY Employment gains during the current expansion have been largest in higher paying occupations. Nearly two-thirds of the new employment growth has been in managerial professional technical sales or precision production occupations. Within these broadly defined occupational categories employment growth has been strong for a wide variety of jobs. It has been less vigorous in lower paying low-skilled occupations and in part-time work For full-time workers data recently available on employment and earnings in nearly occupations show that about percent of the increase in full-time employment between and occurred in occupations with real median earnings of at least $ per year The median earnings of these occupations were at least percent above the median earnings of all full-time workers. Managerial and administrative jobs which tend to pay the highest wages and salaries and employ the most educated workers accounted for percent of the gains in employment even though these occupations accounted for only percent of all existing jobs in In contrast in low-paying occupations such as food preparation and services janitorial services and retail sales where new job growth is commonly thought to be strong the share of new employment growth was almost the same as the share of existing jobs. Employment growth was smallest relative to its share of all jobs for machine operators and other semiskilled blue-collar occupations Moreover studies have indicated that the share of total full-time employment accounted for by the lowest paying occupations declined during the 1970s and has continued to fall during the current expansion while the share accounted for by mid- and high-paying occupations has increased. Thus the growth in employment during the current expansion has not occurred solely in higher or lower paying occupations with fewer employed in the occupations in between The shift in employment toward higher paying occupations among full-time workers does not mask a shift from full-time to part-time employment. More than percent of the increase in employment during the current expansion has been in full-time work. This share exceeds the share of full-time employment in the civilian workforce For those employees who work part time the vast majority nearly percent work part time voluntarily according to surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) The fraction of part-time workers who report that they would prefer to work full time rose in the late 1970s. After increasing substantially during the and recessions it has fallen steadily during the current expansion SHIFTS IN SECTORAL OUTPUT AND EMPLOYMENT During the current expansion real manufacturing output has increased more rapidly than real GNP offsetting the effects of the recession and pushing the share of manufacturing output in real GNP very close to its peak for the postwar period. The share of final goods ( as distinct from services and structures ) has also risen and approached its highest level since In fact except for business cycle movements the shares of real manufacturing output and real final goods output have been remarkably stable for years. In contrast there has been a long and relatively steady decline in the fraction of all workers who are employed in manufacturing or in goods-producing industries and a consistent upward trend of the fraction employed in service-producing industries. More rapid gains in productivity in manufacturing and in goods-producing industries than in the rest of the economy have allowed declining shares of workers in these sectors to produce roughly constant shares of real GNP Shifts in Final Product The value of the economy 's total final product as measured by real GNP is divided officially into three broad categories : goods services and structures. The value of these products includes the contribution of intermediate goods and services from many different industries. For example the price of an automobile includes the value of the transportation provided by the railroad industry the value of the electricity provided by the utility industry and the value of the salesperson 's time provided by the retail industry. These particular services are not included as final services since their value is already embodied in the output of the goods sector Final goods and structures account for more than one-half of total output. These products ' share of real GNP has fallen slowly during the postwar era while the share of final services has risen gradually However since final goods ' share of GNP has remained roughly unchanged. In final goods represented percent of GNP the same share as in and only percentage point below its level in During the last two decades the slight gains in final services have coincided with a declining share of output in structures The relative stability of the shares of final goods services and structures in total GNP demonstrates that the United States is not becoming primarily a service economy While final goods ' share of GNP has remained stable over the last two decades there have been dramatic changes in the types of final goods produced and consumed. Since production of durable goods has risen substantially relative to nondurable goods. Even within these product categories there have been changes in the goods demanded by consumers. In durables consumption of books and kitchen appliances has fallen relative to motor vehicles and electronic equipment. Similarly in nondurables consumption of basic food stuffs has fallen relative to processed foods. These changes in the distribution of production across final products reflect the responses of the economy to changes in consumer demand Shifts in Value Added GNP also can be partitioned based on the contributions that particular industries or sectors make to the value of the final product Value added ( or GNP originating ) in an industry is the difference between the value of its output and the value of inputs purchased from other industries. For example the measure of value added in the motor vehicle industry removes the contribution of the railroad public utility and retail industries from the total value of an automobile. The remaining portion the value added represents the industry 's contribution to GNP Therefore the value added of the goods-producing sector ( which includes agriculture mining construction and manufacturing ) is not equal to the final value of goods and structures. In real value added by the goods-producing sectors accounted for percent of GNP whereas the share accounted for by final goods and structures was percent. The share of value added for the goods-producing industries has declined throughout the postwar period. The economy 's goods-producing sector accounted for percent of GNP in percent in and percent in The declining share in this sector has occurred entirely as a result of declining shares of value added in agriculture mining and construction The share of value added in manufacturing has remained remarkably stable throughout the postwar years fluctuating in a narrow range between and percent. The manufacturing sector 's share of value added has risen since the last business cycle peak in In manufacturing accounted for percent of GNP about percentage point above its share in and only percentage point below its peak share in Manufacturing 's share of GNP has remained stable despite substantial changes in the types of final goods services and structures produced in the economy. These changes reflect the shifting demands for final goods by consumers and for intermediate goods by producers. To accommodate the shifting demand for new products capital and labor have been reemployed in new tasks in the manufacturing sector. This sector has maintained its share of total output because it has adapted to the changing demand for final goods and because it continues to be an important supplier of intermediate products for final services Shifts in Employment Large shifts in employment of labor across industrial sectors have occurred during the postwar period. The share of employment in service-producing industries has risen steadily. In these industries ( which include transportation communications public utilities wholesale and retail trade finance insurance and real estate and other business and personal services ) accounted for nearly percent of all nonfarm payroll employees and they contributed more than percent of total GNP. Over the years the share of employment in the service-producing sector increased faster than its share of GNP. Recently the share of employed individuals working in this sector has exceeded percent while the share of total value added in this sector has topped percent Movements in the share of employment in goods-producing industries are roughly the opposite of such movements in the share for service-producing industries. The share of goods-producing employment and manufacturing employment has declined throughout the postwar era. Currently there are million fewer nonfarm jobs in the goods-producing sector and more than million fewer jobs in manufacturing than in The share of total employment in manufacturing has declined from percent in to percent in to percent in Moreover this trend is not confined to the United States. In all the major industrial countries shares of employment in manufacturing have been declining since at least and in all except Japan the absolute level of employment in manufacturing has been declining since CHANGING PATTERNS OF DEMAND AND PRODUCTIVITY While manufacturing 's share of employment has declined its share of value added has remained roughly constant. These trends are illustrated by Chart which compares the ratio of manufacturing employment to total nonfarm employment with the ratio of value added in manufacturing to real nonagricultural gross domestic product ( GDP ) In about percent of all nonfarm workers were employed in manufacturing and produced approximately percent of total output. By a slightly larger proportion of total output was produced by percent of nonfarm workers. This trend does not suggest any long-term weakness in the manufacturing sector. Instead it reflects stronger productivity growth in manufacturing than in other sectors of the economy More generally the rise in the share of employment in the serviceproducing sector and the corresponding decline in the manufacturing sector reflect expected responses to changing patterns of demand for goods and services as well as differential rates of productivity growth among various sectors of the economy. For most of the past years the output of services has risen faster than real GNP because households have wanted to spend a larger fraction of their rising incomes Real Output and Employment Shares in Manufacturing Percent Employment ShareV Real Output Shared b ru i i i i I i i i i i I I I I I I I I I I I I I -V Manufacturing as percent of nonfarm payroll employment -2/Manufacturing as percent of real gross domestic product less agriculture forestry and fisheries Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor on services. The output of services can rise faster than GNP when productivity growth is more rapid in the service-producing sector than in the rest of the economy or when employment expands more quickly in services than in goods. However productivity growth in much of the service-producing sector lagged somewhat behind productivity growth in the goods-producing sector until and it has stagnated since then. The large gains in output of services have been fueled not by productivity advances but by relatively large increases in employment. Thus the increase in the share of employment in the service sector is the result of growing demand and lagging measured productivity Like manufacturing the agricultural sector 's share of total employment has exhibited a downward trend for some time. Productivity growth in agriculture has been quite strong while its share of national output has been falling. As discussed in Chapter it is estimated that in approximately percent of the U.S. labor force was employed in agriculture. In agriculture 's share was approximately percent ; in it had fallen to percent. During this long period the share of agricultural output declined less rapidly than the share of agricultural employment reflecting rapid increases in productivity Even though agricultural employment as a share of total employment and agricultural output as a share of total output have decreased Americans today are significantly better fed and spend a smaller fraction of their incomes on agricultural products than they did during the 19th century. Because of rapid and sustained increases in agricultural productivity the small fraction of the U.S. labor force working in agriculture is able to produce all the food required for domestic consumption plus a substantial surplus available for export Forestalling the downward trends in the shares of agricultural employment and output would have been counterproductive. Despite the interference of many agricultural policies resources have moved into and out of agriculture in response to changes in consumer demand agricultural productivity and nonfarm opportunities Similarly it would be a serious policy error to attempt to maintain the share of output or employment in manufacturing or in any other industry. The relative constancy of the share of U.S. manufacturing output for the past years is a consequence of particular circumstances. It is not an appropriate objective for economic policy. The declining share of employment in manufacturing in the United States and other industrial countries is not a sign of economic weakness Indeed even though it has contributed to a decline in the share of employment in manufacturing the acceleration of productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing during the 1980s is unambiguously a source of economic strength INCOME AND PRODUCTIVITY By the broadest available measure American living standards have resumed a steady rate of increase during the 1980s after a period of sluggish growth in the 1970s. To a large extent these gains reflect improved productivity growth. During the 1970s gains in real GNP per capita resulted primarily from an increasing proportion of working-age persons in the population and signified little gain for individual workers. During the 1980s by contrast improved productivity growth has allowed more rapid growth in compensation per worker These gains in labor compensation are broad-based benefiting all major demographic groups. Furthermore the upswing in productivity growth will sustain gains in both per capita income and labor compensation in the coming years Another beneficial effect of improved productivity growth has been its impact on the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector. Com- bined with slower compensation growth higher productivity growth in manufacturing has reduced the real cost of producing manufactured goods. The benefits of these cost savings have been realized broadly across the economy through lower consumer prices. Together with the recent depreciation of the dollar lower real costs and lower relative prices of manufactured products have enhanced the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers in world markets thereby contributing to recent strong growth of exports These gains would have been impossible however had labor and management failed to take advantage of opportunities for productivity improvement or if they had failed to meet the challenges posed by foreign competition. The many collective bargaining agreements that have called for wage freezes or concessions and that have addressed labor 's concerns about job security and management 's concerns about work rules reflect the cooperation of labor and management As a result the manufacturing sector has corrected many of the important problems that plagued it a decade ago and it stands wellpositioned for the future INCREASES IN LIVING STANDARDS The broadest measure of the economy 's ability to support the living standards of the American people is the real value of all goods and services produced in the economy each year divided by the total population i.e. real GNP per capita. As indicated in Table real GNP per capita has grown at an annual rate of percent since the last business cycle peak in This rate of growth has approached the rapid rate recorded between and has exceeded the rate experienced between the business cycle peaks in and and has equaled the average rate achieved in the United States since TABLE Growth in Real GNP per Capita and Productivity [ Average annual percent change ] Contribution to real GNP per capita Real GNP per capita Period Real GNP per worker Employmentpopulation ratio Workingage population as share of total Business sector productivity IV to III III to IV IV to IV IV to IV Output per hour all persons Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Real GNP per capita rises when a larger fraction of the population works or when those who work produce more. As indicated in Table the importance of these two factors in generating higher living standards has differed over time. Between and real GNP per worker grew rapidly and more than offset the decline in the proportion of the population at work. The high birth rates of the 1950s increased the share of children in the population thus causing a decline in the share of working-age persons. Between the mid-1960s and the early 1980s productivity growth declined significantly but an increase in the fraction of the population at work partially offset these losses and helped to maintain a steady rate of growth in real GNP per capita Productivity growth slowed during the mid-1960s just as the babyboom generation began to enter the labor force. This influx of inexperienced workers slowed productivity growth but did not entirely account for the slowdown. From to growth in real GNP per worker averaged only one-third of its earlier postwar rate and it nearly ground to a halt between and Yet living standards continued to rise during these periods because the fraction of the population employed increased dramatically. As the baby-boom generation matured the proportion of children in the population fell and the potential pool of workers increased. During the middle and late 1970s nearly all gains in living standards resulted from an increase in the share of the population at work In contrast living standards have risen faster since because of accelerated productivity growth. While the rate of growth of real GNP per worker remains well below that achieved during the early -postwar era these gains represent a substantial improvement over the 1970s. In addition to the encouraging gains in productivity growth increases in the fraction of the population working continue to contribute to rising living standards. During the current decade as women have entered the labor force in increasing numbers the employment to population ratio has grown rapidly. This effect has been offset by slower growth in the share of the population years of age and older. The decline in the birth rate since ensured that during the 1980s the share of adults in the population would grow more slowly and that increases in this share would play a lesser role in raising living standards than they did in earlier decades In the longer term strong growth in living standards at rates comparable to those of the early postwar era will require continued steady growth in productivity. Increases in the fraction of the population at work are likely to slow to about percent per year ; the share of working-age persons in the population is forecast to grow at percent and the employment-population ratio is forecast to grow at percent over the next years ( Chapter ) Thus in the years ahead further gains in real GNP per worker will be the key to continuing rapid increases in living standards Gains in real GNP per worker are closely related to standard measures of productivity growth. These measures differ because labor productivity usually refers to output per hour in the business sector of the economy rather than output per worker for the whole economy. If the second and last columns of Table are compared it is apparent that labor productivity growth is generally somewhat higher but follows the same general pattern as growth of real GNP per worker. This difference reflects both a decline in the number of hours worked per worker during the postwar period and slower measured productivity growth in the nonbusiness sector which constitutes one-seventh of the economy. Nonetheless the implication from these two productivity measures is that recent gains in living standards are the consequence of recent increases in labor productivity growth and that future gains in living standards depend critically on continued labor productivity growth LABOR COMPENSATION AND PER CAPITA INCOME The growth of labor productivity exerts a powerful influence on the compensation earned by workers. Payments to workers either in the form of wages and salaries or nonwage benefits can not consistently outstrip labor productivity growth without diminishing incentives for investment. Over time slower investment is likely to mean slower growth in labor demand labor productivity and labor compensation. Conversely strong labor productivity growth means that firms can increase their workers ' pay and benefits without impairing profits The experience of the United States and other major industrial countries is broadly consistent with this linkage between hourly compensation and labor productivity growth. After a period of sluggish or declining growth during the 1970s U.S. productivity and compensation growth rebounded after Recent rates of growth however remain below the levels attained between and when compensation and nonfarm business sector productivity grew by percent and percent respectively. After the rates of productivity growth slowed considerably and real compensation actually declined slightly. Since productivity growth has averaged percent per year up from percent during the previous decade while compensation growth has resumed its upward trend averaging percent per year. Similarly in the other leading industrial countries there has been a significant slowdown in labor productivity and compensation growth since the early 1970s After the early 1970s measures of real labor earnings in the United States showed an even more pronounced slowdown in growth than real labor compensation. As shown in Chart real hourly earnings ( for production and nonsupervisory workers ) grew rapidly during the late 1960s reaching a peak in They then fell by percent between and and in real hourly earnings remained percent below their peak level. Other measures of earnings such as real weekly earnings of usual full-time workers are similar and were lower in than in Chart _ _ _ Real Hourly Earnings and Compensation { Deflated by CPI-W and CPI-U-X1 ) Index = Real Compensation ( CPI-U-X1 ) y/ / " " " " ~ ~ y ^ \ \ /f / / ' / \ fS ^ / /V * ~ " Real Earnings { CPI-U-X1 } \ y \ \ % \ \ Real Earnings ( CPI-W ) A * ^ % \ i i i i i l i i i _ i i i i ^ y i " * i i i i t Note. Data relate to average hourly earnings of production workers or nonsupervisory employees on nonfarm payrolls and to average hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector ( all persons ) CPI-U-X1 is the consumer price index for all urban consumers incorporating a rental equivalence measure for homeownership costs. Data for are preliminary Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers The pattern exhibited by the real earnings data is broadly consistent with movements in labor productivity but it significantly distorts the impression of what has been happening to the level of real payments to labor. The consumer price index ( CPI ) used to correct for inflation in constructing real earnings series overstated increases in homeowner costs before This distortion caused the rate of inflation to be overstated and measures of real earnings to be too low Furthermore data on earnings do not include employer-provided benefits ( such as most pensions and health insurance ) and employer contributions to social security. The share of such employer-provided benefits and contributions is estimated to have risen from percent of labor earnings in to percent in Real labor compensation growth slowed during the 1970s but nevertheless maintained an upward trend and is substantially above its levels of the early 1970s. The second line in Chart shows the effect of using an alternative price index to correct for inflation when calculating real earnings. The BLS devised this index the CPI-U-X1 to correct for the biases in the CPI during the 1970s. As seen in the chart real earnings deflated by the CPI-U-X1 do not exhibit a substantial decline after If the measure of earnings is broadened to include other nonwage and nonsalary income real hourly labor compensation of all workers is even higher. The third line in Chart shows that real compensation grew between and and that it is presently percent higher than in In general the real incomes of American families also have risen since with most of these gains recorded after Real family income measures the total labor compensation and nonlabor money income of households with two or more related persons. Real income for the median family measured in dollars declined from $ in to $ in and rose to only $ in As with measures of real earnings for workers measures of real family incomes suffer from the bias in the CPI which overestimates inflation during the 1970s. After correcting for this bias by using the CPI-U-X1 real family income still shows a $ decline between and However the adjusted real median family income in was the highest in U.S. history and $ higher than in Changes in the composition of families account for part of the trend in real family income. Over time an increasing number of people have set up households separate from their parents or children. Thus the number of separate households ( made up of either families or unrelated individuals ) has grown relative to the size of the population and average family size has decreased Data on income per capita confirm that the trend toward lower family incomes during the 1970s was mainly due to smaller family sizes not lower compensation. When the standard CPI is used to correct for inflation real income per capita measured in dollars was unchanged at $ between and and then rose $ to $ in When the CPI-U-X1 is used to correct for inflation income per capita rose $ between and and $ between and Gains in real per capita income have been widespread across major demographic groups. When the CPI-U-X1 is used to adjust for infla- tion real per capita income for whites rose percent between and and percent between and For blacks real per capita income rose percent between and and percent between and For Hispanics real per capita income was up percent between and and percent between and These gains in real per capita income for major demographic groups and the gains for the total population are broadly consistent with movements in real GNP per capita and productivity DETERMINANTS OF PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH Productivity growth which contributes to gains in living standards and compensation results from the combined effects of many factors The productivity of labor is increased by human capital ( such as education and work experience ) by physical capital by research and development and by energy and other inputs that cooperate with labor in production. Studies that have sought to identify the total contribution of these factors generally have been able to account for about one-half of the productivity gains during the postwar period. In most studies a significant fraction of productivity growth remains ascribed to general " technological advance " that is not observed directly Nevertheless there is some consensus concerning the factors that contributed to the slowing of productivity growth during the middle and late 1970s and its subsequent reversal during the 1980s. These factors include a growing proportion of persons in the labor force with little work experience a proliferation of new government regulations a lower level of research and development ( R&D ) expenditures relative to GNP and higher energy prices. The impact of these factors was reversed during the 1980s yielding higher productivity growth which seems likely to continue into the future In the coming years the increasing work experience of a maturing labor force and higher levels of educational attainment should yield significant gains in productivity. In addition the policies and investments of the current decade should also contribute substantially to productivity growth. In the years ahead the effects of tax reform higher R&D spending and the removal of burdensome regulation will improve productivity by encouraging greater efficiency in production SECTORAL DIFFERENCES IN PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH The increase in productivity growth since has not occurred evenly across different sectors of the economy. Productivity in manufacturing rose at a rapid percent annual rate between and These considerable productivity gains represent a substantial improvement over the rates of growth achieved during the rest of the postwar era. From to productivity growth in this sector slowed to a percent annual rate after growing by percent per year between and By comparison the productivity performance of the nonmanufacturing sector during the last years has been poor. In this sector unofficial measures of productivity growth slowed starting in the mid-1960s remained unchanged between and and began to creep upward once again at a percent annual rate during the current decade. Not only are these rates of growth substantially lower than those in the manufacturing sector but they are also considerably lower than the percent annual rate of growth realized in the nonmanufacturing sector between and The BLS does not report official estimates of labor productivity growth for the nonmanufacturing sector or for the major components of this sector. However the Department of Commerce 's measures of real value added together with BLS 's measures of hours paid can be used to estimate labor productivity growth for each industry between and These measures of the growth of real value added per hour are shown in Table The data suggest that labor productivity has failed to grow in several nonmanufacturing industries since in contrast to the strong growth that has occurred in manufacturing TABLE Growth in Value Added per Hour Paid [ Average annual percent change except as noted ] output share ( percent ) Sector to to to Goods-producing : _ Transportation.. Communication. Utilities Trade Wholesale. Retail Farm Mining Construction Manufacturing. Durable manufacturing Nondurable manufacturing.. Service-producing : Finance insurance and real estate. Services Government enterprises BUSINESS. Detail does not add to total because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers By these value-added measures of productivity growth productivity gains in agriculture and communications have been strong throughout the postwar period. In manufacturing mining and wholesale and retail trade productivity grew rapidly until the early 1970s slowed after and has accelerated since to match or exceed its early postwar performance. In transportation and public utilities the pattern is similar to manufacturing but productivity growth since has not returned to early postwar levels. In construction in finance insurance and real estate ( FIRE ) and in services ( including business services and personal services such as health care ) value added per hour grew steadily until the mid-1960s and very little thereafter. Since productivity in these areas actually has fallen In construction for example real value added per hour peaked in and now has fallen to its level. Given the strong recovery of productivity growth in manufacturing and the apparent gains in mining and in wholesale and retail trade it appears that the failure of total business sector productivity to regain its early postwar growth rate can be attributed largely to the continued sagging productivity in construction FIRE and service industries Alternative measures of productivity developed by the BLS confirm these differing patterns of productivity growth across industries. The BLS 's productivity measures use gross output instead of value added to measure product. They are available on a selective basis for industries for which the BLS has been able to quantify final output with reasonable reliability. For manufacturing industries coverage is quite broad but not complete. The available data for manufacturing industries generally show a slowdown of productivity growth between and and an acceleration after The same holds true for most specific industries in mining and in wholesale and retail trade though coverage is less extensive than for manufacturing In the transportation sector airlines railroads and petroleum pipelines show a dramatic resurgence of productivity growth after a significant slowdown between and Only the series for bus carriers indicates continued sluggish productivity growth after Data on telephone productivity confirm the pattern of rapid growth in value added per hour in the communications industry indicated in Table For FIRE the only series available is for commercial banks ; it shows a significant acceleration of productivity growth after For other service industries coverage is limited ; the available series for hotels and motels laundry and cleaning and beauty and barber shops cover about percent of total employment in this sector. These data show declining or much slower growth in produc- tivity since For construction there is no available measure of productivity growth based on final output PROBLEMS OF PRODUCTIVITY MEASUREMENT Based on measures of both value added and gross output per hour productivity growth appears strong in agriculture mining manufacturing communications and wholesale and retail trade. In transportation and FIRE the data show mixed results on the strength of productivity growth. In construction and services measured productivity has stagnated or even fallen. The recent decline in value added per hour an construction ^ FIRE and services occurred despite the introduction of new communication and information processing systems and many advances in health care technology. For these sectors not only does the pattern of growth in value added per hour diverge from that seen in manufacturing it also appears inconsistent with observed improvements in technology The forces behind the apparent deterioration of productivity in construction FIRE and services are not well understood. Problems in measuring value added and in apportioning output across sectors may partly explain the apparent poor productivity performance in these sectors. For example measures of real value added are derived by deflating the nominal value of outputs and inputs by appropriate price deflators. Constructing price indexes that correctly account for changes in the quality of outputs and inputs can be difficult especially when there is no physical output or when changes in quality are hard to measure or even observe. The limited coverage of productivity measures based on gross output in construction FIRE and services indicates the problems faced in these sectors. The BLS currently is expanding the coverage of these productivity measures. In the meantime however they recommend that productivity measures based on value added should not be used as reliable measures of productivity in construction FIRE and services The quality of productivity measures in these sectors does not necessarily affect the reliability of measures for the business sector as a whole. Business sector productivity is not a weighted average of productivity in each industry but is the real value of final goods services and structures produced per hour worked. However since value added can be hard to measure both because of problems in measuring real output and real input the potential for mismeasurement of business sector productivity exists as long as industries with poor measures of value added also produce final products. The final sales of construction FIRE and services account for about one-third of the final product in the business sector. Thus distortions of these sectors ' valued added increases the possibility of mismeasuring busi- ness sector productivity. If the price index used to deflate the nominal value of final services understates the impact of quality changes real output and business sector productivity also will be understated The possibility that problems of measurement may be the cause of apparently slower productivity growth in the business sector should not be overstated. For one thing some studies indicate that only about percent of final product is measured poorly. For another thing the same procedures measured significant gains in valued added per hour in construction FIRE and services before the mid-1960s. Thus there is nothing inherent in these measurement procedures that would cause productivity growth in these sectors to appear to worsen in recent years. The disparity between measures of value added per hour in construction FIRE and services before and after the mid1960s could be explained either by workers becoming less productive or by increasingly severe problems of measurement. Currently however there is insufficient evidence to support either hypothesis In sum there is clear evidence of a substantial improvement in the rate of productivity growth in manufacturing and several other sectors of the economy. These gains seem likely to continue. In contrast there is no compelling explanation for the apparent decline in productivity in construction FIRE and services. It may be due partly to measurement problems. However until improved output measures are developed it is unlikely that productivity growth in these sectors will be better understood than it is now COMPETITION AND ADJUSTMENT IN MANUFACTURING The increase in productivity growth in the business sector and the increase in living standards since are explained largely by the dramatic strengthening of productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing However the benefits of stronger productivity growth in manufacturing have not been realized primarily in the real wages of manufacturing workers or in the profits of manufacturing enterprises. Instead they have resulted in lower prices for manufactured products and greater purchasing power for consumers. This result reflects the normal operation of a competitive economy supplemented by intense international competition in manufactured products In a competitive economy relatively strong productivity growth in one sector generally will not translate into relatively faster real wage growth for that sector 's workers or strong profit growth for that sector 's enterprises. Price competition and the mobility of labor and capital ensure that sectoral differences in wage growth and profit growth will not persist. Instead sectoral differences in productivity growth tend to result in lower costs in sectors with faster growing productivity and these lower costs are passed on to consumers in the form of lower product prices. Over the long run wage growth in different sectors generally reflects average labor productivity growth in the whole economy. And since higher rates of return attract additional capital investment profit rates in different sectors also tend over time to reflect the rate of return for the economy as a whole This process has been apparent in U.S. agriculture for many decades. Labor productivity in agriculture typically has increased two or three times faster than productivity in the U.S. economy as a whole However the earnings of agricultural workers and the profits of farm owners have not risen relative to comparable earnings and profits in the rest of the economy. Instead consumers have been the primary beneficiaries of strong productivity growth in agriculture through declining relative prices of agricultural products Similarly in U.S. manufacturing since the real hourly compensation of manufacturing workers has risen by percent per year while labor productivity growth has surged ahead at a percent annual rate. Profits of manufacturing corporations generally leveled off during the 1980s but rose sharply in Relative to net sales real after-tax profits of manufacturing corporations were still percent below their averages through the first three quarters of The primary benefit from stronger productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing has been lower unit labor costs relative to the total private business sector. This reduction in costs has translated into substantial reductions in prices of manufactured products Between and the relative unit labor costs for manufactured products have fallen by percent and the relative prices of manufacturing output have fallen by percent Intense international competition enhanced productivity growth and influenced the allocation of its benefits among consumers workers and firms. The relative price of foreign manufactured products sold in U.S. markets fell sharply between and This decline in import prices was caused in large part by the strong appreciation of the U.S. dollar between and early ( Chapter ) Intense competition from foreign producers put pressure on U.S manufacturers to keep their costs and prices down by limiting wage and profit growth and by enhancing productivity growth. The consumers of manufactured products thus were the primary beneficiaries of foreign competition and stronger productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing The adjustment of U.S manufacturing to increased international competition was facilitated by the cooperation of labor and management. In manufacturing where more than one-third of the wage and salary workers were union members in these adjustments required a break from the customary patterns of collective bargaining agreements in which wage increases often reflected trends in productivity growth and inflation. During the 1970s union real wage growth slowed just as productivity growth slowed but the wages of comparable nonunion workers tended to grow even more slowly. As a consequence the difference between the earnings of union and nonunion workers widened during the decade implying higher relative costs for unionized firms. The combination of higher relative costs and increased foreign competition threatened the competitiveness of many U.S. industries. Manufacturing was particularly sensitive to these problems because of the relatively high levels of unionization and import competition in this sector. Continued growth of this sector required adjustments in wage demands and improvements in labor productivity The adjustment of U.S. workers and manufacturing firms in many cases has been especially difficult and costly. Some workers have been displaced the real earnings of others have declined and profits have fallen. Partially as a result of these changes the level of unionization dropped to about percent of wage and salary workers in manufacturing. Since the compensation of private nonfarm union workers has grown more slowly than for nonunion workers. As illustrated in Table pay increases have been smaller for unionized workers in manufacturing than elsewhere in the economy. Effective nominal average wage increases in major collective bargaining settlements ( agreements affecting more than workers ) in manufacturing have ranged between percent and percent from through Moreover because inflation has averaged roughly percent per year many of these settlements have reduced workers ' real wages This downward trend in real wages is due partly to the relatively large fraction of collective bargaining agreements negotiated during the 1980s that froze or cut wages. Before widespread negotiated wage freezes or outright cuts in pay were unusual even during periods of low inflation. However since particularly in the manufacturing sector these agreements have become common. Even in after years of economic growth percent of manufacturing workers covered by new major collective bargaining agreements accepted wage freezes or pay cuts over the life of their contracts Moreover the recent decline in the real compensation of union members has continued even when taking into account noncpntingent lump-sum payments which have appeared in many recent agreements By recognizing the challenges posed by foreign competitors labor and management cooperated to improve the international competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing. The U.S. economy benefited substan- TABLE Measures of Changes in Compensation and Wages [ Private nonfarm industries ] Sector ^ Percent change2 Compensation : All industries Union workers Nonunion workers Percent Average effective wage adjustment : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Percent of.workers affected Settlements with no wage increase : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturirtg Preliminary Percent change from December to December Average effective wage adjustment in collective bargaining settlements covering workers or more. Includes increases decreases and no changes in wages stemming from current settlements agreements reached in a prior period and cost-of-living adjustment clauses Annual wage adjustments over the life of the contract for settlements covering workers or more reached in year Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics tially through increased productivity growth and improved living standards. Now that the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar has fallen back to the level of the early 1980s U.S. manufacturing is exceptionally well positioned to expand sales in both domestic and foreign markets a process that has been under way at a rapid pace for more than a year and that is likely to provide the key to continued growth for the U.S. economy in the years immediately ahead UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION After hovering close to percent for nearly years the unemployment rate fell by nearly percentage point during to its lowest level since This sudden drop in the unemployment rate has raised concerns that labor markets may be tightening to the point where wage inflation may begin to accelerate. In when the unemployment rate was percent and before the second oil shock there were already clear signs of increases in the rates of wage and price inflation. In the present situation however there is little evidence of an acceleration of inflation and there are signs that further gradual reductions in the unemployment rate can be achieved without an increase in inflationary pressures FRICTIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT Even at full employment there is some " factional unemployment " associated with job changes by current workers and entry of new workers into the labor force. Matching workers to jobs is costly and time consuming. Firms and workers seek employment relationships that best match the skills of the worker with the production requirements of the firm. Workers do not necessarily accept their first job offer nor do employers fill vacancies with the first job applicant Even when job opportunities are relatively abundant workers who lose their jobs at one firm workers who quit voluntarily to seek better jobs and workers who enter or reenter the labor force often take some time to find suitable employment. Consequently even when the supply of and demand for labor are evenly balanced in the aggregate there will be some unemployment in the economy associated with job transitions Since demographic groups differ in their job turnover rates and in the frequency with which they leave and reenter the labor force changes in the demographic composition of the labor force affect the level of unemployment. During the 1970s the composition of the labor force changed as increasing numbers of young persons single persons and married women entered the workforce. Since these groups have higher unemployment rates the overall level of unemployment would have risen. This upward pressure on the unemployment rate was mitigated however by the growing fraction of workers with either higher levels of education or with white-collar and service sector jobs. These groups have lower unemployment rates relative to other labor force participants. Studies differ as to the combined effect of these changes in the labor force but by the late 1970s they may have increased the unemployment rate by as much as a percentage point The growing number of two-earner families and the effects of unemployment insurance do not appear to have contributed to increases in frictional unemployment. The available evidence suggests that husbands with working wives do not remain unemployed for longer periods of time than husbands whose wives do not work. In fact the unemployment rates for married men with working wives are slightly lower than those for married men whose wives remain at home. Although studies show that unemployment compensation increases the duration of unemployment the fraction of wages replaced by unemployment benefits has not risen significantly since the late 1960s. Moreover the share of unemployed workers who receive unemployment benefits has fallen since the early 1970s especially in recent years The factors that have caused frictional unemployment to increase since the early 1970s explain only a fraction of the total increase in unemployment rates since that time. Overall U.S. unemployment rates have been substantially higher since than they were in the early postwar period. Between and the civilian unemployment rate averaged percent ; it averaged more than percent in only recession years and Since the civilian unemployment rate has averaged percent and it has averaged less than percent in only years and Furthermore unemployment rates have risen for all demographic groups. Even adult married men a group with traditionally low unemployment rates have experienced the same proportional increase in their unemployment rates as teenagers a group with traditionally high unemployment rates. Increases in frictional unemployment associated with shifting demographic patterns can not explain these broad increases in unemployment rates since the early 1970s The deep recessions of and and the brief recession in partly explain higher average unemployment after During these years unemployment rates rose to their highest levels since the Great Depression ; thus they have influenced the average level of unemployment during the last years. The depth of these recessions and limits on the feasible speed of securing reductions in the unemployment rate especially in the face of a rapidly expanding labor force also partly may explain the high average level of unemployment. However there is no evidence that increases in frictional unemployment can account for unemployment rates in or that are higher than in the later years of expansions during the 1950s and 1960s. Moreover demographic shifts that tended to increase unemployment during the 1970s more recently have been pushing down the frictional unemployment rate reversing perhaps one-half of the earlier rise/Further downward movement in frictional unemployment from anticipated demographic shifts especially the continuing decline in the share of younger workers suggests that further reductions in unemployment are feasible in the coming years INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT TRADEOFF With the unemployment rate below percent during the second half of some people have been concerned that further reductions in unemployment may not be possible without serious risk of accelerating inflation. The belief that further reductions in the unemployment rate may not be feasible is based on the view that there is a systematic tradeoff between lower unemployment and higher inflation and that the unemployment rate has fallen to a level where inflation is likely to accelerate. This view states that when the unem- ployment rate is low and labor markets are tight firms will face increased pressures to raise wages in order to attract and maintain a qualified and stable work force. Thus without a corresponding increase in productivity unit labor costs also will rise and these increased costs will be reflected in higher product prices The performance of the U.S. economy during the 1950s and 1960s as illustrated in Chart was consistent with the notion of a stable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. Unemployment tended to be low in the years when inflation rates were high Chart Wage Inflation and Unemployment Percent change in average hourly earnings ^ \ \ ? \ \ \ x \ V \ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ f g ? I I * t I I ^ ~ ^ ~ ^ --_ ~ ~ ^ ~ I I ^ ^ \ Civilian Unemployment Rate ( Percent ) -I/For production workers or nonsupervisory employees on nonfarm payrolls Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers During the stagflation of the 1970s however this empirical relationship ceased to hold. Years of high inflation often were associated with high unemployment rates. In the absence of a stable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment some studies postulated that the tradeoff shifted over time due to changes in inflationary expectations Support for this view came from the observation that during each of the prior postwar expansions wage inflation tended to rise as the unemployment rate fell. However the observation of a shifting relationship between inflation and unemployment explains little if most of the actual behavior of inflation and unemployment is attributed to unexplained shifts rather than to the purported relationship Recent data provide little evidence of a tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. In the United States the inflation rate as measured by the CPI has been running close to percent per year since the end of The inflation rate fell temporarily to percent in and then it rose temporarily to more than percent in early mainly due to swings in energy prices. However when energy prices are excluded from the CPI inflation has been approximately percent for years ( Chapter ) During this 6-year period the inflation rate has been essentially constant while the unemployment rate has fallen almost full percentage points from percent at its peak in November to percent in December Wages and earnings also have shown little evidence of accelerating as the unemployment rate has declined during the current expansion The average unemployment rate fell from percent in to percent in below the level at which inflation was beginning to accelerate during the expansion. Unemployment rates fell in every region of the country during with especially sharp reductions in the Northeast and in the energy-producing States. Yet this substantial reduction in unemployment during was not accompanied by a sharp increase in nominal wage rates. For the year the wages of production and nonsupervisory workers increased by percent compared with an average annual rate of increase of percent during the previous years of the expansion Recent experience in other countries also appears to contradict the notion of a stable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. In many Western European countries unemployment rates generally have been rising since the early 1970s and they have risen throughout most of the current expansion. In contrast rates of wage and price inflation in these countries generally have fallen since and they are now typically lower than they were in the middle and late 1970s. Based on the experience of the 1950s and 1960s these reductions in inflation rates have been much smaller than would have been expected given the increases in unemployment rates. Comparisons of inflation rates with unemployment rates for Western European countries for the 1950s through the 1980s show no consistent relationship Evidence concerning a possible relationship between inflation and unemployment suggests that the U.S. economy can reduce unemployment rates further without suffering from accelerating inflation. Perhaps as recent experience appears to show there is no meaningful tradeoff. Over wide ranges inflation and unemployment can move largely independently. Further reductions in unemployment that are the result of natural economic adjustments as opposed to monetary or fiscal stimulation can occur without increased risk of accelerating inflation. Alternatively if there is a shifting tradeoff between inflation and unemployment the evidence in Chart would suggest that the U.S. economy has returned to the relationship that existed in the 1950s and 1960s. If this is the situation then it would also appear that further reductions of unemployment can occur without a serious risk of significant increases in inflation PROSPECTS FOR REDUCING UNEMPLOYMENT In assessing the potential for further reductions in the unemployment rate and the problems in securing such reductions it is helpful to examine the distribution of unemployment by geographic region and by duration of unemployment. Regional data point to the promise of reducing the national unemployment rate toward the low levels now prevailing in some regions and securing this reduction in regions where unemployment remains high. Data on the duration of unemployment point to the significance of long-term unemployment associated with job displacements of more experienced workers and to the benefits of avoiding deep recessions and massive economic disruptions that tend to generate long-term unemployment on a broad scale While employment gains have been widespread across regions during the current expansion substantial regional differences in unemployment rates continued to exist in As shown in Table the unemployment rate in New England was percent in well below the national average of percent and down percentage points from the unemployment rate in this region during the recession year of In contrast unemployment in in the West South Central region ( Louisiana Oklahoma Texas and Arkansas ) was percent well above the national average and percentage points above the unemployment rate in this region during This energy-producing region was sheltered somewhat from the effects of the recession by continued high energy prices but it suffered significantly from the sharp decline of energy prices in The relatively low rates of unemployment in the Middle Atlantic South Atlantic and especially the New England regions indicate that there is no inherent barrier that prevents the unemployment rate from falling below percent. Studies have shown that the difference among regional unemployment rates is not explained by differences in the characteristics of the region 's labor force and the composition of the region 's industrial base. The data reported in Table show that the regions with relatively high unemployment rates during the TABLE Regional Unemployment Rates Selected Years [ Percent1 ] Region New England Middle Atlantic South Atlantic East North Central West North Central East South Central Mountain Pacific U.S. unemployment rate West South Central Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force January-November average Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers expansion were not the same as those which had relatively high unemployment rates in Thus for the most part regional characteristics do not appear to cause unemployment rates to be permanently higher in some parts of the country than in others Recent data indicate somewhat higher rates of wage increase in regions where unemployment rates are relatively low. The rate of wage inflation however remains moderate even in New England where the unemployment rate has been at or below percent since mid1986. Since the national unemployment rate is well above New England 's rate the data on regional unemployment and wage inflation certainly do not suggest that the economy is about to suffer from a general acceleration of inflation Moreover higher rates of wage increases in regions with relatively low unemployment rates can play an important role in reducing overall unemployment. Since workers tend to move to areas with higher relative wage rates and lower unemployment rates they reduce unemployment when they leave one place and they relieve tight labor market conditions when they arrive at another. Furthermore higher wage rates in areas with low unemployment induce firms to shift jobs to areas with lower wage rates and higher unemployment. Through this process of shifting workers and jobs unemployment rates in different regions tend to be equalized over time and the aggregate unemployment rate gradually is reduced When unemployment rates approach frictional levels in some regions efforts to drive down aggregate unemployment through stimulative policies may be especially inappropriate and counterproductive ^ time for workers to migrate to areas with rising wages and ior firms to create new production capacity and new jobs in areas with high unemployment rates. These adjustments can occur naturally and gradually ; they should not be forced. Resorting to stimulative macroeconomic policies could accelerate inflation without significantly affecting unemployment. Indeed in a short time the need to combat inflation could lead to policies that would increase unemployment Reducing the unemployment rate further to the levels of the early 1970s requires reversing the effects of either or both of two trends : an increase in the proportion of workers who lose their jobs and an increase in the length of time workers remain unemployed. Both of these trends have contributed to higher unemployment rates over the last years. As indicated by the data in Table an increase in the proportion of workers who lost their jobs accounts for almost all of the increase in unemployment rates between and although increases in the proportion of workers who quit their jobs or who entered the labor force were important contributors to rising unemployment rates between and Moreover as indicated in Table since there has been a significant increase in the portion of the unemployed who report that they have been out of work for weeks or longer. Some studies have indicated that prolonged ( and often repeated ) spells of unemployment by experienced workers who lose their jobs are an important reason for the increase in the aggregate unemployment rate since the early 1970s TABLE Unemployment by Reason and Duration Selected Years [ Percent ] Year Reason for unemployment All unemployed Job losers Job leavers Duration of unemployment ' Entrants Percent of civilian labor force Less than weeks = weeks weeks and over Percent distribution Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Comprehensive data that detail the reasons for job loss and prolonged unemployment are not available. However it reasonably may be inferred that deep and prolonged recessions and sudden massive shifts in relative prices and in the structure of output are primary causes of job loss particularly for experienced workers. Certainly the recessions of and generated job losses on a large scale. The sudden decline of energy prices in clearly resulted in widespread job losses in energy-producing states Recessions are costly to the economy in terms of lost output but more importantly to the workers who lose their jobs. These costs continue even after the recovery from a recession has begun since a substantial amount of time is required to bring the level of unemployment down to its prerecession levels. Elimination of all fluctuations in the economy is of course neither feasible nor practical. Such fluctuations are an essential counterpart of economic progress Changes in relative prices and in the structure of output are necessary if the economy is to adjust to changes in demand and technology. However there is no need to repeat the destructive sequence of expansions marked by progressively rising inflation rates and punctuated by deep recessions that afflicted the U.S. economy in the 1970s and early 1980s. Moreover as discussed in last year 's Report avoiding a resurgence of inflation and the subsequent need for disinflation probably would remove an important cause of large swings in relative prices and real interest rates like those that buffeted the U.S economy during the last years The U.S. economy today can continue economic expansion and gradual reduction of the unemployment rate without resorting to potentially inflationary policies. Reduction of the U.S. trade deficit is under way and it is projected to continue in and beyond Thus the tradable goods sector of the U.S. economy ( predominantly manufacturing ) should expand more rapidly than the rest of the economy reversing the pattern of and These gains should aid in the further gradual reduction of unemployment CONCLUSION Since the United States has enjoyed large gains in employment and production accelerated growth of productivity and real per capita income and substantial reductions of unemployment without a resurgence of inflation. The gains during this extended period of economic growth have been shared widely by all major demographic groups. The achievements of the last years did not result from specific government programs but rather from a general approach to policy that emphasizes reliance on the private sector. The desire for economic gain disciplined by the forces of competition in free and open markets provided the essential incentives for the productive efforts the physical and human investments the technological innovations and the entrepreneurial advances that form the foundation of prosperity and growth. Little progress generally results from governmental efforts to control manage or fine tune the processes that generate growth. The proper role for government is to provide a stable economic environment in which private enterprise can flourish to protect the rights of individuals so they can benefit from their labors investments and entrepreneurship and to avoid the dulling or distortion of economic incentives through excessive taxation or burdensome regulation While private business has clearly been the direct source of the most important economic gains during the current expansion government policy has played a critical role by shaping the economic environment for this success. The Administration 's key priority was to enhance the stability of general economic conditions by avoiding a recurrence of the cycles of accelerating inflation rising interest rates and deep recessions that seriously impaired the performance of the economy during the 1970s and early 1980s. In pursuing these objectives fiscal policy limited Federal spending reduced marginal tax rates and provided greater certainty about future tax policies. Monetary policy provided money growth that was sufficient to sustain economic expansion while avoiding the resurgence of rapid inflation And microeconomic policy promoted the efficient operation of markets and avoided intrusive regulation. The strong growth of the economy at low rates of inflation indicates that these policies have been very successful. Thus this Administration has made substantial progress toward the goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Administration 's economic program has become a blueprint for promoting and maintaining noninflationary growth worldwide This approach to economic policy is especially important in today 's highly interdependent world. The events of the 1970s and 1980s demonstrate that the U.S. economy is affected increasingly by events in the world economy and economic policies of other nations. The rapid growth of the U.S. economy has fostered growth in other countries as rising living standards have allowed Americans to buy more products from abroad. Likewise rising living standards abroad will allow other nations to buy more products from the United States and enhance U.S. economic growth CHAPTER Adjustment and Growth in a Changing World Economy MAINTAINING NONINFLATIONARY GROWTH while reducing external imbalances is the primary objective of economic policy in the United States and other leading industrial nations. Market forces and economic policies have combined to reduce external imbalances at least in volume terms for more than a year. Further reductions are in prospect and are important to maintaining the long-run health of the world economy. Even more important this progress should be continued in a manner that does not undermine economic growth reignite inflation or yield to the temptation of protectionism The problems associated with present external imbalances are real and require attention but unfortunately they often are exaggerated or misunderstood. Despite a large increase in the U.S. external deficit since and problems in specific industries overall employment growth in the United States has been very strong the strongest of all the major industrial countries. The U.S. unemployment rate has dropped percentage points since late while unemployment rates in many other industrial countries have risen and now are well above the U.S. rate. Improvement in the trade balance is expected to contribute to job growth when it is most needed during when domestic spending is expected to grow only slowly. Nor has U.S. manufacturing performed poorly. During the past years its share of total real output has been running at the postwar average and in it stood just below its postwar peak. But despite substantial gains in employment persistence of a large U.S. trade deficit fuels protectionist sentiment that threatens the open system of world trade and could impair future employment gains In the 1980s the measured rate of national saving has been low and the United States has been a substantial net importer of foreign capital. Yet net foreign claims against the United States remain very small relative to U.S. income and wealth. Thus the general economic problems arising from the U.S. external deficit are primarily problems of the future problems that will arise only if adequate progress is not maintained in reducing external imbalances. The immediate concern therefore is to continue visible progress in reducing these imbalances in order to reassure financial markets and enhance prospects for sustaining noninflationary growth in the world economy Current external imbalances have arisen primarily from macroeconomic causes and require primarily macroeconomic solutions. The $ billion deterioration in U.S. real net exports of goods and services between and late was widespread across product categories and trading partners. Although some U.S. exports have suffered from barriers in some foreign markets the growth of the U.S trade deficit was not caused by an increase in unfair trade practices in foreign countries Instead the growth of the U.S. trade deficit in the 1980s primarily reflects the influence of several interrelated macroeconomic developments. Rapid growth of spending ( domestic demand ) in the United States relative to both growth of spending in other countries and to growth of production ( gross national product or GNP ) in the United States spurred U.S. demand for foreign imports and restrained foreign demand for U.S. exports. The need for many heavily indebted developing countries to reduce their international borrowing and improve their trade balances also cut into U.S. exports and tended to expand imports into U.S. markets. Growth of U.S. spending relative to production and income implied a deterioration in the national saving-investment balance which in turn owed much to the persistence of a large Federal deficit late into the current expansion. An increasing net inflow of foreign capital offset a declining national saving rate and helped to finance reasonably robust U.S. investment This capital inflow which was partly motivated by high prospective after-tax returns on U.S. investment was one among several important factors that contributed to the strong appreciation of the U.S dollar between and early Dollar appreciation in turn was the critical proximate cause of much of the deterioration in the U.S trade balance because it made U.S. exports more expensive in foreign markets and foreign imports less expensive in U.S. markets Efforts to reduce external imbalances have focused on reversing their underlying macroeconomic causes and on facilitating structural adjustments essential to an altered pattern of world trade. In the United States a continued slowing of domestic demand growth and further reductions in the Federal deficit promise continued improvements in the national saving-investment balance. In contrast demand growth in other leading industrial countries has increased due to government policies and market forces. In the United States relative price changes have encouraged economic adjustments directed toward higher output increased employment and greater investment in tradable goods industries. Relative price changes also appear to have assisted in reorienting economic activity toward stronger inter- nally led growth in some countries with trade surpluses. A large correction in the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar has been especially important in improving international competitiveness of U.S industry and in turn the U.S. real trade balance This chapter first assesses the economic significance of present external imbalances. It then discusses two of the key macroeconomic causes of present imbalances : the strong growth of domestic demand in the United States relative to other industrial countries and the decline of the U.S. national saving-investment balance in the presence of persistently large Federal deficits. It next considers the role of exchange-rate movements and relative price changes in creating and correcting external imbalances. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the adjustment process that will sustain progress in reducing external imbalances in an environment of noninflationary growth THE SIGNIFICANCE OF EXTERNAL IMBALANCES The external trade and payments position of the U.S. economy moved from surplus to substantial deficit in the early 1980s. This deterioration reflects several closely related phenomena. However it does not signal a defect in the general performance of the U.S. economy nor does it necessarily portend serious problems for the future The significance of the U.S. trade and payments imbalance the problems that it does and does not pose for the U.S. and the world economy are best understood with reference to alternative measures of these imbalances MEASURES OF THE EXTERNAL BALANCE All measures of the U.S. external position show broadly similar movement during the past two decades and exhibit sharp deterioration since For example as measured in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) the merchandise trade balance the difference between exports and imports of goods alone moved from a $ billion deficit in to a $ billion deficit in In the merchandise trade deficit grew further to $ billion These movements in the merchandise trade balance indicate that since the value of U.S. imports has grown far more rapidly than U.S. exports Expanding the measure of the trade balance to include services ( and factor income ) yields the NIPA concept of " net exports. " Chart shows that nominal net exports were in surplus in before deteriorating through the end of Movements in nominal net exports have closely paralleled movements in the merchandise trade balance. However since the United States runs a surplus of trade in services the deficit in nominal net exports is somewhat smaller than the deficit in merchandise trade Net Exports and the Current Account Balance Billions of dollars { seasonally adjusted annual rates ) \ \ \ ' Nominal Net Exports \ \ \ Real Net Exports ^ ' Current Account Balance -7Om I I I I | I | M I M I I I M I I 11I I M ll I I I I I I I 1I I I I I I ^ Billions of dollars Note. Net exports for fourth quarter are preliminary ; current account balance not available Source : Department of Commerce Measuring the balance between exports and imports of goods and services in constant dollars rather than in current dollars produces the NIPA measure of " real net exports " the measure most closely related to real GNP. As illustrated in Chart real net exports fell more than nominal net exports between and late ; since then real net exports have improved while nominal net exports have continued to deteriorate. The behavior of real net exports since late indicates that the external sector has made a net positive contribution to growth in real GNP and employment The recent divergence in the movements of real and nominal net exports primarily reflects movements in import prices. The price of imports as measured by the import price deflator fell between and late with an especially sharp drop in due to the fall in the price of imported oil. As a result the increase in nominal spending on imports was less than the increase in the real quantity of imports. Since late import prices generally have been rising faster than the price deflator for domestically produced goods and services. Consequently nominal spending on imports rose more than the real quantity of imports and more than the nominal value of exports. This phenomenon usually is referred to as the " J-curve " effect of currency depreciation. The initial effect of depreciation is often to raise nominal spending on imports because of higher prices and to lead to a deterioration in the nominal trade balance. However over time the depreciation will tend to improve both real and nominal net exports A deficit in net exports necessarily implies that total spending by domestic residents is greater than the value of domestic production ( GNP ) and domestic income. When domestic demand exceeds domestic production the excess is imported and the country runs a deficit on goods and services. Accordingly the decline of U.S. real net exports between and late corresponded to a growing gap between real domestic demand and real GNP. Similarly the decline in nominal net exports corresponded to the growing gap between nominal domestic demand and nominal GNP The decline in nominal net exports also was closely related to the deterioration of the national saving-investment balance. This is a direct consequence of national income accounting relationships Aside from some relatively minor items the excess of national saving over national investment is equal to the excess of GNP over domestic demand and therefore equal to nominal net exports. As will be discussed later growth of the government deficit ( which counts as a negative element in national saving ) played an important role in the deterioration of the national saving-investment balance The difference between national saving and national investment equals the flow of net foreign investment. When U.S. residents save more than is required to finance national investment the remainder is available to finance net accumulation of foreign assets either direct ownership of assets located abroad or ownership of stocks bonds or other financial claims on foreigners. Conversely when national investment in the United States exceeds national saving the excess is financed through net foreign accumulation either of direct claims on U.S. assets or of financial claims on U.S. residents ( include ing the government ) Since foreigners have increased their net claims on U.S. assets and U.S. residents as the deficit in international trade has grown Finally except for some relatively minor accounting differences the current account balance is conceptually similar to a measure of the national saving-investment balance. Moreover the net capital inflow which is conceptually similar to net foreign saving equals the current account deficit except for a statistical discrepancy. Thus the decline of the current account balance since illustrated in Chart describes the decline of national saving relative to national investment GROWTH OF EMPLOYMENT A loss of jobs to foreign competitors and a general slowing of growth of the U.S. economy often are suggested as important adverse effects of the deterioration of the U.S. trade position since the early 1980s. In fact however the only significant declines in U.S employment since occurred during the recessions of and when the U.S. current account was in surplus. The deterioration of the U.S. external position began in earnest in late which also marks the beginning of the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history. As discussed in Chapter employment growth during this expansion has been outstanding International comparisons of employment growth and reductions in unemployment do not indicate that the United States has been " losing jobs " to other industrial countries. Between and the United States sustained the strongest growth of employment in percentage terms among the seven large industrial countries that participate in the annual economic summits creating about two and one-half times as many jobs as the other six countries combined. Especially striking is a comparison with Japan and West Germany the two countries with the largest current account surpluses among the seven summit countries. The United States created million new jobs between and almost five times as many jobs as Japan and more than times as many jobs as West Germany The large increase in employment does not simply reflect the size of the U.S. economy or an increase in the labor force. Since the United States has enjoyed the largest reduction in the unemployment rate of all seven of the summit countries. As the top panel of Chart shows as of the third quarter of the United States had the lowest unemployment rate among the summit countries except for Japan. This reverses the situation that existed in the 1950s 1960s and early 1970s when unemployment rates in Western Europe typically ran at about half the U.S. rate. Furthermore as shown in the lower panel of Chart unemployment rates in a number of Western European countries have increased since Despite years of economic expansion these unemployment rates now stand not only well above the U.S. unemployment rate but also near or above the peak levels recorded for these countries between and It has been suggested that employment in the United States would have grown even more and the unemployment rate would have dropped even further if the U.S. external imbalance had not developed since Analysis of the strength of employment growth Chart ~ * Unemployment Rates in the Seven Summit Countries Unemployment Rate ( Percent ) in Third Quarter Percentage Point Change from Fourth Quarter to Third Quarter BSD mmmm i ! | S ^ I ! ! lW ^ .HJ ^ ^ France Italy West Germany Japan United Kingdom Canada United States Note. Unemployment rates used approximate the U.S. concept Source : Department of Labor over the course of the expansion however does not support this notion During the initial phase of the expansion from the end of through the middle of output and employment grew very rapidly ( Table ) Real GNP rose at a percent annual rate setting a 35-year record for real GNP growth during a six-quarter period Real domestic demand grew even more rapidly than real GNP the fastest rate over a six-quarter period in nearly years. In these six quarters employment rose at a very strong percent annual rate The exceptionally strong growth of real domestic demand relative to the strong growth of real GNP is directly reflected in the $ billion deterioration of real net exports between the end of and the middle of With the same rate of real domestic demand growth if real net exports had not deteriorated real GNP would have grown at a percent annual rate. However an effort to meet domestic demand growth entirely with U.S. production even if that TABLE Economic Growth [ Average annual percent change except as noted ] Jl to III IV to II Item III to IV RealGNP Real domestic demand Civilian employment Change in real net exports Change in civilian unemployment rate Preliminary Change over the period in billions of dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) Change over the period in percentage points Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) had been feasible probably would have been misguided. By March the Federal Reserve already was becoming concerned that the U.S. economy might be overheating and tightened monetary policy to forestall the risk of accelerating inflation. If real GNP had grown percent rather than percent possible overheating of the economy and a resurgence of inflation surely would have been even more of a concern in A policy reaction to forestall such a development could have cut short the expansion. Thus it is not clear that more rapid growth of real GNP during the initial phase of the expansion would have been particularly good for the economy or would have contributed to employment growth in the longer term During the second phase of the expansion from the second quarter of through the third quarter of the growth rates of real domestic demand real GNP and employment all declined from the very rapid rates recorded initially. Some slowing probably was inevitable as the expansion matured. The sharp oil price decline in early led to increased unemployment in the energy-producing States and probably contributed to slower overall employment growth. The further decline in U.S. real net exports during this period probably also contributed to slower employment growth and a smaller decline in real net exports probably would have been beneficial for the economy In the latest phase of the expansion since the third quarter of improving real net exports have contributed positively to real GNP and employment growth. The unemployment rate dropped rapidly during this period. While further reductions in the unemployment rate appear possible for the future ( Chapter ) the feasibility of a significantly more rapid decline during the past five quarters is open to question Thus strong growth of domestic demand early in the expansion contributed to a growing trade deficit without generally damaging effects on overall employment growth. Now it is widely anticipated that improvements in real net exports will help to sustain growth of real GNP and employment during a period when growth of domestic demand is expected to be weak. The timing of movements in the trade balance may not have been exactly right to maintain the precisely optimal pace of employment growth. However the deterioration of the trade balance did help to absorb some of the effect of very strong domestic demand growth when that could have been a serious problem for the economy. Improvement of the trade balance now promises to assist output and employment growth at a time when such assistance appears particularly useful STRENGTH OF MANUFACTURING A related complaint about the trade and payments deficit is that it has crippled U.S. manufacturing and led to a massive loss of manufacturing jobs. This issue was examined extensively in Chapter In the face of intense international competition substantial and often difficult adjustments have been made in many manufacturing industries. The output of some manufacturing industries declined. However the cause of the general decline in manufacturing output in clearly was the recession not the trade imbalance. Since manufacturing output has recovered very strongly. In fact manufacturing 's share of total real output currently stands near the record level for the postwar era In the 1980s manufacturing 's share of total employment has continued its long-term decline and the absolute level of manufacturing employment at the end of remained below its peak level of These developments however reflect the generally stronger growth of productivity in manufacturing than in other sectors of the economy. Perhaps if foreign competition had been less intense productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing would have been slower and more jobs would now exist in that sector. Americans as a whole however would be less well off. And unless real wage growth had been reduced to match slower productivity growth manufacturing would not be as well positioned to expand exports in the future In comparison with other leading industrial countries manufacturing has been relatively strong in the United States. Between and manufacturing output grew slightly more rapidly in the United States than in Canada and considerably more rapidly than in Western Europe. Only Japan recorded significantly stronger growth of manufacturing output and only in Japan and Denmark did manufacturing employment increase. In Canada the decline in manufacturing employment was proportionally smaller than in the United States reflecting Canada 's slower growth of productivity. In France Italy and the United Kingdom the proportional decline in manufacturing employment was significantly larger than in the United States If there were no U.S. trade deficit production of manufactured goods and employment in manufacturing industries in the United States probably would be higher than they are at present ; but total U.S production and total U.S. employment would not necessarily be any higher. As discussed in Chapter there appears to be some room for further gradual reductions in the unemployment rate without automatically stimulating an acceleration of inflation. There is no evidence that output and employment in manufacturing and other tradable goods industries could have been increased sufficiently to replace net imports of tradable goods in without largely offsetting reductions of output and employment in other industries. Similarly over time as the trade deficit is corrected gradually output and possibly employment in the manufacturing sector may expand more rapidly than in the rest of the economy. These changes however will reflect a shifting distribution of the economy 's productive resources not a net increase in the supply of those resources GROWTH OF FOREIGN DEBT The present size of net foreign claims on the United States and their rate of increase often are cited as problems arising from continued large current account deficits. The recorded net international investment position of the United States $ billion in ( the latest data available ) represents the difference between U.S. assets abroad ( $ billion ) and foreign assets in the United States ( $ billion ) The net international investment position often is referred to as the net debt of the United States even though the value of U.S. assets abroad and foreign assets in the United States include assets such as land buildings and stocks as well as interestbearing assets such as bonds and bank accounts The net international investment position of the United States has deteriorated over the last few years. In the U.S. net international investment position was $ billion ( valued in dollars ) The deterioration to $ billion in reflects the cumulative effect of a string of large external deficits as well as some valuation changes Estimates of the flow of net foreign investment suggest that the U.S net international investment position may have grown roughly $ billion to approximately $ billion in The net international investment position of the United States may be overstated by these estimates. According to Department of Commerce estimates in the United States received income of $ billion on assets owned abroad and it paid $ billion on foreignowned assets in the United States This excess of receipts over pay- ments reflects in part undervaluation of some U.S.-owned assets located abroad ( especially direct investments made years ago that are valued at historical cost ) as well as a generally higher rate of return on U.S.-owned assets abroad than on foreign-owned assets in the United States. Therefore in terms of income received and paid the United States may have been a net creditor in However in the third quarter of for the first time in recent history payments on foreign-owned assets exceeded income on assets owned abroad By this measure the United States crossed the boundary between net creditor and net debtor only in the middle of Even at $ billion net foreign claims on the United States are not large relative to the income generated by the U.S. economy that can be used to service them. Net foreign claims of $ billion represent less than percent of U.S. GNP. Assuming a percent real rate of return the income required to service these claims would amount to less than one-half of one percent of U.S. GNP. And based on the amount of income paid on foreign-owned assets in the United States and U.S.-owned assets abroad the income required for net debt service in was about percent of U.S. GNP. Consequently concerns about the current stock of net foreign claims on the United States may be overstated While the current level of net foreign claims should not be cause for alarm persistent growth of such claims at an annual rate equivalent to 3V2 percent of U.S. GNP ( about $ billion in ) would be a source of worry. At this rate net foreign claims on the United States would reach percent of U.S. GNP by the end of the century. Servicing these claims assuming a percent real rate of return would consume about percent of U.S. GNP still not a large percentage but a very substantial absolute sum. Relative to the size of the economy U.S. net indebtedness would not be much larger than Canada 's has been in recent years. However the absolute figure would be very large more than $ trillion in dollars. This could present difficulties for the world financial system especially if for some reason foreigners suddenly become less willing to hold claims on the United States. Evidence of a steady reduction of the U.S. external deficit over the next few years will prevent these difficulties from emerging THE LEVEL OF NATIONAL SAVING When a foreign net capital inflow is used to finance productive investment even a relatively large and persistent inflow need not be a source of concern. The increased productive capacity financed by the capital inflow can generate the income to pay foreign creditors. Because of taxes and for other reasons the entire return from invest- merit is not always paid to creditors. Furthermore a net capital inflow means that the level of productive capital stock in the importing country probably is higher than it would be otherwise. Hence a country can gain from a net inflow of foreign capital when this capital is used to increase productive investment. For much of its history until about the United States was a fairly consistent net importer of foreign capital. For example foreign borrowing helped to finance construction of U.S. railroads during the 19th century As indicated in Table the recent net inflow of foreign capital has enabled the United States to maintain a ratio of gross investment to GNP that is close to the postwar average at a time when the ratio of national saving to GNP has been relatively low by postwar standards. The recent strong performance of the U.S. economy suggests that investment in the United States has paid an attractive return Given the level of national saving financing some investment through a net capital inflow measured by net foreign saving appears to have been worthwhile. The problem to the extent that there currently is a problem does not arise from the net capital inflow ; it arises from the relatively low rate of national saving TABLE Saving and Investment as Percent of GNP [ Percent of GNP ] average Item average * Current dollars : Gross private domestic investment Gross national saving Net foreign saving Net national saving Constant ( ) dollars : Gross private domestic investment.. Gross national saving3 Net private domestic investment2 Relative price of investment ( = ) Preliminary As percent of net national product Gross national saving deflated by the implicit price deflator for gross private domestic investment Ratio of gross private domestic investment and GNP implicit price deflators multiplied by Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers National saving is a matter of concern because when properly measured national saving measures the increase in national wealth and thus the potential for future improvements in living standards. If the national saving rate is relatively low future living standards may not rise as quickly. The relevant measure of national saving however must take into account the many forms of saving that contribute to rising living standards. Such saving includes not only the usually measured accumulation of claims to physical investments and the income streams they generate but also investments in human capital and in research and development leading to new products and technologies ( discussed in Chapter ) as well as the accumulation of consumer assets that contribute directly to production within the household. Making such adjustments a recent study of broadly defined measures of national saving and capital formation found that the United States has not been a particularly " low-saving " country in the postwar period Moreover even the narrow measures of national saving and national investment look more robust when recent declines in the relative price of capital goods are considered. Specifically as indicated in Table the ratio of real gross investment to real GNP recently has been somewhat higher than its average in the postwar period thus implying that the recent net capital inflow has helped to finance a somewhat higher rate of real gross investment Nevertheless the measured rate of gross national saving in recent years has been lower than the postwar average. Even allowing for problems in measuring depreciation the standard measure of real net investment relative to real net national product ( NNP ) has not been particularly high in recent years. The standard measure of net national saving relative to NNP has been running at less than half its postwar average since and the net capital inflow has financed roughly half of net national investment. Broadening the measures of national saving and national investment to include human capital research and development and consumer durables diminishes the relative importance of the net capital inflow. However it still appears that the national saving rate has been relatively low in recent years Whether the appearance of a low national saving rate actually portends slower growth of living standards is far from clear. The rate of national saving between and whether measured in nominal real gross or net terms was not particularly low by postwar standards. Yet as discussed in Chapter the rate of increase in living standards measured by the rate of growth of real per capita GNP was quite slow by earlier postwar standards. Since the rate of growth of real per capita GNP has increased notwithstanding the decline in the measured rate of national saving. Judged by the outcome therefore the rate of national saving would appear to have risen since the middle and late 1970s although not back to the level of the earlier postwar period In any event a higher rate of national saving probably would mean more rapid improvement of living standards and both natural economic adjustments and economic policies indicate an increase in the national saving rate. With national investment projected to remain strong but not increase substantially as a share of GNP the anticipated increase in the national saving rate would imply a significantly smaller net inflow of foreign capital and hence a significantly slower increase in net foreign claims on the United States. The anticipated increase in national saving relative to national investment also implies a reduction in the growth rate of real domestic demand relative to that of real GNP. This is consistent with the expectation that improvements in U.S. real net exports will make important contributions to output and employment growth in coming years. Because improvements in real net exports must come to a large extent in net trade in manufactured products these anticipated developments also suggest continuing strength of output and employment growth in the manufacturing sector DEMAND GROWTH AND THE SAVING-INVESTMENT BALANCE The external deficit of the United States has been improving in real terms since late Continued progress in reducing this deficit in an environment of noninflationary growth is an important goal of economic policy. Assessing the likelihood of such progress and the policies that will help to sustain it requires clear understanding of the macroeconomic forces that are fundamentally responsible for the growth of the U.S. external deficit. Specifically strong demand growth in the United States after the worldwide recession of and relatively weak demand growth in other industrial countries during the early phases of recovery spurred the growth of U.S imports and retarded the growth of U.S. exports. Simultaneously the growth of the Federal deficit and its persistence late into the current expansion contributed to the deterioration of the U.S. national saving-investment balance and to a corresponding increase in the net inflow of foreign capital THE MACROECONOMIC CHARACTER OF THE EXTERNAL DEFICIT The U.S. external position deteriorated between and with all measures of the trade and payments balance moving into substantial deficit. In particular U.S. real net exports ( measured in dollars ) moved from a surplus of $ billion in to a deficit of $ billion in with the deficit reaching a maximum of $ billion on an annualized basis in the third quarter of As indicated in Table all but one component of the trade balance other goods shared in the deterioration. The surplus in services was cut in half in real terms. Merchandise trade which accounts for the bulk of total trade absorbed over percent of the total decline in real net exports. Most major end-use categories of the real merchandise trade balance ( foods feeds and beverages ; industrial supplies and materials ; capital goods ; automobiles ; and consumer goods ) experienced a decline. Within merchandise manufactured products moved from a surplus in to a large deficit in Agricultural exports which are influenced by economic forces and policies somewhat different from other merchandise exports also suffered from shrinking markets between and Furthermore the aggregate trade balance deteriorated against most major regions and trading partners : against the industrial countries as well as the developing countries ; against Europe and East Asia as well as Africa and Latin America TABLE Selected Real Net Exports [ Billions of dollars ] IV Item II ! IV * Seasonally adjusted annual rates Net exports of goods and services. Merchandise Foods feeds and beverages Industrial supplies and materials ( including petroleum ) Capital goods ( except automobiles ) Automobiles Consumer goods Other Services Factor income... Other = MEMORANDUM : Nonagricultural exports minus nonpetroleum imports. Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Exceptionally strong growth of imports into the United States led the deterioration in real net exports. Between the beginning of the expansion and the third quarter of real imports grew at an average annual rate of percent more than double the average growth rate recorded between and Real exports also grew but their percent annual growth rate was much less than that of imports and about half the annual growth rate of real exports between and Between the third quarter of and the end of real net exports improved by $ billion narrowing the real trade deficit from to percent of real GNP. A $ billion increase in real exports outstripped a $ billion increase in real imports. The percent annual rate of real export growth was more than double the average between and Strong gains in real merchandise exports were widespread across major product categories. At percent the annualized growth rate of real imports was well below the pace set between and late and about equal to the average growth rate between and Increases in real merchandise imports were generally modest ( negative in the case of consumer goods and petroleum products ) except for capital goods excluding autos. Strong import growth in capital goods presumably reflected increased business purchases of durable equipment and substantial inventory accumulation. Contrary to the improvement in merchandise trade the surplus in factor income deteriorated by $ billion the effect of a growing stock of foreign claims on the United States This led to a deterioration in the real trade balance in services ; the surplus on services other than factor income showed the same pattern as merchandise trade The influence of broad macroeconomic forces rather than specific developments in markets for particular products or trading relationships with particular countries is readily apparent in the development of the U.S. real trade balance during the 1980s. Broad macroeconomic forces caused the strong growth of U.S. imports and the weak growth of U.S. exports across so many products and trading partners. Similarly broad macroeconomic forces played a critical role in the recent resurgence of real export growth and in the general slowing of real import growth. These forces must continue to be major factors in the gradual process of reducing the U.S. external imbalance DIFFERENTIAL DEMAND GROWTH During the 1970s both real domestic demand and real GNP in the United States generally grew more slowly than in Japan Canada and Western Europe. Differences between demand growth and real GNP growth however were relatively small in all countries and trade imbalances remained small by recent standards. The situation changed during the 1980s as indicated by the data in Table During the general period of slow growth and world recession in U.S real GNP fell slightly more rapidly than real domestic demand ; thus as a share of real GNP U.S. real net exports fell by percentage point. In Canada the pattern was essentially the reverse ; real domestic demand fell a little more rapidly than real GNP and real net exports increased modestly During the period of world recession real GNP growth in Japan slowed from a percent average annual rate in the 1970s to percent. Real net exports contributed about percentage point to Japanese economic growth since real GNP grew about percent annually and real domestic demand grew about percent per year. In West Germany real domestic demand fell at a rapid percent annual rate but improving real net exports cushioned the effect on output growth and real GNP fell at only a percent annual rate. The pic- TABLE Growth in Real Domestic Demand and Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries [ Average annual percent change ] Country/region United States Japan Germany France United Kingdom. Italy Canada Europe ( Big Four ) G-7 less United States4 I to IV Real domestic demand2 II to III IV to tl Real GNP3 domestic demand2 domestic demand2 III to III1 Real GNP3 domestic demand2 Real GNP3 ^ * '1.6 Data for United States and Germany are preliminary estimates for IV Real domestic demand is real GNP minus real net exports Data for France United Kingdom Italy and Canada are real GDP Data for Europe ( Big Four ) and G-7 less United States use GNP weights. Big Four consists of Germany France United Kingdom and Italy Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and country sources ture was mixed in the other three large European economies ( France Italy and the United Kingdom ) During the initial phase of the expansion from the end of to the middle of real domestic demand in the United States shot up at a percent annual rate exceeding by percentage points the rapid growth rate of U.S. real GNP. The strong growth of demand and income reflected the recovery of the economy from a particularly deep recession aided by the shift to a quite expansionary monetary policy early in the second half of and spurred on by significant reductions in marginal tax rates on both labor and capital income. In most of the other six leading industrial countries recovery was less robust as indicated in Table For these six countries combined real GNP growth averaged percent slightly exceeding the percent annual growth rate of real domestic demand The very strong growth of real domestic demand in the United States together with relatively weak demand growth in other industrial countries clearly contributed to the strong growth of U.S. imports and the weak growth of U.S. exports during this period In the second phase of the expansion from the middle of through the third quarter of growth of real domestic demand in the United States slowed to a percent annual rate. As real net exports deteriorated further U.S. real GNP grew at a moderate percent annual rate. Growth of real domestic demand picked up in some of the other six leading industrial countries and equaled the U.S. rate during this period. Because U.S. imports already were substantially larger than U.S. exports by equal rates of demand growth in the United States and abroad implied further deterioration of the U.S. trade balance Moreover growth of real domestic demand during this period may give an exaggerated impression of the strength of spending particularly for countries whose currencies appreciated against the dollar. In early the dollar prices of oil and many primary commodities fell. These price declines made possible increased purchases of oil and other primary commodities ( measured in volume terms ) even though the amount spent ( measured in dollars ) fell. And when spending is measured in foreign currencies that appreciated against the dollar the effect of falling dollar prices of primary commodities was amplified. This observation partly explains how real domestic demand could grow more rapidly than real GNP in Japan between the second quarter of and the third quarter of and yet Japan 's current account surplus could increase from to percent of GNP Some of the benefits that Japan enjoyed from the large decline in the yen prices of oil and other primary commodities ended up in increased saving rather than increased spending. Similarly during this period West Germany recorded a large increase in its current account surplus from to percent of GNP despite only a small excess of real GNP growth over real domestic demand growth In the most recent phase of the expansion starting in late and continuing through the growth rate of real domestic demand in the United States slowed to percent per year due primarily to slower growth of consumption spending. In the other six leading industrial countries the growth rate of real domestic demand moved up slightly. The latest available data show that between their peak in the fourth quarter of and the third quarter of the current account surpluses of Japan and West Germany ( as a share of GNP ) declined by and percentage points respectively. The reversal of the demand growth differential contributed to an improvement in U.S. real net exports thus allowing the growth rate of U.S. real GNP to rise to percent despite the slower growth rate of U.S. real domestic demand The growth rate of U.S. real domestic demand probably had to fall below the percent annual rate experienced during the second phase of the expansion if the decline in U.S. real net exports was to be reversed. As discussed in Chapter if the U.S. unemployment rate declines further and productivity grows further the mediumterm growth rate for U.S. real GNP is probably about percent per year. Improvement of U.S. real net exports at an average annual rate equivalent to for example percent of real GNP implies an aver- age annual growth rate of real domestic demand of about percent which is very close to the percent growth rate actually realized since the turnaround in real net exports began in late In it appears likely that real domestic demand will grow relatively slowly in the United States for the reasons discussed in Chapter In particular consumption spending is expected to grow relatively slowly as households seek to increase their saving rates above the low average level of ( but probably not much above the rate achieved in the fourth quarter ) Furthermore investment spending for inventory accumulation is expected to decline. The strong growth of both real exports and real net exports is expected to play a key role in maintaining a moderate rate of economic growth Rapid growth of real domestic demand in other industrial countries particularly those with large external surpluses is critical to reducing their external surpluses maintaining worldwide demand growth and improving the U.S. external balance. If U.S. real domestic demand growth declines without an offsetting increase in other countries total demand growth in the world economy would fall. If this happens the rate of growth of world output also would fall Output and employment growth in all the industrial countries including the United States and the surplus countries probably would be curtailed. The economic problems of many developing countries especially those with large external debts would become more severe Recent developments indicate that domestic demand in other industrial countries is beginning to strengthen. In surplus countries recent growth of real domestic demand has been running well ahead of growth of real GNP reversing the pattern of export-led growth that had prevailed for many years. Between the third quarters of and domestic demand growth exceeded real GNP growth by percentage point in West Germany and by percentage point in Japan. Furthermore recent domestic demand growth in Japan has been exceptionally strong and percent in the second and third quarters of In these two quarters domestic demand growth in Japan exceeded GNP growth by an average of percentage points. Strong growth of real domestic demand in Canada and the United Kingdom also has contributed significantly to recent demand growth in the world economy The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) estimates that real GNP in Western Europe will grow only about y % percent per year during the next years while real domestic demand is expected to rise by 2V4 percent per year. Some countries that enjoyed relatively vigorous demand and output growth during the past years may face worsening balance of payments po- sitions. Consequently it is especially important for countries with substantial external surpluses to increase their demand growth in order to maintain their own output and employment growth while their external surpluses contract. More rapid demand growth in surplus countries also is essential for the health of the world economy because domestic demand growth is expected to be relatively weak in the United States and a shrinking U.S. trade deficit will subtract from demand growth in other countries Market forces have provided and are likely to continue to provide strong incentives for rapid growth of domestic demand in surplus countries. In particular the real appreciation of the yen and the lower dollar price of imported oil have substantially reduced the real cost of goods imported by Japan relative to goods and services produced in Japan. The passthrough of a substantial part of this decline in real import costs has boosted the purchasing power of Japanese consumers thereby contributing to rising living standards and to growth of domestic demand. Moreover yen appreciation has induced consumers to shift their purchases from domestic to imported goods The passthrough of the benefits of currency appreciation and lower oil prices apparently has been important in stimulating stronger growth of consumer spending in West Germany as well The government of Japan has carried out commitments made at the Louvre Accord in February and the Venice Economic Summit in June to boost domestic demand growth. On May the Japanese government announced a trillion yen ( $ billion ) emergency stimulus package including trillion yen in public works and trillion yen in tax cuts. At the end of last year the government of Japan approved a budget including $ billion for public works percent above the figure a year ago and equal to the high level established by last year 's supplementary budget West Germany also has taken actions to boost domestic demand growth. For example the West German government increased the amount of tax cuts for and later years to about DM14 billion ( $ billion ) and it will provide special loans at preferential rates for private and public investment projects. In addition the German Bundesbank moved to reduce short-term interest rates in late Continued domestic demand growth in other industrial countries will contribute to the health of the world economy in another important way. A growth-oriented solution to the international debt crisis requires that the heavily indebted developing countries expand their exports. During the 1980s the United States increased its purchases of goods exported by these countries while other industrial countries reduced their purchases. Now as the United States reduces its trade deficit other industrial countries must absorb more of the exports of these heavily indebted developing countries if they are to solve their debt problems. As a result developing countries would be better able to service their debts and would provide better markets for the exports of the industrial countries THE ROLE OF THE FEDERAL DEFICIT Because a deterioration in the U.S. external position corresponds to a decline in the national saving-investment balance and to an associated increase in the net capital inflow the deterioration of the U.S external position also must have an explanation in terms of factors that affect the national saving-investment balance and the net capital inflow. This explanation does not contradict the earlier discussion of differential demand growth in the United States and other countries nor does it conflict with the later discussion of exchange-rate movements. All are part of the same puzzle. The importance of different forces affecting the external balance may be more readily apparent from one perspective than another but all the pieces fit together in the end The deterioration of the national saving-investment balance and the corresponding increase in the net capital inflow since reflect primarily the decline in the national saving rate ( as officially measured ) The low rate of national saving since is accounted for primarily by the high rate of government dissaving which in turn is attributable to large Federal deficits. Measured on a NIPA basis the government deficit ( Federal State and local combined ) has averaged percent of GNP since compared with an average deficit of percent of GNP between and The Federal deficit alone has increased to an average of percent of GNP since compared with a pre-1982 average of only percent of GNP. The personal saving rate also has been relatively low since but the rate of business saving has been relatively high. Since the private saving rate ( personal plus business saving ) has run about the same as its postwar average The causal linkages between the government deficit and national saving national investment and the capital inflow however are more complex than these averages suggest. As shown in the upper panel of Chart movements in th ^ general government deficit as a share of GNP have tended to parallel movements in the private saving-investment balance as a share of GNP. This parallelism has offsetting implications for movements in the net capital inflow as measured by net foreign saving in the national income and product accounts : an increase in the private saving-investment balance implies a smaller net capital inflow while an increase in the government deficit implies a larger net capital inflow. As shown in the lower panel of Chart movements in the net capital inflow generally have been smaller than movements in either the private saving-investment balance or the government deficit Chart Components of the Saving-Investment Balance Percent of GNP General Government Deficit * / Private Saving-Investment Balance b -VGross private saving minus gross private domestic investment i/Federal State and local deficit a/Defined as net foreign saving Note. Data for are preliminary Source : Department of Commerce In the United States the dominant economic factor affecting movements in both the government deficit and the private saving-investment balance has been the business cycle. Usually during recessions private investment has declined more than private saving so the private saving-investment balance has improved. Also during recessions government revenues tend to fall and government expenditures tend to expand so the government deficit grows. In contrast during expansions private investment usually grows relative to private saving so the private saving-investment balance deteriorates. Also government revenue tends to rise relative to government expenditure so the government deficit declines. Because business cycle effects on the private saving-investment balance typically have been a little stronger than business cycle effects on the government deficit the net capital inflow has tended to decline during recessions and to increase during expansions In this regard the recessions of and were not very different from earlier recessions. However as is apparent in Chart the pattern changed during the current expansion. As usual the private saving-investment balance declined during reflecting the strong growth of private investment. But the government deficit did not decline during as it usually does during a vigorous expansion a result more than accounted for by the persistence of quite large Federal deficits. Therefore the net capital inflow grew much more than normal between the end of and late In fiscal due to a large decline in the Federal deficit the total government deficit dropped substantially from to percent of GNP. By itself this reduction should have cut the net capital inflow and the current account deficit by nearly one-third from its level in fiscal However the private saving-investment balance deteriorated substantially between fiscal and fiscal from percent to minus percent of GNP. This fall in the privatesaving investment balance reflected both a strong gain in gross private domestic investment ( due largely to higher inventory investment ) and an outright decline in private saving ( because of lower personal saving ) Thus despite a substantial decline in the government deficit the net capital inflow and the current account deficit both increased modestly Future improvements in the private saving-investment balance and future reductions in the Federal deficit should cause the national saving-investment balance to improve and the net capital inflow to decline. Because the rate of inventory investment in the nonfarm sector at the end of is probably unsustainable for any significant length of time downward adjustment in this component of private sector investment should contribute to an improved private saving-investment balance in The personal saving rate in was very low by postwar standards although it rose in the fourth quarter. Assuming that the personal saving rate remains close to its fourth quarter level in ( which implies growth of consumption spending about even with growth of real disposable income ) the average saving rate in will be well above that of a further factor tending to improve the private saving-investment balance The Federal budget deficit as a share of GNP is expected to decline only modestly in after the large drop registered in However the revised Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget law mandates a gradual reduction in the Federal deficit in later years and a balanced budget by The budget compromise agreed to by the Administration and the Congress last autumn provides for further steps in this gradual process. Of course the desirability of particular measures to reduce the Federal deficit must be assessed on the basis of their likely effects on the economy The Federal deficit has grown because Federal outlays as a share of GNP have risen substantially since the 1960s ( despite a lower share for defense spending ) while Federal revenues as a share of GNP have risen modestly. Specifically Federal outlays averaged percent of GNP in the 1960s ; they were percent in Federal revenues also rose but by less than the increase in Federal outlays : from percent of GNP in the 1960s to percent in Increases in taxes without effective restraint on spending growth could fail to reduce the budget deficit. Moreover increasing taxes and undoing tax reform would impair incentives to work invest and produce the foundations of future growth. Thus reduction of the Federal deficit but only through appropriate means is the proper policy for improving the national saving-investment balance Finally the behavior of the net capital inflow can not be viewed as entirely passive. The apparent attractiveness of U.S. investment to foreigners and the inflow of capital it helped to stimulate probably contributed to the appreciation of the dollar between and early which played a major role in the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance. In the overall equilibrium of the economy this deterioration was the necessary counterpart of both the increase in real domestic demand relative to real GNP and the growing gap between national investment and national saving. If foreigners had not supplied capital willingly the pattern of real domestic demand real GNP national investment national saving and the government deficit all would have been different Nevertheless it is fair to say that the low rate of national saving which reflects primarily the persistence of a large Federal deficit late into the current expansion has played a key role in the development of the U.S. external deficit. It is equally and simultaneously true that the strong growth of real domestic demand in the United States and the relatively weak growth of real domestic demand in other industrial countries between and late played critical roles in the evolution of the U.S. external deficit. Therefore reduction of this external deficit in an environment of continued economic growth in the United States and other countries requires two important and simultaneous developments. First the U.S. national saving-investment balance must improve through government spending restraints leading to a reduced Federal deficit. Second the growth of real domestic demand in other industrial countries must remain sufficiently high to sustain world output growth while growth of real domestic demand remains restrained in the United States leading to a gradual contraction of worldwide external imbalances EXCHANGE RATES AND RELATIVE PRICES Strong appreciation of the U.S. dollar between and early and its lingering effects in were important proximate causes of the deterioration of the U.S. trade balance the ultimate causes lying with the economic forces that induced the dollar to appreciate. The full effects of dollar appreciation were not felt immediately ; it took time for the relative prices of imports and exports to respond fully to exchange-rate changes and it took more time for trade quantities to respond to changes in relative prices. As illustrated in Chart of Chapter there is about a six-quarter lag between movements in the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar and movements in U.S. real net exports. The recent upturn in real net exports beginning in late followed six quarters after the beginning of dollar depreciation in early The improvement in the trade balance through the end of however is somewhat smaller than normally would be expected from dollar depreciation through the middle of after allowing for lags. Analysis of this shortfall requires examination of the responses of relative export and import prices to dollar depreciation. This analysis is important for assessing the likelihood of recovering lost ground and of further improving real net exports commensurate with the further depreciation of the dollar since the middle of THE EXTENT OF EXCHANGE-RATE MOVEMENTS The value of the U.S. dollar increased substantially against the currencies of most industrial countries between and the first quarter of The extent of appreciation was somewhat uneven across currencies. The dollar rose percent against the British pound and percent against the West German deutsche mark but only percent against the Japanese yen and percent against the Canadian dollar. According to the Federal Reserve staffs trade-weighted index of the foreign exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of large industrial countries ( used in subsequent discussions ) the dollar rose substantially over this period. Adjusted for movements of the price level in the United States and in other industrial countries the real foreign exchange value of the dollar rose a similar amount The dollar 's appreciation during the early 1980s probably was spurred in part by the shift in monetary policy from perceived ease and accommodation in the late 1970s to an actual and ultimately credible anti-inflationary stance. Continued dollar appreciation after probably also reflected the strong recovery in the United States in comparison with most other industrial countries as well as the general restoration of confidence in the U.S. economy. High real interest rates in the United States during the early 1980s as well as changes in U.S. tax laws that increased the attractiveness of investment in the United States may have attracted foreign capital that tended to push up the value of the dollar. The increase in U.S. interest rates and the tightening of monetary policy that began in early may have contributed to the upward surge in the value of the dollar in No single factor however is the exclusive cause of the dollar 's appreciation ; several different factors probably played important roles Since February the U.S. dollar generally has been depreciating. Substantial declines have been recorded against the currencies of all the large industrial countries except Canada. Based on the Federal Reserved index by the end of the dollar had fallen in real and nominal terms about percent and was slightly below its level. The adjustment was less however against the currencies of some developing countries As with the dollar 's appreciation in the early 1980s the exact causes of its depreciation since early are difficult to isolate. The deceleration in U.S. real GNP growth after mid-1984 probably contributed to the dollar 's fall. The intentions of the G-5 countries ( France Japan the United Kingdom the United States and West Germany ) to seek a lower dollar as implied by the Plaza Agreement of September and their subsequent actions to back up these intentions probably hastened the dollar 's fall. The easing of U.S. monetary policy that began in late and extended through also may have contributed to the dollar 's decline THE DOLLAR AND RELATIVE EXPORT PRICES The rising dollar in the early 1980s increased the relative price of U.S. produced goods exported to foreign markets. The price of U.S exports in foreign currencies relative to overall foreign price levels rose percent between and the first quarter of It is not surprising therefore that U.S. exporters became less competitive. In U.S. real exports of goods and services had fallen percent below their level compared with about percent growth that would have been expected based on the trend rate of growth between and Dollar appreciation not slow productivity growth or spiraling wage costs was the primary cause of the decline in the international competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing in the first half of the 1980s. Be- tween the cyclical peak in the third quarter of and the first quarter of labor productivity in manufacturing increased at a percent annual rate more than one and a half times as fast as the average and only slightly below the percent growth rate of labor compensation in manufacturing. As a result U.S. unit labor costs rose at only a percent rate from late to the first quarter of This was less than the growth in a trade-weighted average of unit labor costs in of the largest foreign industrial countries measured on a national currency basis during the first half of the 1980s. However once dollar appreciation is factored in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) estimates that unit labor costs for U.S. manufacturing relative to unit labor costs for manufacturing in other industrial countries rose substantially during this period The depreciation of the U.S. dollar since early now has enabled U.S. exporters to regain the international competitiveness they lost earlier. Since the dollar began to decline relative unit labor costs have fallen significantly. Continued strong productivity growth and wage restraint in U.S. manufacturing have contributed to improved cost competitiveness. Between the first quarter of and the fourth quarter of manufacturing productivity increased at a percent annual rate and hourly compensation of manufacturing workers grew at a percent annual rate. As a result unit labor costs for U.S. manufacturing have fallen at a percent annual rate since the first quarter of Adding to this the effect of dollar depreciation the IMF estimates that unit labor costs for U.S. manufacturing relative to those in other industrial countries fell percent between the first quarter of and the second quarter of ( the latest data available ) and they are currently below their level Dollar depreciation also has contributed to a significant decline in the relative price of U.S. nonagricultural exports in foreign markets as measured by a foreign currency price of U.S. nonagricultural exports divided by a foreign consumer price index ( CPI ) As Chart illustrates movements in the relative price of nonagricultural exports have been dominated by movements in the exchange rate. As the dollar appreciated in the early 1980s the relative price of U.S nonagricultural exports rose in foreign markets. As the dollar depreciated this relative price declined and it is now lower than it was in As might be expected on the basis of improved price and cost competitiveness U.S. exports recently have enjoyed very strong growth. Real nonagricultural exports have grown at a percent annual rate since the third quarter of nearly triple their rate of growth between and Reflecting this export growth U.S Chart Relative Prices of Exports and Imports and the Exchange Rate Index = Exchange Rate A Index y l \ Relative Price of Nonpetroleum Imports ^ \ \ \ _ / / / \ 7A \ \ / \ \ J ) y i n i 'y { \ / \ Relative Price of \ Nonagricultural Exports ^ \ i t i f i t i i i i i i t i i i t i i i i i i M'I -I/Multilateral trade-weighted value of the dollar against the currencies of the G-10 countries plus Switzerland V Ratio of the implicit price deflator for nonpetroleum imports to the U.S. consumer price index -S'Ratio of the implicit price deflator for nonagricultural exports multiplied by the exchange rate index to a GNP-weighted consumer price index for the G-10 countries ( excluding the United States ) plus Switzerland Note. Data for fourth quarter are preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System manufacturing output has increased at a percent annual rate and manufacturing employment has increased by Econometric estimates suggest that nonagricultural exports rise about three-fourths of a percent for every percent decline in their relative price with about half the effect occurring within three quarters. Based on these estimates the percent decline in the relative price of nonagricultural exports between the first quarter of and the third quarter of should increase U.S. nonagricultural exports by about percent within years. By the end of real nonagricultural exports had risen percent above their level in the first quarter of Since a part of this export gain probably was due to normal export growth associated with rising foreign incomes it would appear that substantial further export growth should result from relative export price adjustments made through the third quarter of Moreover relative export prices in the third quarter of may not yet fully reflect the depreciation of the dollar since early Following the Louvre Accord in February exchange rates among the group of seven summit countries ( the G-7 countries ) remained fairly stable until the fourth quarter allowing for much of the adjustment of relative export prices to exchange rates to occur by the end of the third quarter. However the dollar continued to depreciate against the currencies of important trading partners outside the G-7 during the spring and summer and it declined a further to percent against other G-7 currencies ( except the Canadian dollar ) in the fourth quarter. Therefore there is reason to anticipate further reductions in relative prices of U.S. goods in foreign markets that will contribute to further increases in U.S. exports To correct the U.S. external deficit in a noninflationary manner U.S. manufacturing industries must be able to expand output to serve domestic and foreign markets without incurring rapidly rising costs. Recent data on capacity utilization suggest that existing capacity in most manufacturing industries appears ample to meet output growth in the near term. The ability to expand capacity beyond existing levels is aided by the availability of unused capacity in the durable goods industries that produce business equipment as well as by the slack that exists in the construction industry. The incentive to expand capacity is indicated by recent data that show manufacturers ' profits from current production running well above their average rate in Additional incentive is provided by the knowledge that the correction of the trade imbalance should assure continued strong growth in the manufacturing sector. According to the most recent Department of Commerce survey of investment intentions U.S. manufacturers plan to increase spending for plant and equipment in real terms by S.6 percent in THE DOLLAR AND RELATIVE IMPORT PRICES The price of nonpetroleum imports relative to the U.S. consumer price index fell until the fourth quarter of at which time it was percent below its level. Allowing further years for this relative price decline to work its full effect on import quantities econometric estimates suggest that a relative price decline of this magnitude would have induced about a percent increase in real nonpetroleum imports. In the fourth quarter of nonpetroleum imports were about percent above their level. The additional increase reflects large increases in U.S. income and real domestic demand and the need for the heavily indebted developing countries to run external surpluses in order to service their debts. There is therefore little mystery about the rapid growth of real imports between and the end of From the end of to the end of U.S. real nonpetroleum imports increased percent ; from the end of to the end of they increased a further percent. Some of these increases can be explained by the growth of real domestic demand ( percent in and percent in ) and especially for by the delayed effects of earlier reductions in relative import prices. However in view of the substantial depreciation of the dollar beginning in early the continued rapid growth of real nonpetroleum imports in and appears somewhat out of line with earlier empirical relationships. This continued strong growth of real imports not a smaller than normal response of real exports accounts for the failure of U.S. real net exports to improve as rapidly as would normally be expected given the large adjustment in the foreign exchange value of the dollar Although the recent strength in real nonpetroleum imports is unusual given the sharp depreciation of the dollar this strength is not unusual given the behavior of the relative price of such imports. As illustrated in Chart the relative price of nonpetroleum imports increased very little during the period of dollar depreciation. At the end of it stood just percent above its level in the first quarter of ( and only percent above its lowest level in the fourth quarter of ) despite a percent depreciation of the dollar Econometric studies suggest that the relative price of nonpetroleum imports normally would have risen about percent in response to dollar depreciation rather than the amount actually recorded. It appears that the very limited response of relative import prices largely accounts for the failure of real import growth to slow to the extent that normally would be expected given the size of the dollar 's decline PROFIT MARGINS AND IMPORT PRICES A substantial decline in the cost of materials purchased by foreign exporters partially accounts for the slow rise in relative import prices in the United States since Measured in U.S. dollars the price of oil in averaged about half its level in One commonly cited index of the dollar price of raw commodities fell percent between early and late Other factors being equal reductions in the dollar cost of raw materials allow foreign exporters to reduce the dollar prices of U.S. imports without reducing their profit margins. However if appreciation of foreign currencies and movements in foreign labor costs are considered the decline in materials costs only partly explains the limited increase of import prices in the United States during the period of dollar depreciation. Apparently the profit margins of foreign exporters have absorbed much of the effect of dollar depreciation The profit margins of exporting firms typically absorb some of the effect of movements in exchange rates. This appears to be true to a limited extent for U.S. firms exporting to foreign markets and to a greater extent for foreign firms exporting to the United States. When the dollar appreciates U.S. exporters whose costs often are determined in U.S. dollars may not raise their prices in foreign markets ( quoted in foreign currencies ) in the same proportion as the dollar appreciates. Instead to help preserve their market share abroad or for other reasons they sometimes will absorb part of the effect of dollar appreciation by reducing their profit margins on export sales Conversely when the dollar depreciates U.S. exporters may not cut their prices in foreign markets in the same proportion as the dollar 's decline and their profit margins may expand. Similarly foreign exporters to the United States may not cut their prices in U.S. markets as much as the dollar appreciates or raise their prices here as much as the dollar depreciates The evidence concerning adjustment of profit margins in response to exchange-rate changes is largely inferential. Some evidence is available in some specific cases but there are no comprehensive data on profit margins in different national markets for U.S. firms or for foreign firms. It is possible however to construct proxy measures of the ratio of prices to costs that indicate general movements in profit margins. For U.S. exporters the dollar price of U.S. nonagricultural exports is taken as a measure of prices received in foreign markets. If this price is divided by the U.S. producer price index ( PPI ) for finished goods a proxy price-cost ratio for U.S. exporters can be constructed. For foreign exporters to the United States the dollar price of U.S. nonpetroleum imports is one measure of prices received. If this price is divided by the foreign wholesale price index converted into U.S. dollars using market exchange rates a proxy price-cost ratio for foreign exporters to the United States also can be constructed. An increase in this price-cost ratio generally suggests an increase in the corresponding profit margin but the relationship probably is not exact. However alternative measures of the price-cost ratio show generally similar movements The behavior of the price-cost ratios for U.S. and foreign exporters is illustrated in Chart The levels of the two indexes are not particularly meaningful but their movements in comparison with movements in the Federal Reserve 's index of the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar are important. Basically the price-cost ratio for U.S. exporters shows relatively little movement although there is a fairly consistent downward trend beginning in In contrast the price-cost ratio for foreign exporters moves in fairly close sympathy although somewhat less than in proportion with movements in the exchange rate U.S. and Foreign Exporters ' Price-Cost Ratios and the Exchange Rate lnde>c = Exchange Rate A Index ^ / \ / \ SA \ U.S. Exporters ' Price-Cost Ratio * / " " " Foreign Exporters ' \ \ Price-Cost Ratio ^ ->+ * * x ^ > s/ i i i i 1i i i 1i i i 1i i t 1i i i 1t t t 1i 1f I 11I 1I I 1I 11I -VMultilateral trade-weighted value of the dollar against the currencies of the G-10 countries plus Switzerland -2/Ratio of the implicit price deflator for nonagricultural exports to the U.S. producer price index for finished goods .2/Ratio of the implicit price deflator for nonpetroleum imports to a trade-weighted wholesale price index for eight industrial countries excluding the United States divided by the exchange rate index Note. Data for fourth quarter are preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Data Resources Inc The behavior of the price-cost ratios relative to the exchange rate illustrated in Chart is broadly consistent with the behavior of relative import and export prices illustrated in Chart It appears that U.S. exporters basically price their products in dollars and in line with movements in domestic costs. The relative price of U.S. exports in foreign markets therefore moves in close sympathy with the exchange rate ( Chart ) while the price-cost ratio for U.S. exporters shows little relation with the exchange rate ( Chart ) The reverse largely holds for foreign exporters. The relative price of foreign exports moves to some extent in response to exchange-rate movements ( indicated by the inverse relation between movements in the relative price of nonpetroleum imports and movements in the ex- change rate in Chart ) while the foreign price-cost ratio appears to absorb most of the effect of exchange-rate changes ( Chart ) The decline in the price-cost ratio for U.S. exporters between and or is consistent with the fact that U.S. exporters were under heavy competitive pressure in foreign markets and chose to absorb some of this pressure in lower profit margins. The further decline of the price-cost ratio for U.S. exporters through is * peculiar in view of the very large correction in the value of the dollar Part of this anomaly may be due to deficiencies in the proxy measure of the price-cost ratio. An alternative measure based on unit labor costs and raw materials prices rather than the PPI does not show a decline in ; it is roughly constant throughout the 1980s. The strong growth of corporate profits for manufacturing firms in and the strong growth of exports suggest that profit margins were not falling The recent behavior of the price-cost ratio for foreign exporters suggests that their absorption of the effects of dollar depreciation at least partly explains the less-than-expected relative price increase of U.S. imports. The extent of such absorption also appears to have exceeded previous experience. Studies using alternative measures of the price-cost ratio or the profit margin for foreign exporters generally have confirmed these impressions Less than complete passthrough of measured dollar depreciation to import prices may result from changes in the pattern of international trade. For example the sources of U.S. imports may have been shifting in the direction of exporters with relatively lower production costs measured in U.S. dollars including exporters located in countries whose currencies have appreciated relatively little against the U.S. dollar. In addition some products imported into the United States have been subject to quantitative restrictions imposed by the United States or by the countries of origin. The prices of such imported products in U.S. markets are influenced strongly by these restrictions rather than by exchange rates Less than complete passthrough is also consistent with economic theory. Foreign producers whose costs tend to rise with increased output and whose sales have been falling ( in both domestic and foreign markets ) probably have been experiencing declining production costs especially at the margin. Such producers naturally would cut their prices in line with declines in their marginal production costs even if their profits ( taking account of fixed costs ) were falling. Furthermore for a foreign producer whose dollar prices are higher than production costs holding the dollar price constant and cutting the profit margin may retain more profits when the dollar depreciates than raising the dollar price and suffering substantial sales losses Moreover if a large share of a foreign producer 's total sales are in the U.S. market primarily in competition with U.S. producers there may be little alternative to maintaining dollar prices even when production costs in terms of dollars rise due to appreciation of the producer 's home currency. Some of the profit shrinkage may be passed back to the foreign producer 's workers and suppliers who also recognize their indirect dependence on sales in the U.S. market. Because of the large size of the U.S. market this situation is more likely to arise for foreign firms selling in the United States than for U.S firms selling abroad. Finally as a general marketing strategy firms may find it advantageous to maintain stable prices despite fluctuations in production costs arising from exchange-rate changes or other factors. This may be especially important if brand loyalty is a significant sales factor if production costs are a relatively small share of the final sales price or if fluctuations in production costs are viewed as temporary Whatever the reason for the relatively limited passthrough of dollar depreciation to U.S. import prices through the end of the most recent depreciation of the dollar and some of the residual effects of earlier depreciation may have a more substantial effect on import prices in the future. During the past year dollar depreciation has become more general against a broader range of currencies and some quantitative restrictions on imports that were previously important are becoming redundant. Presumably there is also a limit beyond which profit margins can not reasonably be squeezed. Furthermore foreign producers may now recognize that much of the dollar 's depreciation since is likely to prove permanent so previously delayed price adjustments may now be made In sum U.S. exports appear to have a good potential for growth while economic forces are working to slow if not partially reverse the growth of imports. Because of strong productivity growth effective cost containment and exchange-rate adjustment U.S. exporters already have regained the international competitive position they held in when the United States had a substantial surplus of real net exports. The additional depreciation of the dollar during the fourth quarter of and the continuing passthrough of some of the effects of earlier depreciation should enhance export competitiveness further. Provided that costs remain effectively contained and demand growth continues in foreign markets real U.S. exports should continue their recent vigorous growth. For real U.S. imports increasing passthrough to relative import prices of the effects of recent and earlier dollar depreciation should limit growth. Anticipated slow growth of real domestic demand is an additional factor limiting likely growth of imports. Thus with import growth restrained and exports growing strongly improvements in real net exports should contribute substantially to overall U.S. economic growth THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS Reduction of external imbalances requires substantial macroeconomic and structural adjustments that may be difficult to achieve rapidly without endangering the fundamental objective of maintaining economic growth with low inflation. To be successful therefore the process of reducing external imbalances must be gradual. It also must be persistent. The apparent response of financial markets to disappointing news about external imbalances suggests that an undesirably rapid pace of adjustment could be forced if external imbalances are not steadily reduced. Moreover the incentives to undertake the necessary structural adjustments probably are enhanced when the need for and reward from such adjustments are apparent Consider the necessary macroeconomic adjustment in the United States. In the fourth quarter of the U.S. deficit in real net exports was equivalent to about percent of real GNP. As a matter of arithmetic elimination of this deficit requires that real GNP rise about percent relative to real domestic demand or equivalently that real domestic demand fall by about percent relative to real GNP. Yet since the Korean war there has been only one period longer than a year and a half when annual growth of real GNP has consistently exceeded annual growth of real domestic demand by close to a percentage point. This period lasted just over years and it included when a sudden drop in real domestic demand drove the economy into a sharp recession. The danger is that without the assurance of substantial persistent improvement in the trade balance slow growth of real domestic demand increases the risk of recession. Prudence therefore suggests that several years be allowed to achieve the large necessary reductions in the U.S. real net export deficit For other countries excessively rapid reduction of the U.S. net export deficit also poses significant macroeconomic problems. In the world as a whole demand growth must equal output growth. Therefore if slower domestic demand growth in the United States is not offset by more rapid domestic demand growth in other countries world output growth would suffer and the effects would not be limited to the United States. Slow growth or outright decline of U.S. imports means slow growth or outright decline of other countries ' exports. This process could be mutually reinforcing increasing the risk of worldwide recession. Moreover there appear to be practical limits to the growth of real domestic demand that can be expected in other countries. Given the objective of sustaining world output growth therefore there are practical limits to the desirable rate of reduction of external imbalances Because the tradable goods and services sector of the U.S. economy is roughly percent of the total economy the structural adjustments required to reduce the U.S. trade deficit are relatively larger than the macroeconomic adjustments. To reduce the real net export deficit by percent of GNP production of tradable goods ( including tradable services ) must expand by about percent relative to consumption of tradable goods. Except in an economic downturn U.S consumption of tradable goods is unlikely to decline over a sustained period. Indeed the need to expand productive capacity in the tradable goods sector is likely to keep domestic demand for tradable capital goods relatively strong. Therefore reduction of the trade deficit in an environment of economic growth likely will require significant expansion of domestic production of tradable goods In production of tradable goods probably expanded at about a percent rate ( the growth rate of industrial production ) and the rate of capacity utilization increased significantly. Sustaining output growth at a percent rate probably would be feasible if productive capacity were expanded sufficiently rapidly. However at this rate of output growth it would take several years to close the gap between production and consumption of tradable goods. In a growing economy with the unemployment rate already down to percent pushing adjustment of the tradable goods sector too fast could generate undesirable cost pressures that among other problems could erode the international competitiveness of U.S. producers For other countries whose trade positions must adjust as the U.S position improves their structural adjustment problem is essentially the opposite. Production of tradable goods must decline relative to consumption of tradable goods. This adjustment will be easier and less painful to achieve especially for workers and firms in the tradable goods sector if it occurs gradually through a shift in the relative growth rates of tradable goods production and consumption rather than suddenly through an absolute decline of tradable goods production. In the United States it should be recalled even though adjustments in tradable goods industries often were difficult during the period of the growing U.S. trade deficit output of most tradable goods industries ( particularly manufactures ) continued to expand in line with the overall economy Moreover outright contraction or very slow growth of tradable goods industries in foreign countries could impair overall economic growth there. Resources need to shift away from tradable goods and toward nontradable goods. However unemployment of resources in the tradable goods sector means temporary income losses that may limit spending and thereby impair domestic demand growth essential to maintaining overall growth in the world economy. These difficulties could be magnified if investment in the tradable goods sector drops precipitously without offsetting increases of investment in other sectors. Thus all trading nations share a common interest in avoiding adjustment pressures that are ultimately too strong and selfdefeating CONCLUSION Macroeconomic and structural adjustments in the United States and other countries have begun to reduce external imbalances in an environment of sustainable noninflationary growth. That process will continue in and beyond. Growth of real domestic demand has slowed in the United States and it appears likely to remain relatively slow in the period ahead. Federal deficit reduction together with prospective improvement in the private saving-investment balance should improve the national saving-investment balance. Growth of real domestic demand abroad has accelerated due to government policies and market forces. Relative price adjustments resulting from the substantial correction in the foreign exchange value of the dollar already have brought and will continue to bring reductions in worldwide external imbalances. These relative price adjustments have helped to stimulate stronger internally led growth in foreign economies and to motivate necessary structural adjustments both in the United States and abroad Clearly it is important to maintain policy momentum in the macroeconomic area as well as to continue progress in reducing structural rigidities and barriers to adjustment especially in economies with high unemployment rates. Reduction of marginal tax rates of burdensome government regulations and of inefficient government subsidies and when appropriate judicious easing of monetary policy and increased spending on worthwhile public investments can contribute to demand and output growth without raising risks of inflation Elimination of restrictive work practices excessive nonwage labor costs expensive job security arrangements rigid work rules and wage restraints and other labor market practices that impair mobility and discourage job creation can contribute to both growth and adjustment. On the consumption side reform of government policies that prevent efficient use of scarce land and removal of artificial restraints on mortgage and consumer credit can aid growth under appropriate circumstances Finally maintenance of an open system of world trade is essential to the process of reducing external imbalances in an environment of noninflationary growth for the world economy. Specifically the growth-oriented method for gradually reducing external imbalances requires stronger demand growth in foreign countries while demand growth remains restrained in the United States. This will allow improvements in the U.S. trade balance to come primarily from an expansion of exports rather than a sharp cut in imports. For this method to work foreign markets must be open to U.S. exports. The alternative method for reducing the U.S. trade deficit protectionism at home and retaliatory market-closing measures abroad is a prescription for worldwide economic stagnation. Especially now when U.S. industries have regained international competitiveness and export growth appears likely to sustain economic expansion the United States has a particular interest in avoiding protectionism and pursuing instead its program for freer and fairer trade CHAPTER Expanding Trade and Avoiding Protectionism TWICE IN THIS CENTURY the United States has taken the lead in setting a new course for the world 's trading system. The first time was in with the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Act which led to global protectionism and contributed to the Great Depression. The second time was after World War II with the process of trade liberalization brought about through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) The result was more rapid recovery from the destruction of war the unprecedented expansion of world commerce and increased prosperity in the industrialized and developing countries The Smoot-Hawley Act and GATT both taught that the United States has a large influence on the world economy for better or worse. Likewise the actions taken in the coming months regarding American trade policy have the potential to influence the course of international trade for years to come Recognition of the immense benefits of trade is a fundamental principle of American economic policy. The framers of the U.S. Constitution saw the wisdom of prohibiting all tariffs and duties on the trade between the States. Today those trading States together with the States that were added later are among the most prosperous in the world. The same principles of trade apply to commerce between countries Although recent negotiations are improving U.S. access to a substantial portion of world markets current domestic legislative proposals threaten to close U.S. markets and reverse many of the market-opening gains made over the past years. On the positive side are the Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement entered into on January the United States-Mexico Framework Understanding signed on November and other initiatives proposed by the United States in the ongoing Uruguay Round negotiations of GATT. On the negative side are proposed changes to domestic trade law contained in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of the effects of which are potentially dangerous EXPANDING TRADE OPPORTUNITIES ABROAD Both bilateral and multilateral initiatives are vital for expanding trade opportunities. In the past year bilateral agreements were successfully completed and substantial progress was made at the multilateral GATT negotiations. During the coming year the multilateral GATT negotiations will become increasingly important CANADA-UNITED STATES FREE-TRADE AGREEMENT In many respects a free-trade agreement between the United States and Canada is a natural consequence of longstanding friendship common economic interests and geographic proximity. Nevertheless there is a history of numerous unsuccessful attempts over more than a century to reach a free-trade agreement. That an agreement was reached in stands as a major achievement. The two nations had to overcome special interests internal pressures for the status quo fears about loss of identity and protectionism in order to craft a final document The outcome represents a victory for both countries. For the first time the agreement firmly anchors free trade as the fundamental principle governing commerce between the two countries. It now remains for the U.S. Congress and the Canadian government to approve the understanding Canada and the United States are each other 's largest trading partner. Measured in terms of national product they will make up the largest free-trade area in the world. Chart shows the relative importance of Canadian trade to the United States. In terms of bilateral trade Canada represents percent of all U.S. trade. As the chart shows trade with Mexico represents percent of U.S. trade and trade with all other countries in the Western Hemisphere amounts to percent History The United States and Canada share common origins as former British colonies. In spite of different political histories the natural economic proclivities of the two nations have led them to greater cooperation and economic interdependence as the years have passed The earliest attempt at a free-trade agreement dates back over years. Canada initiated discussions with the United States for bilateral free trade in the middle and late 1840s in response to growing separation from the British market brought about by Britain 's unilateral movement toward free trade and the repeal of the Corn Laws. In under the impetus of the U.S. desire for fishing rights on the east coast a reciprocity treaty was signed covering free trade in natural products. The treaty was abrogated in by the United States Chart Shares of U.S. and Canadian Merchandise Trade in Shares of U.S. Trade Shares of Canadian Trade Japan Canada % % Rest of World % Other Western Hemisphere % Other Western Hemisphere Mexico % % Rest of World % United States % Note. Shares are based on the sum of bilateral exports and imports in dollars Source : Council of Economic Advisers based on International Monetary Fund data due in some measure to British support for the South in the American Civil War and the ties between Britain and Canada In the Canadian provinces joined together in confederation Seven years later the United States and Canada negotiated a new reciprocity treaty which failed to be confirmed by the U.S. Senate. Since that time sentiment in both countries has alternated on the notion of bilateral free trade and the free-trade issue has been revisited frequently including a half dozen times in this century Over the years the tariffs of both countries have been used to provide differing amounts of protection. In the average U.S. tariff level was percent and Canadian tariffs were percent. U.S. tariffs rose to a high of percent in following passage of the Smoot-Hawley Act while average Canadian tariffs reached percent in After World War II both countries * tariffs were reduced The post-Tokyo Round average U.S. tariff was percent and the average Canadian rate was percent although tariffs on selected products were substantially higher Recognizing the natural economic benefits to both countries the Canadian Royal Commission on the Economic Union and Develop- ment Prospects for Canada concluded in August that it was in Canada 's interest " to engage the United States more directly in bilateral free-trade negotiations. " In the United States the Trade Agreements Act of already had instructed the President to study " the desirability of entering into trade agreements with countries in the northern portion of the western hemisphere " for the mutual expansion of market opportunities. On September the Canadian Prime Minister requested that the United States and Canada consider the potential for negotiating a comprehensive free-trade agreement The request was accepted and the President notified the Congress on December of his intent to enter into bilateral negotiations which began formally on June Benefits of a Free-Trade Area Three-fourths of the trade between the United States and Canada is already duty free. Moving to a free-trade area expands the range of duty-free trade to cover all goods The reasons for creating a free-trade area are essentially the same as the reasons for encouraging free trade generally. Moving to an open trading regime brings gains associated with the freer flow of goods and better allocation of resources to productive uses. Allowing the Nation 's households and firms to trade freely with foreigners means that domestic sellers can add the net demand of foreigners to domestic demand thus expanding their market. Similarly buyers can add the net foreign supply to domestic supply expanding the total supply and lowering the prices of goods they purchase. Because on average prices fall for the products for which the country is a net purchaser and rise for the products for which the country is a net seller ( a terms-of-trade improvement ) the cumulative effect of freer trade is to increase welfare in both countries. Gains by one do not imply losses to the other Another benefit from enlargement of the market is greater opportunity for economies of scale in production marketing and distribution. Many products can be produced and sold at lower cost per unit if a larger volume is manufactured. A larger volume generally means lower prices to the consumer and a greater variety of products which can be profitably offered for sale in the marketplace. In addition the incentives to invest in research and development in order to enhance technical knowledge and create new products are greater in a larger market. Again these benefits can accrue to both countries at the same time Many of the effects of the Free-Trade Agreement such as enhanced growth and the momentum given to ongoing negotiations to open markets worldwide are difficult to quantify. Benefits in the form of lower prices to consumers ( reduced cost of living ) and in- creased profits to firms however can be modeled and quantified Studies of the effects of the Free-Trade Agreement estimate that these economic gains to the United States are on the order of $ billion to $ billion annually. Most studies show that gains to Canada are of a similar absolute size. This stream of benefits is like an annuity that will grow over time with economic growth in the two countries. The present value of these gains ranges between $ billion and $ billion Because Canada is the smaller country however the effect of the free-trade area on returns-to-scale gains is more important for Canada. Studies show that these harder-to-quantify effects have the potential to increase Canadian gains severalfold If there are such obvious benefits to freer trade then why is there opposition to it ? One reason is the claim that removing trade barriers eliminates jobs or sends them abroad. But this argument is misleading because overall employment in an economy is determined by internal conditions and macroeconomic policy not by the existence of trade barriers or the level of trade flows. The United States created nearly million payroll jobs over the course of the current economic expansion a period of U.S. trade deficits and relatively open U.S markets. During the same period the European Community ( EC ) created virtually no net new jobs even though they experienced trade surpluses. The same level of employment can be obtained in the total absence of foreign trade as when trade is completely free. But without foreign trade a nation will be worse off economically because in effect it will throw away part of its productive capability the ability to convert surplus goods into other goods through foreign trade Free trade leads to industrial expansion in those industries in which a country has a comparative advantage. To expand in one sector however productive resources including labor must shift from other sectors. Thus employment may decline in some sectors and there may be temporary unemployment during the transition. To halt such economic adjustments in order to prevent the loss of jobs in a particular sector however is to lose the benefits of international trade. ( For a discussion of the Administration 's proposal to aid the transition of workers to new employment see the summary of the Worker Readjustment Program in Chapter ) Elements of the Agreement Visible Barriers. If both countries approve the agreement beginning on January all bilateral tariffs will be eliminated either immediately or in five or ten equal annual stages depending on the product. Table displays the average tariff rates by sector for each country as they apply to the other. In the clothing and footwear sectors for example Canadian tariffs on U.S. products are over per- cent. Other sectors in both countries are protected by tariffs ranging from percent down to nearly zero. Because each country retains its own tariffs on third-country trade the agreement provides for rules of origin that require articles imported into one country to be sufficiently processed in the importing country before they can be exported duty free to the other. Thus goods can not be imported into the country with the lower tariff and then exported duty free to the other country TABLE Canadian and U.S. Bilateral Tariffs by Sector [ Percent ] Canada Share subject to tariffs Sector Agricultural products United States Average tariff Share subject to tariffs Averai tariff Forest products Textiles apparel and footwear. Energy and chemicals Minerals and metals Machinery and equipment Miscellaneous manufactures ALL SECTORS Canadian averages are weighted by imports from the United States and vice versa. Average tariffs are calculated using only those products subject to tariffs Source : U.S. International Trade Commission estimates based on trade data The agreement also eliminates almost all quantitative restrictions on trade between the United States and Canada. In energy quantitative restrictions on imports or exports are prohibited with exceptions for national security considerations prevention of the exhaustion of a finite energy resource and a special exception placing an upper bound on the sales of Alaskan oil to Canada. If restrictions are imposed to prevent resource exhaustion access must be granted to the other party sufficient to maintain a prescribed proportion of their purchases relative to total supply Canada is the largest supplier of energy to the United States and it is also the largest importer of U.S. coal. Two-way energy trade has amounted to about $ billion annually and is likely to increase as a result of the Free-Trade Agreement Canadians sometimes have argued that it is harmful for Canada to sell its energy resources to foreign countries. It is hard to support such a position when the move to free trade in energy implies higher prices for Canadian sellers and when contracts to sell are freely entered into by both buyer and seller. From the Canadian point of view the Free-Trade Agreement represents an assured market in the United States. From the U.S. perspective a unified market reduces uncertainties about future energy supply In agriculture several significant quantitative restrictions will be liberalized in addition to the elimination of tariffs and export subsidies. The United States has a comparative advantage in most fruit and vegetable trade. Seasonal quantitative restrictions remain in place but they are relaxed under the agreement. Import restrictions on poultry products also will be lessened. Of general significance to agriculture trade in fertilizers and other agricultural inputs will be liberalized Invisible Barriers. The past two decades have seen growth in the less visible but economically damaging nontariff and rule-based trade barriers. Invisible barriers to trade can take virtually an unlimited number of forms. Examples include discriminatory access to distribution systems for foreign goods relative to domestic goods the application of standards and codes that restrict foreign goods rules about government purchases ( e.g. the " Buy American ' * provisions of U.S law ) failure to provide intellectual property protection for foreign processes and goods and various procedural restrictions on foreign investment The Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement makes progress in reducing a number of these barriers. For example both countries now have agreed to provide national treatment to the investors of the other subject to grandfathering existing regulations. Direct U.S. and Canadian investment in each other 's economy currently totals over $ billion. The free movement of capital across geographic boundaries allows resources to move to the location of their greatest usefulness and profitability making the opportunities of the combined market available to the resources of both regions. After years Canada will screen direct acquisitions by U.S. investors only when the Canadian company being sold has assets of $ million or more in constant Canadian dollars. Canadian screening of indirect acquisitions ( where a firm 's ownership changes when ownership of its parent firm outside the country changes ) by U.S. investors will be phased out completely. Other provisions eliminate certain performance requirements imposed by one party on investors of the other Another section of the agreement ensures ease of border crossing by individuals traveling for business purposes The Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement breaks new ground as the first bilateral agreement involving the United States which governs the entire financial sector. The agreement frees the capital market share and growth restrictions placed on U.S. banks in Canada ( currently at least U.S. institutions are affected ) and it makes it possible for U.S. insurance firms to establish or acquire closely held commercial banks and federally regulated insurance and trust companies. Canadian financial institutions will continue to enjoy the open access already received in the United States. In addition they are granted certain guarantees giving security of access to the U.S. financial sector The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is supplemented by an agreement on government procurement describing rules for foreign participation in domestic government procurement. After February provisions of the code will apply to purchases by covered agencies of signatory governments of special drawing rights ( in $ ) or greater in value. The previous cutoff was special drawing rights. Under the Free-Trade Agreement that threshold is reduced for U.S.-Canadian procurement to $ Previously approximately three-fifths of Canadian government procurement was not covered by the code due to the high threshold. The procurement market affected by this agreement is estimated to be on the order of $ million in Canada and almost $ billion in the United States. Measures which strengthen current code disciplines and negotiations to improve the openness of the government procurement process are provided for in the agreement Both countries have agreed to refrain from using domestic technical standards as a barrier to trade. For example they have agreed not to use in-country requirements for accreditation of testing facilities and certification bodies and to recognize each other 's systems for laboratory accreditation. Moreover both countries will work to harmonize Federal standards when appropriate and to consult about potential problems before new standards are implemented Both Canada and the United States already have similar and effective laws for protecting intellectual property. However the agreement resolves a number of problems in this area. In particular Canada will extend copyright protection to the retransmission of copyrighted programming. Both countries have agreed to work in the Uruguay Round negotiations to enhance intellectual property rights protection worldwide The Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement is the first major agreement to apply binding rules to trade in the services sector Scores of service categories are covered including telecommunications network-based enhanced services computer services professional services ( accountants architects engineers scientists management consultants ) tourism insurance construction engineering and retail and wholesale trade. The basic principles underlying the agreement for services are national treatment ( equivalent treatment of foreign and domestic nationals ) access to domestic distribution systems establishment of a commercial presence transparency of rules and procedures and dispute settlement arrangements Currently there are relatively few barriers to U.S.-Canadian trade in services and bilateral trade is already open in most areas. The Free-Trade Agreement insures that the environment will remain open governed by the principles enunciated in the agreement Other Provisions The machinery and transport equipment sector which includes road vehicles accounted for $ billion of bilateral trade in over percent of bilateral trade between Canada and the United States. Under the Automotive Products Agreement of between Canada and the United States a large part of trade in automotive products is already duty free. Under the Free-Trade Agreement tariffs on all original equipment tires and parts will be eliminated ; the Canadian embargo on used-car trade will be phased out in years ; and duty waivers on imports of automobile products linked to exports of automobiles to the other party will be stopped At least one-half of the assembly costs and production materials in automobiles freely traded across the border must originate in the exporting country. To meet this requirement averaging over a 12month period on the relevant vehicle class is permitted. Recognizing the fast-changing nature of the automobile industry the agreement mandates the establishment of a select panel to assess the state of the industry and make further recommendations for later consideration The concern over cultural identity primarily by the Canadians led the negotiators to exempt cultural industries from the provisions of the Free-Trade Agreement. Cultural industries include the publication of books magazines periodicals or newspapers ; the production and sale of films and video and audio recordings ; the sale of music ; and communication media for the general public ( radio television and cable television ) However if one party takes actions which normally would have been prohibited the other party is permitted to take measures of an equivalent commercial effect. Actions inconsistent with free trade therefore should be taken only rarely and for strongly held reasons The Institutional Features. As with any agreement between two sovereign parties arrangements must be made to resolve misunderstandings and disputes that arise after implementation. Devising a dispute resolution mechanism suitable to both countries was a major difficulty in reaching a final agreement. The solution chosen to resolve disputes successfully and ingeniously blends the binational settlement process with the separate laws of each nation The agreement establishes the Canadian-United States Trade Commission to supervise implementation of the agreement and resolve disputes. The Commission composed of members from both countries and led by Cabinet-level representatives will meet at least once a year in regular sessions. Either country may request ad hoc consultations ; if consultations are unsuccessful in resolving a dispute either country may request a meeting of the Commission. If the Commission is unsuccessful in resolving a dispute promptly it may establish a panel consisting of two members chosen by each country and a fifth member chosen by both countries from a predetermined roster. The recommendation of the panel would form the basis for the Commission 's final determination normally resulting in the nonimplementation or removal of a measure. If a country fails to implement the findings of a panel then the other country has the right to suspend equivalent benefits The safeguards provisions which address problems faced by industries harmed by increased fair trade are separated into two parts One part regulates safeguards for third-country trade. The United States and Canada are excluded from any actions taken by the other under Article XIX ( the safeguards article ) of GATT unless goods of the other party contribute importantly to and are a substantial cause of the injury. If the other party is included in the action the remedy can not cut back imports from the other party to less than the level of imports over the base period specified by the agreement with allowance for growth The other part addresses agreement-related injuries where it can be established that duty reductions resulting from the agreement caused the injury. In this case the remedy can not exceed the lesser of the most-favored-nation rate of duty in effect at that time or preagreement rates of duty. Furthermore the remedy can remain in effect for only years In cases involving antidumping and countervailing duty law the agreement sets up a separate binational dispute settlement mechanism. A panel is made up of two members chosen by each country and a fifth member chosen by both countries from a predetermined roster. The panel would replace judicial review by both the United States and Canada. Each country would continue to apply its own domestic antidumping and countervailing duty laws but upon request the binational panel would review the administrative record of a disputed decision. After reviewing the antidumping or countervailing duty order for its consistency with the relevant law ( statutes and judicial precedent ) of the country applying the order the panel has binding authority to sustain or remand the decision back to the relevant investigating authority No future changes to antidumping or countervailing duty law would apply to the other party unless it is specifically stated to apply to the other country in the legislation the changes are fully consist- ent with the GATT antidumping code and subsidies code the other party is notified and prior negotiations are entered into upon request. If a panel requires modification of the changes to the statutes because they are inconsistent with GATT or because they overturn a prior decision of a binational dispute settlement panel compulsory negotiations are mandated for days. If a solution is not found the other party may enact comparable legislation take equivalent executive action or terminate the agreement with days ' notice Viewed from the perspectives of economics history and international relations the Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement represents a remarkable achievement. In its implications for the future of U.S.-Canadian trade the benefits which it secures for both countries and the example which it sets for trade liberalization worldwide it is truly an historic document THE UNITED STATES-MEXICO FRAMEWORK UNDERSTANDING On November the United States and Mexico signed an understanding concerning a framework of principles and procedures for consultations regarding trade and investment relations between the two countries. A bilateral consultative mechanism was set up to review trade and investment issues resolve disputes and negotiate the removal of trade barriers. The agreed upon principles and procedures supplement those in GATT Mexico is the third largest purchaser of U.S. goods behind Canada and Japan. In U.S. exports to Mexico were $ billion while U.S. imports from Mexico were $ billion of which some $ billion was crude petroleum. In trade terms the United States is more than times as large as Mexico 's second most important trading partner ( Japan ) The United States accounts for a full two-thirds of Mexico 's total trade with the world In spite of the importance of trade between the United States and Mexico the two countries have been without a formal mechanism to govern their commercial relations. Although the United States and Mexico generally grant one another most-favored-nation treatment and other benefits similar to those found in GATT there was no formal channel to pursue the complaints that inevitably arise with such a large volume of trade. Agreeing to overcome this deficiency the Presidents of the United States and Mexico decided in August to pursue the idea of a bilateral framework understanding Formal discussions began in February Under the bilateral mechanism either party may request consultations at any time to be held within days of the request. Annual consultations will be held to review the status of the two countries ' trade and investment relationship. The United States and Mexico also agreed to initiate discussions promptly in such areas as investment intellectual property electronics textiles agriculture steel and services sector information exchange The United States-Mexico Framework Understanding reflects the size and importance of the two countries ' bilateral economic relationship. This step adds further stability to the relationship and signals the mutual commitment to resolve trade and investment problems expeditiously GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE In the past years both world production and international trade have grown rapidly. Real global output rose at an average annual rate of percent while the real volume of international trade expanded by percent per year. Through more efficient use of global resources increased international trade leads to higher global living standards. GATT is partly responsible for the flowering of world trade GATT is a multilateral agreement that defines the responsibilities and operating rules of international trade that have been agreed upon by signatory governments ( contracting parties ) As its preamble states GATT 's goal is to raise living standards through " reciprocal and mutually advantageous arrangements directed to the substantial reduction of tariffs and other barriers to trade and to the elimination of discriminatory treatment in international commerce. * ' Four basic principles underlie GATT : ( ) Member countries should work to lower trade barriers in general and to eliminate the use of quotas in particular ; ( ) any barrier to trade should be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all member countries ( the principle of most-favored-nation treatment ) ; ( ) once a tariff concession is made it can not later be rescinded without extending compensation to affected trade partners ; and ( ) trade conflicts should be settled by consultation The Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations officially launched at a Ministerial Meeting of GATT contracting parties in Punta del Este Uruguay in September is the eighth GATTsponsored negotiating round since World War II and the first since the Tokyo Round. While an attempt was made to address nontariff barriers in earlier rounds real progress was not made until the Tokyo Round which resulted in nine agreements or codes pertaining to issues such as customs valuation import licensing technical standards for products subsidies and countervailing duties government procurement antidumping duties and rules governing trade in civilian aircraft This Administration played the principal role in developing a broad consensus among GATT members to launch the Uruguay Round. The centerpiece of the U.S. approach to the Uruguay Round is a bold effort to bring GATT discipline to agricultural subsidies and agricultural trade barriers. Also due in large part to the efforts of U.S. negotiators barriers to trade in services restrictions on foreign investment and the protection of intellectual property rights ( beyond the limited area of counterfeiting ) are on the negotiating table for the first time. In pressing for the launching of GATT 's most ambitious multilateral trade negotiation ever the United States is seeking to revitalize and strengthen an institution which has served it and the rest of the world well Functioning of the GA TT System The Punta del Este Ministerial Declaration endorsed a threepronged approach to improve the functioning of the GATT system : enhanced surveillance ( on a country basis as well as on a subject basis ) of the contracting parties ' trade policies ; greater ministerial involvement ; and closer links between GATT the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and the World Bank. The Administration believes that these are among the most important reforms to GATT contemplated in the Uruguay Round. Besides fostering transparency and predictability periodic individual country reviews under the surveillance mechanism would encourage trade policies that benefit the functioning of the international trading system in conformity with GATT intents and precedents. Increased ministerial involvement is expected to raise countries ' political accountability within the GATT system and reinforce the free-trade principles on which it was founded. Improving GATT 's policy management by linking its activities more closely to those of the IMF and the World Bank would ensure that their activities are complementary in improving the outlook for continued trade liberalization among GATT member states Dispute Settlement Another institutional issue aimed at improving the effectiveness of the GATT system is reform of the dispute settlement mechanism of the General Agreement. There is widespread recognition that the existing consensual dispute settlement procedures do not always foster expeditious resolution of trade disputes. The United States has suggested possible improvements which might include an enhanced GATT mediation role process timetables improved panel procedures avenues for recourse should panel reports be blocked and the possibility of binding arbitration in certain instances Intellectual Property Rights Reward for creativity and innovation are the principal driving forces for technological change which in turn is a great source of dynamism for world trade. But because of inadequate laws or laws inadequately enforced patent trademark and copyright infringement has grown worldwide. Legitimate firms have reduced incentives to invest in research and development when some of the returns will be pirated. Intellectual property thieves do not devote the large sums of capital needed to develop a new product. Hence they are able to undersell legitimate competitors. And since the pirates only copy proven successes they need never absorb the cost of failures. The U.S. International Trade Commission has estimated that lost sales due to infringement of intellectual property are up to $ billion annually Under the auspices of GATT the Administration seeks a comprehensive intellectual property agreement to establish and enforce intellectual property rights. The U.S. negotiating team has proposed a consultation and dispute settlement mechanism combined with strong rules governing domestic and border enforcement. Such an agreement covering inter- and intracountry measures would increase legitimate trade by raising standards of protection and the obligation to enforce them Services Despite their large and growing role in world trade now accounting for approximately percent of the total services have never been a significant area of negotiation in GATT before the Uruguay Round. Difficult new issues arise in services trade that do not arise in goods trade. For example trade in services often requires local production of the service and therefore involves sensitive right-of-establishment and investment issues. The GATT concept of national treatment is based on the notion that a good receives the same treatment as domestic products once it has crossed the border into the importing country. The concept does not immediately carry over to services trade because it must be applied to service providers as well as to the service itself. The issue of defining the proper " border " and when it is crossed is different This Administration seeks a GATT services agreement which will provide a framework for future negotiations. The United States has proposed an umbrella agreement stating general trade liberalizing principles and second-level agreements or protocols for individual sectors. U.S. goals for services trade include greater transparency of domestic laws ; nondiscrimination and national treatment for foreignprovided services ; discipline on state-sanctioned monopolies ; antisub- sidy provisions ; and consultation and dispute settlement mechanisms for trade in services. Since liberalization of trade in services is expected to continue for many years the framework developed in the Uruguay Round must incorporate the flexibility needed to allow for growth and consideration of new issues Investment Direct investment encourages trade in goods and services boosts development and contributes to the efficient allocation of resources throughout the world. With a free market in foreign investment capital is allocated to those projects with the highest rates of return The United States is an example of the benefits of foreign direct investment both as a host country and as an investor. In the 19th century the United States became a leading economic power with the help of foreign capital. After World War II the United States became a leading provider of foreign direct investment in the world. More recently the United States again has been attracting increased capital flows from abroad Unfortunately many countries have attempted to stifle or distort the free flow of foreign investment an action that also affects trade flows. Distortions include domestic content requirements exchange controls licensing requirements technology transfer requirements and requirements for a minimum level of exports by the foreign corporation operating in the host country. The U.S. goal in these negotiations is to identify and systematically address investment restrictions which have a trade-distorting effect and then to bring those practices within the framework of GATT Agriculture in the Uruguay Round The United States has proposed the elimination of all policies that distort world agricultural production prices and trade. Since domestic farm programs and trade policy are fundamentally bound together free trade in agriculture requires reform of domestic agricultural policies as well as border measures such as tariffs and quotas World Agriculture in Disarray. The current round of multinational trade negotiations has begun at a time of stress in world agriculture Recently both world market prices and trade volumes have been low and farm programs worldwide have become more costly and distortionary Chart shows the changes in the real value of U.S. agricultural exports and the U.S. share of world exports. World and U.S. agricultural exports both expanded rapidly in the 1970s reached a peak in and have fallen since then. The U.S. share of world agricultural trade rose from percent in to over percent in Agricultural prices rose dramatically during the 1970s increasing nominal exports sixfold while the real value of exports doubled. Then in the 1980s U.S. agricultural export prices and quantities fell for most commodities. In the quantities values and market shares for U.S. agricultural exports rose and prospects are good for the rest of the decade Chart U.S. Agricultural Exports Billions of dollars ~ Share of World Agricultural Exports ( right scale ) Note. U.S. value for estimated ; world value not available Sources : Department of Agriculture Food and Agricultural Organization and Council of Economic Advisers World farm production prices and trade have been governed by numerous distortionary agricultural programs that frequently work at cross purposes. Many countries use a variety of policy measures that subsidize production or raise prices to consumers. These measures include tariffs import quotas variable import levies export subsidies price supports direct government payments based on output levels paid land diversions production or input quotas and subsidies for storage and inputs such as fertilizer credit insurance fuel and transportation One summary indicator of farm program effects the producer subsidy equivalent ( PSE ) measures the loss of farm income that would result from the removal of a given set of policies ( often reported as a percent of farm revenues ) An analogous measure the consumer subsidy equivalent ( CSE ) measures the total policy contribution to costs of farm output often reported as a percent of expenditures. Table shows average PSE and CSE measures for a variety of countries TABLE Agricultural Subsidies for Producers and Consumers Selected Countries [ Percent of value1 ] Country Australia Producers Consumers <3 ) Japan. United States Taiwan South Korea European Community ( EC-10 ) India Nigeria6 Producer figures are subsidy equivalents as percent of farm sales value ( PSEs ) ; consumer figures are percents of value at first sate after the farm gate ( CSEs ) For dairy subsidies sales value of primary dairy products is used. For Taiwan Korea Nigeria and India consumer subsidies are percents of consumer values at wholesale or retail levels. Positive figures indicate net subsidy ; negative figures indicate that policies provide a net tax relative to no such policies. Commodity coverage varies but for each country major grains oilseeds sugar and livestock products are included except as noted for Nigeria Estimates do not include state policies which would raise PSEs Not available Estimates do not include individual country policies which would raise PSEs and lower CSEs. For data are for EC-9 State policies are minor and are not included but general Federal subsidies such as for farm credit are included Commodity coverage is limited to wheat corn rice sugar cotton and cocoa Sources : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers In many developing countries where farmers are a large but not particularly influential segment of the economy producers are taxed and consumers subsidized for many agricultural goods. Thus PSEs are negative and CSEs are positive for most developing countries over a wide range of commodities. ( See for example the average PSE and CSE for Nigeria and India. ) During the last decade policy distortions have been slowly reduced in developing countries especially in Asia and Latin America. At the urging of the United States the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank farm prices in developing countries have been allowed to rise so that they more nearly reflect world market levels In most wealthy nations where agriculture is a small part of the economy and generally has been heavily subsidized farm programs have become increasingly distortionary leading to higher farm prices relative to world prices more restrictive import barriers and increased government subsidies. Crops such as sugar or wheat are grown at high cost in nations using price supports and import barriers and then surpluses are exported to the world market with the aid of large subsidies. World prices of many commodities have been depressed by these policies imposing a severe economic burden on export-dependent countries that would have a comparative advantage in the absence of these distortions In the United States farm programs have become particularly costly and complex. Table shows that overall PSEs in the United States doubled in the years from to The Agriculture and Food Act mandated high price supports at a time when world market prices were falling. In farmers were paid to cut back output ; surpluses were reduced temporarily but U.S. participation in world markets also declined. The Food Security Act of reduced price supports increased the removal of land and other resources from production expanded the use of Federal Government programs to aid exports and maintained target prices at up to twice the market price or more. In the United States also began the Export Enhancement Program to counter the subsidies of other exporters ( mainly the EC ) As a result of these policies Federal outlays for commodity programs reached $ billion in and net farm incomes have been high despite low market prices Agricultural production and consumption also is distorted throughout Europe. The Nordic countries Switzerland Austria and the EC all maintain high producer and consumer prices and restrict imports During the 1980s EC surpluses have been sold on world markets with the help of export subsidies. Table shows that the average PSE for the EC is above percent and EC buyers pay over percent more because of these farm programs. The Common Agricultural Policy cost taxpayers and consumers of the EC about $ billion in Japan has long been a net agricultural importer but it distorts world agricultural trade by holding its domestic prices high and limiting access to its markets. For wheat and rice Japan now has a support price greater than five times the world market price. Japanese producer and consumer prices for many agricultural goods are often twice the world market price. Japanese consumers spend about percent of their income for food compared to less than percent spent by consumers in the United States Many countries continued to pursue policies that increased agricultural trade distortions during a period of slowly liberalizing world trade partly because at the urging of the United States over years ago GATT prohibitions on import quotas and export subsidies were not applied to agriculture. During the GATT negotiations held over the past years few important agreements have been reached for liberalizing trade in agricultural commodities The most serious distortions and barriers related to international agricultural trade are caused by domestic programs in the industrialized countries that transfer income from consumers and taxpayers to owners of agricultural resources. Because these programs have been considered part of domestic policy rather than international trade policy it has been particularly difficult to include them in international negotiations The U.S. GATT Proposal in Agriculture. In July the United States put forward a GATT proposal on agriculture consisting of three major parts : ( ) an elimination gradually over years of all subsidies that distort agricultural trade either directly or indirectly ; ( ) an elimination gradually over years of all barriers to agricultural imports ; and ( ) international harmonizing of health and sanitation regulations so that differences can not be used as indirect trade barriers The U.S. proposal would not prohibit GATT contracting parties from transferring income to agricultural groups. Nor would it restrict bona fide foreign aid or domestic food assistance. Only those programs that have a direct or indirect effect on international trade including output subsidies would be restricted Reactions to the U.S. proposal have been encouraging. The October and December meetings in Geneva of the negotiating group on agriculture included additional formal proposals. The proposals by both Canada and the Cairns Group ( an informal organization of selfproclaimed " nonsubsidizing " nations that includes major exporters from developed and developing nations ) were consistent with the U.S. initiative. These proposals sent a clear signal that Canada and other Cairns Group members would be working together with the United States in this GATT round The EC and Japan have been expected to resist efforts to liberalize agricultural trade. However at the October GATT meeting the EC endorsed multilateral reductions of subsidies and the separation of income support from production. As was expected the EC also suggested a number of short-term measures involving supply controls and market sharing that would run counter to a move to freer trade Their proposal as a whole however leaves the negotiations on track Formal GATT proposals from the Nordic countries Japan and some other importers were made available in December. The Japanese agreed that subsidies generally should be reduced but they have emphasized the maintenance of some of the current array of import barriers. Japan and some other countries have argued that since they are already major importers of farm goods their production subsidies and import barriers are not a significant problem However they undoubtedly would import much more in the absence of barriers. The Japanese recognize that they have much to gain from the Uruguay Round because of Japan 's position as a major exporter of manufactured goods. Domestic political pressures in Japan in support of agriculture are strong but international and domestic pressures to join in the move toward free trade are also considerable Consequences of Liberalization. Because liberalization offers very significant potential benefits organizations such as the World Bank the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture have studied the likely pattern of prices production and trade flows that would follow as a consequence of world policy reform. A variety of studies have used different methodologies different underlying assumptions different base periods for comparison and somewhat different policy scenarios. Given these differences the conclusions are remarkably robust Removing agricultural barriers and ending subsidies is projected to foster a major expansion in international trade. Compared to what agricultural trade would likely be in the mid-1990s without reforms world wheat exports are projected to rise somewhat and coarse grain and rice exports are projected to expand substantially. In red meats and dairy products international trade is projected to more than double. East Asia Europe and other restricted markets are expected to experience major growth in imports. The United States is expected to profit from a major expansion in exports of several commodities such as tobacco coarse grain and meats. U.S. coarse grain sales also would expand in the domestic market because of the expansion of the U.S. livestock industry which in turn would be free to sell meat directly to currently restricted import markets Export prices under free trade are projected to be slightly higher for coarse grains and poultry in the range of to percent higher for wheat rice and sugar and up to percent higher or more for beef and dairy products. Prices paid to U.S. producers of program crops are projected to be higher under free trade than current world prices but lower than current target prices ( or support prices in the case of sugar and dairy products ) Removing trade barriers also would reduce substantially the instability of world commodity prices a factor now used as a rationale for many farm programs. Because consumers and producers in many countries now are insulated from world markets weather and yield shocks are not dampened and absorbed through supply and demand responses in the full world market. Free trade is projected to reduce world price variability by to percent for major farm commodities. Large reductions in price variability are projected for beef wheat and dairy products and smaller changes are expected for coarse grains and sugar Potential world welfare gains from free trade are substantial. A variety of estimates for large but limited groups of countries and commodities range from $ billion to $ billion per year. Trade liberalization that included all industrialized and developing countries and all major crop and livestock markets probably would increase world well-being by significantly more. One careful study has found that compared to projections without reform U.S. farmers would gain from multilateral liberalization and compared to a potential unilateral reduction in subsidies their gains would be substantial. Farmers in the developing countries clearly would gain although their urban consumers would lose. Consumers in Europe East Asia and other restricted markets also would benefit. They would enjoy lower food and fiber costs because they would be allowed to import without restriction from the United States and other efficient producers. Their income gains would be spent on increased imports of nonfarm goods as well thus improving trade balances Under the GATT proposal the United States would end its distortionary and costly farm production subsidies and the output restrictions that accompany them. However the United States and other nations would be free to provide transition support and income transfers as long as such aid did not subsidize production or otherwise interfere with trade. The removal of barriers would expand the use of the more efficient agricultural resources in the United States and could increase the demand for farm inputs and marketing services as well Potential now exists to achieve the first substantial reform since the series of ever-increasing agricultural distortions began. Major international agreement requires patience and persistence but success in the Uruguay Round would improve well-being throughout the world THE PROTECTIONIST THREAT AT HOME The United States has gone through numerous periods in its history when the sentiments for protectionism gained ascendancy. These episodes typically were associated with times of economic downturn or regionalist sentiment the early counterpart of special interest politics today. The most recent period of this nature occurred more than years ago with the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Act of probably one of the most damaging pieces of legislation ever signed in the United States. Passed after the stock market crash of Smoot-Hawley attempted to benefit U.S. agriculture and manufacturing by raising tariff rates. But it had the opposite effect and caused retaliatory tariffs to be put in place by foreign trade partners. More than nations responded within years with tariffs of their own World trade fell dramatically. Chart shows the spiraling decline in world trade between the beginning of and the first part of Far from being beneficial Smoot-Hawley helped turn the 1930s into a depression Chart Contracting Spiral of World Trade April > October Millions of dollars Note Data are total imports of countries Sources : Charles P. Kindleberger The World in Depression ( Berkeley California : University of California Press ) ; data from League of Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics February The concerns and frustrations over trade felt today by the Congress the President and the American public stem from the large trade deficits which the United States has been running since As discussed in Chapter the macroeconomic cause of the trade deficit is related to the tremendous growth in Federal spending ( percent of gross national product ( GNP ) in versus percent in ) relative to the also substantial growth in taxes ( percent of GNP in versus in ) and the harmful effect of the resulting Federal deficit on the savings-investment balance in the United States. Yet the Congress has responded by seeking to eliminate various foreign trade practices. Many provisions of the trade bill ( H.R. ) passed by the House of Representatives and the version passed by the Senate both of which embody these frustrations are distinctly protectionist. Protectionism is also the motive of recent legislative proposals such as the Textile and Apparel Trade Act ( H.R ) passed by the House of Representatives. Ironically since the macroeconomic causes of the trade deficit are not addressed by these actions they are likely to have little or no influence on reducing the trade deficit although their protectionist influence could be harmful and long lasting The lesson from Smoot-Hawley is that passage of protectionist trade legislation by the United States will increase protectionist activity in the rest of the world poison the international climate for trade diplomacy in general and slow the process of trade liberalization for years to come. Since the United States is a major trading nation it could suffer major economic losses in the event of increased global protectionism PROTECTIONIST TEXTILE LEGISLATION Two of the most protected industries in the United States today are textiles and apparel. The costs which this protection places on the American family and consumer are enormous running in the range of $ to $ per year per household In a major protectionist effort the House of Representatives passed in the Textile and Apparel Trade Act which would raise the wall of protection even higher adding another $ to $ in costs per household over the first years. Similar textile legislation was passed by the Congress in and vetoed by the President The current bill would set a percent annual growth limit on U.S global imports of textiles and apparel freeze shoe imports at levels and for the first time restrict imports from Canada and the European Community The textile and apparel industries do not need greater protection In textile industry profits rose percent. Capacity utilization for textile mills was percent in the third quarter of compared with an average capacity utilization rate of percent for all U.S. industries. U.S. textile and apparel exports rose percent in and are estimated to rise another percent in Average hourly earnings and employment in both sectors continued to rise through the third quarter of And while the Congress would seek to limit textile import growth to percent a year U.S. consumption of textiles rose percent in Regrettably the Congress frequently considers the larger economic interests of American consumers to be less important than the interests of particular industries. As with other protectionist measures consumers would have to pay for the special interest legislation losing more in increased costs than the gains to those who benefit from the legislation. In the United States the equivalent rate of tariff protection on textiles and apparel already amounts to roughly percent ten times higher than average U.S. tariffs. H.R. would cost consumers between $ billion and $ billion in the first years above and beyond the $ billion to $ billion annually they already pay because of existing tariffs and quotas In addition to generating net economic losses for the country as a whole the textile bill would act like a regressive tax hurting those most who can afford it least. Because of the large share of income they are forced to devote to clothing low-income families especially those with children would be burdened disproportionately by this legislation EMBRACING PROTECTIONISM THE OMNIBUS TRADE BILL The most threatening proposal being considered by the Congress is the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of the House and Senate versions of which amount to about pages. The bill which now must be considered in conference committee includes many features which have only a tangential relationship to trade policy or which are inconsistent with U.S. policy in GATT. Among these are sections dealing with education grants plant closing restrictions ( Chapter ) subsidies to agricultural programs changes to domestic tax laws and investment screening regulations. With so many provisions grouped together in one bill the President is given little opportunity to consider them on their separate merits. Furthermore the Administration is on record stating that many of the provisions are unwise and damaging to U.S. interests Although the trade bill would include tariffs and trade barriers as Smoot-Hawley did it represents a fundamentally different kind of protectionism. In the area of trade policy the legislation would change the rules for administering U.S. trade law and for granting protection to U.S. producers Helpful Features Every President since has had authority to enter into international trade agreements involving the reduction of tariffs and to reduce U.S. tariffs by Presidential proclamation to carry out the country 's trade objectives. This authority originally was employed to extricate the country from the economic disorder created by high tariffs after passage of the Smoot-Hawley Act. Tariff proclamation authority was renewed for every President thereafter until January Reinstatement of this authority is a desirable feature of the trade bill A second desirable feature is the so-called " fast track " trade agreement authority which was used in the Canadian free-trade agreement negotiations and in the last round of GATT. Under a modification of the operating rules of the House of Representatives and Senate the President is allowed to negotiate a trade agreement and present it with necessary implementing legislation to the Congress for accept- ance or rejection without amendment within a specified period of time. This authority is important for U.S. credibility in international negotiations because foreign countries are assured that agreements made at the bargaining table will not be undone later apart from overall acceptance or rejection. However the Senate version of the trade bill contains harmful " reverse fast track " provisions allowing the Congress to remove fast track authority at any time A third desirable feature of the trade bill is the authority to implement the Harmonized System of tariff schedules. Common tariff schedules greatly facilitate international interaction in trade issues. It is regrettable and a keen source of disappointment to the Administration that the Congress chose not to grant this authority in earlier legislation in time for the United States to join in implementing the new system on January The United States which was one of the original and principal supporters of the development of the Harmonized System is now the only major trading country not to have implemented it Harmful Features Unfortunately the protectionist features of the trade bill outweigh the helpful features in number and in potential for harm. Legislation whose result is protectionist ( increasing the number of trade cases filed and the amount of protection offered in response to them ) would hamper the attainment of U.S. trade objectives in the rest of the world damage global perceptions of the United States and invite retaliation on U.S. products Many other countries perceive international trade agreements such as GATT as mechanisms to restrain U.S. antidumping and countervailing duties whereas the United States views them as a way to control foreign subsidies and alleged unfair trade. In recent years the United States has filed more antidumping and countervailing duty cases than any other nation. The extensive use of U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty law as applied to Canada for example was the major difficulty in reaching agreement in the Canada-United States Free-Trade Agreement. The Canadians insisted on establishing a binational panel to review issues related to these laws before an agreement could be reached With passage of the omnibus trade bill damaging protectionism would become embedded in U.S. trade law. Among the dangers are changes to the law designed to : ( ) increase the number of cases brought against foreign competitors ; ( ) rearrange legal definitions and structures to increase the likelihood of finding injury or " unfairness " once a case is brought ; and ( ) increase the likelihood and magnitude of protection once a case is concluded The omnibus trade bill would remove Presidential judgment and discretion from the protection-granting process. Converting important portions of U.S. trade law to mechanical rules for bringing trade cases against foreign trade partners and eliminating case-by-case evaluation by the President would be a serious change in current practice Table summarizes the four main sections of current U.S. trade law. The origins of present provisions date back many years and their forms often represent decades of experience. Adjustments to the statutes the most recent in frequently have been made to enhance industry access to protection under the various sections The changes recently suggested however represent a sharp break from the past ; they would throw out the wisdom that has been crafted into the statutes over time and replace it with untried and potentially dangerous alternatives TABLE Principal U.S. Trade Law Provisions Statute Focus Response Criteria for action Duties quotas tariffrate quotas orderly marketing arrangements adjustment assistance Responsibility President ( ITC recommendation ) Section : Fair Trade ( Escape Clause ) Increasing imports Increasing imports are substantial cause of injury Section : Unfair Trade Foreign practices violating a trade agreement or injurious to U.S trade Unjustifiable Al ! appropriate and unreasonable or feasible action discriminatory practices burdensome to U.S commerce President ( Interagency recommendation ) Section : Subsidized Imports Manufacturing production or export subsidies Material injury or threat of material injury Duties ITC Injury determination Commerce Subsidy determination Section : Dumped Imports Imports sold below cost of production or below foreign market price Material injury or threat of material injury Duties ITC Injury determination Commerce pumping determination Note. Origin of current provisions : Tariff Act of ( Smoot-Hawley ) as amended ; Trade Act of as amended ; Trade Agreements Act of as amended ; Trade and Tariff Act of Source : Council of Economic Advisers Section 20L The escape clause provisions of current U.S. trade law provide assistance to industries injured as a result of an increase in fairly traded imports. The law is not designed to provide permanent protection but to aid workers and firms temporarily as they adjust to increased imports. The petitioner submits its case to the U.S. International Trade Commission which then undertakes an investigation including public hearings to determine if the growth in imports is a substantial cause of serious injury. If the U.S. International Trade Commission finds affirmatively and recommends that import relief be granted the President must decide what method and amount of relief he will provide including possible adjustment assistance Granting relief inevitably burdens other parts of the U.S. economy Therefore in his decision the President is required to consider whether such relief is in the overall national economic interest. Relevant considerations include the impact of relief on industries and firms facing higher prices for their inputs the effect of the relief on other U.S. international interests the probability that the relief will be effective in promoting adjustment and the costs imposed on taxpayers consumers workers communities and other " innocent " parties. In other words a favorable recommendation by the U.S. International Trade Commission does not and should not lead automatically to protection being granted Changes proposed in the trade bill would narrow the definition of domestic industry used in Section cases to cover only the domestic portion of production only that subset of the industry which produces the like or competitive article causing the damage and/or only the geographic area where the imports are concentrated. Narrowing the definition of domestic industry of course means that an injury finding would be easier since non-injured parts of the industry would be removed from consideration Another change would alter the procedures for recommending protection once injury is found. The proposal would change the law to say that only those commission members who voted affirmatively ( found injury ) in the review would be eligible to vote on recommendations about relief. Without the moderating voice of the minority dissenters who failed to find that the foreign fairly traded goods injured the domestic industry more protection is likely to be granted When a Section case reaches the President proposed changes in the Senate version would effectively require the President to accept the recommendation for protection or else in the House version he would be removed from the process altogether. In the House version the President 's authority would be given to the United States Trade Representative ( USTR ) In the Senate bill the exceptions to granting protection would be rigidly curtailed. The President would be required to impose protection unless he certifies that protection endangers national security disproportionately burdens agriculture results in a net U.S. job loss causes serious injury to a downstream industry or burdens the poor disproportionately. The burden of proof would be changed too. Protection would be imposed unless the President takes action to prevent it. With fewer reasons why protection could be rejected and with overall national economic interest not among them the probability of protection would be increased substantially Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Law. In the United States as in GATT dumping is considered unlawful when it injures domestic import-competing industries. Dumping is deemed to occur when a product is sold in the United States at less than " fair value " that is at a price lower than it is sold in the selling country 's home market or below its cost of production. Companies might engage in dumping because they maintain high prices in their less competitive home market or because they lower export prices in hopes of capturing foreign market share. Furthermore because exchange rates vary over time firms may choose to hold dollar prices constant to retain export market shares and let profit margins in their domestic currency change Section of the TarifF Act of as amended directs the Department of Commerce to examine claims of dumping to determine whether imports are being sold at less than fair value. If the Department rules in the affirmative the U.S. International Trade Commission then determines whether a U.S. industry has suffered material injury or the threat of material injury as a result of the specified imports Countervailing duty law is intended to offset any unfair advantages foreign producers might enjoy as a result of government production or export subsidies. In Section of the Tariff Act of as amended the Department of Commerce determines whether the specified imports have received foreign government subsidies. If the Department finds in the affirmative the U.S. International Trade Commission determines whether a domestic import-competing industry has suffered material injury or the threat of material injury as a result of the subsidized imports. If the International Trade Commission rules in the affirmative countervailing duties are assessed on the offending products There are legitimate reasons for opposing dumping and subsidies However improper use of antidumping and countervailing duty law also can be damaging to the country imposing it. Dumping and subsidies are in and of themselves beneficial to the importing country ( and are costly to the exporting country ) because the buyers of the product obtain their goods more cheaply ( at the expense of the selling company or country ) Subsidies and dumping are harmful to the importing country as a whole if the lower prices drive competitors out of existence ( as in predatory pricing ) or cause unnecessary adjustment costs to the domestic industry and labor ( as in foreign business cycle dumping ) and prices of products sold by foreign suppliers subsequently are raised above what they would have been The threat of ultimately higher prices burdensome and unnecessary adjustment costs and reduced competition is the fundamental reason for opposing dumping and subsidies. But the remedy for dumping also raises domestic prices by imposing duties. If abused duties have the effect of reducing competition from foreigners in the domestic market as well as harming domestic buyers of the product through higher prices Thus care must be taken to ensure that misuse of antidumping and countervailing duty law does not make the cure worse than the disease. The interests of competition and the benefits to consumers and domestic producers as well as the interests of the import-competing industry all must be considered Because current law already offers adequate protection from harmful dumping and subsidies changes to expand the use of antidumping duties would be protectionist. For example in some cases dumping margins are extremely difficult to establish clearly since the foreign country may not be selling the exported good in its home market legitimate related costs of selling may be higher in the foreign market and the costs of foreign production may be difficult to ascertain. Under current law when a product 's fair value is calculated it is assumed that exporters must sell at a price high enough to provide an percent profit margin even though the before-tax average rate of profit on sales reported in for manufacturing wholesale and retail trade in the United States was less than percent Trade bill proposals for antidumping and countervailing duties would move the law closer to a mechanism for granting protection independent of a legitimate threat to the domestic economy. One proposed change to U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty law would require antidumping cases against products which are not dumped themselves but which incorporate inputs alleged to have been purchased by the manufacturer at a price below fair value. The amendment proposed in reaction to this newly defined " input dumping " is protectionist and GATT-illegal and it makes the law less administrable because the foreign producer may not know if he is purchasing dumped inputs or what their fair value is supposed to be The effect of the proposal is to expand the range of activities against which protection can be offered and encourage the initiation of cases Proposals to increase the likelihood of protection once a case is brought would alter the way dumping margins and subsidies are computed. One which would harm American subsidiaries of foreign firms would change the way indirect selling expenses are treated in determining foreign market value for transactions between related parties. The proposal would require that the administering authority not deduct " indirect selling expenses from the foreign market value in order to offset expenses deducted from an exporter 's sale price. " For example firm XYZ-Europe produces a product at a cost of $ Its selling expenses in Europe are $ and its profit margin is $ The product therefore sells for $ per unit. Firm XYZ-America the subsidiary sells the same product in the United States for $ per unit. According to the new proposal the product would have a dumping margin of percent. The Department of Commerce would be required to deduct U.S. selling expenses and profit on sales as not part of the product cost. In America the product cost would be $ while in Europe the product cost would be $ Thus would come a charge of dumping whereas a proper calculation would find none Historically the definition of subsidies has been based on quantifiables such as government provision of capital loans or loan guarantees on better than commercial terms provision of goods or services at preferential rates forgiveness of debts and contributions toward manufacturing expenses. In subsidy cases the Department of Commerce has uniformly held that generally available benefits applicable to all companies and industries within an economy are not countervailable subsidies. This position conforms with GATT interpretations The trade bill would define a subsidy to include actually conferred benefits which bestow a " competitive advantage " on a class of beneficiaries regardless of the number of firms or industries receiving the advantage. Expanding the definition of course widens the class of actions which could be found countervailable. Applying such a definition to the United States for example one might ask whether national weather forecasts would be considered subsidies to agriculture since the forecasts create greater competitive advantage for U.S. agricultural beneficiaries. The subjectivity of such a definition is dangerous in its possibilities for protectionist abuse and creates unfair uncertainty for trading partners about its application Section 30L Section of the Trade Act of as amended provides the President with extremely wide discretionary authority to act against the unfair trade practices of U.S. trade partners. This authority can be used to enforce the rights of the United States under a trade agreement to respond to a foreign practice that has the effect of denying benefits to the United States under a trade agreement or to eliminate any foreign practice that is unjustifiable unreasonable or discriminatory and which burdens or restricts U.S. commerce " Unjustifiable " is usually taken to mean any act policy or practice in violation of or inconsistent with the international legal rights of the United States. " Unreasonable " is taken to mean unfair and inequitable while " discriminatory " typically means acts policies or practices which deny national or most-favored-nation treatment to U.S. goods services or investments Under Section the President can take all appropriate and feasible actions within his power to enforce U.S. rights to obtain the elimination of the objectionable act policy or practice. The response can be on a nondiscriminatory basis or solely against the guilty trade partner or party. It can be taken without regard to whether the goods or sector employed were involved in the act policy or practice identified as the original cause of the action. Among the responses the President may suspend or withdraw benefits of trade agreement concessions or impose duties on goods or services as he deems appropriate. The President can act in response to petitions filed by private parties or on his own initiative. Investigations are administered by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative in cooperation with other U.S. Government agencies. USTR negotiates with the foreign government resolves the dispute if possible and recommends actions to the President after interagency consultation The Section statute has shown itself to be effective when used in a judicious and discerning manner. This Administration has been more vigorous in its active use of Section than any other increasing the yearly caseload by more than percent and for the first time initiating at the President 's request a number of cases such as the Japanese tobacco products case. But the mere act of instigating a Section case does not magically ensure a solution to the problem at hand. While many Section cases have been successful others resulted in long and inconclusive negotiations or only modest gains relative to the effort expended. In a sense cases that end in retaliation or counterretaliation as some have represent failures of policy and diplomacy Because the Senate trade bill mandates mechanical retaliation against unjustifiable foreign trade practices without regard to whether retaliation is in the national economic interest or without exercise of Presidential discretion long-run gains to the United States could be sacrificed. More cases would be brought but this would be less desirable than if the cases were brought on the basis of discretion The trade bill also requires retaliation against countries deemed deficient in their provision of intellectual property rights and against countries which do not give reciprocal treatment in the telecommunications area. Since the United States has the most open telecommunications market in the world virtually every country could be covered even countries which in segments of the market are as free as the United States was only some or years ago before the breakup of the national telephone system Schemes for Deficit Reduction by Threats of Trade Sanctions. The trade bill would require retaliation against countries which are found to have " excessive and unwarranted " trade surpluses with the United States. The term " excessive " is defined according to a formula and " unwarranted " means that USTR has found the country to have a pattern of unfair trade practices that have an adverse effect on U.S commerce and contribute to the trade surplus of the country. The provision would allow months to reach an agreement to improve the bilateral trade balance by percent annually or retaliation is mandated. It does not specify what would be done to reinstate free trade and reduce international tension after the United States has branded one of its trading partners as an " unfair trader " and imposed a retaliatory set of tariffs Apart from a misplaced faith in negotiations as the method for reducing the U.S. trade imbalance belief that bilateral trade balances should be required to stay within some fixed range exhibits a certain amount of confusion over the nature of international trade. Consider the simplest possible example of three countries A B and C each of which produces a single good a b and c. Each country can make use of only two of the goods : country A trades some of its a to B using the revenues to buy c from C ; B trades some of its b to C using the revenues to buy a from A ; and similarly for country C. Each country has balanced trade although no pair of countries has bilaterally balanced trade. Forcing bilateral balance not only would severely restrict trade but in this case it also would shut down trade altogether Situations similar to this example are not difficult to find. For example in the United States had a trade surplus with respect to Australia ( primarily selling machinery and transport equipment ) Australia had a trade surplus with Japan ( selling primarily food and raw materials ) and Japan had a trade surplus with the United States ( selling primarily motor vehicles and sound and image reproduction equipment ) Although the stylized example is simplistic it shows how simplistic it is to believe that trade sanctions should be used to keep bilateral trade balances within a mathematical norm. Retaliations also would damage U.S. international relations. Finally limitations on bilateral trade balances may not be in U.S. interests in the 1990s when America may need trade surpluses to pay back some of its borrowing of the 1980s The Climate for Protection and Removal of Presidential Discretion. T h e House bill would transfer the President 's authority under Sections and ( as well as under other sections not discussed here such as Sections and ) to USTR and both the House and Senate bills would transfer to USTR the President 's authority to determine whether foreign government practices are unfair under Section In combination with the mandating of Section cases these transfers of authority would represent a major change in the operation of U.S. law Since protection benefits the few at the expense of the many the President who speaks for the Nation usually has been less willing to institute protection than those who speak for selected interests. By design the executive branch as a whole is also broader in its perspective than its component agencies. The Departments of Agriculture Commerce and Labor for example have missions to speak for important components of the population just as members of the Congress represent different regions. The President however can take the entire country and economy into consideration as well as foreign policy objectives through the interagency process which advises the President from many sources The need for advocating and balancing different interests within the American economic structure was recognized by the founding fathers. U.S. trade law similarly should seek to preserve necessary checks and balances. Thus Presidential discretion should not be removed in Section and cases as has been suggested since no single agency has as broad a perspective as the President The proposed procedural changes in U.S. trade law and removal of the President from his traditional role in the process are a sad but perhaps expected consequence of the growing demand for protection in the United States. Chart compares the amount of protection granted in the United States under Section dealing with fair trade where the President has discretion and interventions under Sections and dealing with unfair trade where he does not in the periods to and to As shown protection granted under Section changed little but the number of petitions resulting in interventions under Section increased percent and the number resulting in interventions under Section increased percent. It is difficult to believe that the frequency of foreign subsidies during this Administration are more than three and one-third times what they were previously or that dumping has risen to more than two and one-half times its previous level ( especially since the strong dollar during the latter period made selling to the United States easier for foreigners rather than harder ) More likely the higher intervention rate derives from changes made in U.S. trade law in the large trade deficit and the consequent increased demand for protection inside this country The net effect of the definitional changes the procedural changes the loss of checks and balances and the removal of Presidential discretion would be to further increase the amount of protection afforded domestic import-competing producers. Since passage of the Trade Act of the President has found that it was in the national economic interest to grant protection in response to percent of the Section U.S. International Trade Commission recommendations Chart Trade Interventions Cases per Year I I i i i / 3-ou Unfair Trade j N o p r e S j,j e n t j a | Discretion ) H " y.V " ; V '. ' ' '. ; : : i. ' " _ \ : ' : ' ; : ' '. : ' rair i raue ( P jsidential Discretion ) '. ' ; ' ' ! ' ' ' ' ' ' " ' " ' '. ' " Section _ Section ! ; 'Mi " ' ; Section Source : Council of Economic Advisers based on data from Office of U.S. Trade Representative Thus in the absence of Presidential participation protection under Section could more than double if trade bill proposals became law. The figure would be substantially higher if curtailing the President 's role also created an incentive for industries to file more cases Mandating the initiation of cases under Section would increase their number while reducing the success ratio. Enlargements of the definition of actionable practices and altered procedures for deciding cases would make Sections and affirmative findings and the subsequent market interventions easier The Pork Barrel. In addition to the procedural issues there are many < ( pork barrel " amendments in the two trade bills. The Senate version of the trade bill contains a provision establishing a lamb import quota fashioned after the protectionist U.S. meat import law. This provision would place an upper bound on the amount of lamb that could enter the United States each year. Such a restriction is contrary to U.S. obligations under GATT. This trade barrier like its sister meat import quota would raise the cost of meat in the United States Protection on meat is equivalent to voting a new tax on product users and handing part of it over to domestic sellers. Part of the users ' losses ( in the form of higher prices paid ) would go to domestic producers but another part ( resulting from the cessation of consumer purchases because of higher prices ) would end up in no one 's hands and thus be wasted The legislation also contains protectionist provisions for steel adding additional products to those currently being protected by voluntary restraint agreements with foreign sellers a form of quota Users of wire fence panels wire fabric and reinforcing mesh would have to pay higher prices because of these imposed barriers to trade Since another provision would include downstream steel products ( those products incorporating steel components ) in the quota of the country where the basic steel input was melted and poured these products also would cost more to Americans. The bill also calls for the amount of U.S. coal purchased by Japan to be " taken into consideration " in any agreement with Japan regarding imports of steel That is U.S. willingness to buy Japanese steel would be linked to Japanese willingness to buy U.S. coal thus distorting the market In addition to the above examples the trade bills also contain provisions that would provide payments to special interest groups. One such provision is the proposed exception to the requirement that the tobacco program be operated at no net cost to the U.S. taxpayer for government-assisted exports. Pressure to use the public treasury to subsidize tobacco exports could increase Commodity Credit Corporation outlays by many millions of dollars Another handout is the sugar duty drawback provision. It is a usual practice in international trade for a firm that imports a product for domestic processing and then exports the good again to receive a refund or " drawback " of the duty paid upon reexport. The drawback normally is applied within a reasonably short period of time after actual import and reexport. The trade bill would extend the drawback period for sugar retroactively to allow drawbacks for exports as late as October claimed against imports as early as October This means that future exports ( which need not have been imported themselves and which may have nothing to do with earlier sugar which was not reexported because it was more profitable to sell domestically ) would receive duty drawbacks. In effect the law arranges to give money from the public treasury to refiners of sugar in the United States. Estimates place the transfer at more than $ million and possibly higher than $ million. Because the U.S. Customs Service has not been able to verify potential claims the loss to the treasury could be even higher CONCLUSION In the area of trade policy the United States today faces a choice It can continue its commitment to foster an environment of trade liberalization or it can turn to protectionism. The choice will be determined by how the Nation shapes domestic law and how it deals with its trade partners in the international forum rather than by public statements of intentions U.S. negotiators have made substantial and historic progress this past year in forging agreements with other countries which free major international markets from trade restrictions. Pacts with Canada and Mexico and U.S. participation in the ongoing Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations offer real hope for the future of American trade relations. The U.S. GATT proposal for major reform of agricultural policies that distort international trade offers the prospect for progress in that important sector At the same time spurred by its unwillingness to reduce Federal Government spending and the desire nevertheless to appear responsive to the large American trade deficit many in the Congress appear ready to reconfigure U.S. trade law. Due regard for the macroeconomic and Federal deficit-related causes of the trade deficit suggests however that the proposed legislation is unlikely to have any substantive effect on the trade balance. A reasoned review of the various proposed trade provisions suggests that they are protectionist in nature violate our international obligations under GATT increase costs to consumers and business purchasers of imported inputs and distort existing U.S. trade law. The recent textile and apparel legislation also would be damaging and costly Because protection favors some groups at the expense of the rest of the country there always will be pressures from within the United States to provide greater protection. The same pressures exist abroad. But now as bilateral and multilateral negotiations show signs of success it is time to resist pressures for protection and international confrontation. The choice is between contraction or further liberalization. Contraction points down the road of economic stagnation while liberalization will result in continued growth strengthening the groundwork for international trade well into the 21st century CHAPTER Knowledge Markets and Economic Progress THE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED STATES has generated rising standards of living for most of its history. During this century real output increased twelvefold while population tripled approximately quadrupling the goods and services available to the average American. Output per hour of work doubled in the first half of the century and has since doubled again. This enormous and sustained gain in productivity has led to rapid increases in living standards. Real per capita income rose at a percent annual rate in the first half of the century and at a percent annual rate in the postwar period Long-term economic progress is assessed not only by output and productivity but also in terms of the means and choices that allow people to enjoy full healthy and satisfying lives. Gains in real per capita income improve well-being as reflected in other indicators The infant mortality rate in the United States declined from roughly per thousand in to per thousand in Life expectancy increased from years in to years for persons born in Retirement from work a rare phenomenon a century ago and associated primarily with ill health is now the norm thanks to longer lifespans and higher incomes Steadily rising income and its broader benefits are not inevitable In many societies throughout much of history living standards rose only slowly and at times even declined. Indeed the postwar period may be unique in terms of both the high overall rate of increase in real per capita income in the world and the widespread nature of the gains. In a world linked by trade the benefits of economic progress are shared widely. Increased productivity and growth in one country enhance prospects for growth in other countries This chapter examines the factors that underlie increases in living standards over the long term and considers the role of government in supporting and sustaining the determinants of economic progress Business cycle fluctuations aside the output available for current consumption or for investment to augment future consumption is determined by ( ) the quantity and quality of labor capital and natural resources ; ( ) the technology used in production processes ; and ( ) the mechanisms that allocate inputs in production processes and distribute goods and services to final users. Government policies enhance the rise in living standards when they encourage increases in supplies of factors of production support the advance and application of knowledge that increases productive efficiency and improve allocative mechanisms In the United States government policies have played an important positive role in supporting increased standards of living. Constitutional and common law traditions that protect individual rights and private property have provided the foundation for freedom and economic progress. Resulting improvements in well-being continue to attract those in search of better opportunities. Individual efforts to earn maximum returns in a competitive environment promote effective allocation of resources. Individuals have powerful incentives to increase supplies of productive resources especially their own knowledge and skills ( human capital ) and to develop new products and technologies that promise economic rewards. In addition government has supported public education which has played a critical role in increasing the supply of human capital and has financed basic research that contributes to economic advance but may generate little private reward. Recent actions in the United States to reduce high marginal tax rates and to remove burdensome regulations both of which impair economic efficiency and diminish incentives for growth have strengthened prospects for further improvements in living standards. These policies also have set an example for growth-oriented policies in other countries Expansion of the physical capital stock is a major contributor to economic progress and productivity. During the postwar years physical capital accounted for approximately one-third of output growth and percent of growth in output per hour of work. Most measures of investment include only physical capital. It is estimated however that human capital accounts for three-quarters of the Nation 's total stock of productive capital. Thus much investment is not identified as such in standard accounts of national income. Recognizing the importance of knowledge and effective resource allocation to economic progress studies of the sources of growth have come to include contributions of human capital technical innovations and shifts in productive resources In the past in the United States and still in some very poor countries investments in human capital that led to better diets and improved health increased human capacity for physical labor. Today the forms of human capital most important for progress are those that expand skill and knowledge. Investment in education training and work experience increases productivity and earnings. Individuals families and businesses gain directly and society at large benefits indirectly. The widely shared benefits of investment in human capital and problems in borrowing to finance it suggest that government should encourage such investment. The strong incentives of individuals and families to invest in the most useful forms of human capital also suggest the value of individual choice and market allocation mechanisms. Investments in human capital and the government 's role in promoting them are the main issues discussed in the first major section of this chapter Advances in scientific and technical knowledge and their application to the development of new products services and technologies are widely recognized as important for economic progress. Without definition and enforcement of property rights that allow discoverers of valuable new knowledge to reap at least part of the benefits incentives for these socially valuable activities would be inadequate Governmental support also is needed for advances in knowledge in areas that are public by their nature such as national security. As with investment in human capital economic incentives are critical in allocating resources to research and development. These are the main issues discussed in the second major section of this chapter Finally one of the key advantages of a competitive market system is its ability to respond quickly and appropriately to the rapidly changing conditions that accompany high rates of economic progress Interventions that slow necessary adjustments in a dynamic economy are impediments to economic growth. Governmentally imposed barriers and distortions that diminish incentives for work investment and innovation or that divert resources from their most productive uses are further barriers to progress. In particular growth often requires reallocations of labor. Policies intended to reduce adjustment costs and protect existing jobs often can reduce employment and stifle growth. The harmful effects of such policies and the benefits of a more flexible market-oriented approach to economic adjustment are the main subject of the third major section of this chapter HUMAN CAPITAL The United States devoted roughly $ billion in to gross investment in formal education. Another $ billion was spent for worker training not including informal efforts to improve skills and performance on the job. Investment in human capital is thus more than one-third larger than the approximately $ billion spent last year for gross private nonresidential investment in physical capital Human capital investment has contributed substantially to the productive capacity of the labor force and the growth of the U.S. economy. Recent studies indicate that in the postwar period increases in human capital have contributed to percent of real output growth and a similar percentage of the gains in output per hour of work Over the last years the education and skill of the U.S. labor force has improved continuously but unevenly. An index of human capital primarily representing schooling and work experience developed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) grew at an average rate of about percent per year over the postwar period. During the mid-1970s as many new workers entered the labor force the average human capital per worker stopped increasing. In contrast during the 1980s this index has grown by almost percent per year INVESTMENTS IN EDUCATION TRAINING AND WORK EXPERIENCE Aggregate rates of human capital investment are affected by population growth and the age distribution of the population. In the United States both the population and the labor force have grown steadily. Better health and increased longevity have increased potential years of working life. Demographic changes such as the aging of the baby-boom generation and labor market trends such as increased employment of women outside the home and earlier retirement also have affected patterns of schooling training and work experience Education Direct annual expenditures for schooling public and private are currently about $ billion. About percent or $ billion is spent on grade schools and high schools and the rest on post-secondary schooling which includes vocational schools as well as colleges and universities. Expenditures for schooling have remained in the range of to percent of gross national product ( GNP ) for two decades after having risen rapidly during the schooling of the babyboom generation. The number of students has declined from a peak of almost million in the mid-1970s to just under million in the mid-1980s A large component of total investment in schooling at the higher levels in addition to direct costs is the forgone earnings of the students themselves. The time and effort devoted to study could otherwise be spent at work or leisure. The forgone earnings of students aged and over are estimated to be about $ billion per year most of which is accounted for by post-secondary students. The share of total social costs of education attributable to the postponed earnings of students has increased in recent years because a larger proportion of schooling is for post-secondary students with higher potential wages. In the early 1970s about percent of the student population was enrolled in post-secondary schools compared with percent today Increases in years of schooling of the labor force are indicated in Chart During the last years the percent of the labor force not completing high school has fallen by more than half while the percent having attended college has more than doubled. These trends have occurred primarily because retirees have had relatively little schooling. High school completion rates have been fairly stable for a decade at about percent of persons to years old and the proportion of persons to years old with years or more of college has remained about percent Chart Years of Schooling of the Labor Force Percent of civilian labor force Years High School \ ___- An ^ X ^ Y College Less than years High School = ~ ^ r ^ _ _ " * * I I < I t i i t I i i I > i t < I i Note. Data are for March and relate to highest years of schooling attained Source : Department of Labor Data on hours of work by educational level and gender indicate that the amount of schooling has increased for both male and female workers but more so for males. The BLS estimates that in twothirds of the hours worked by men and more than half the hours worked by women were accounted for by those with fewer than years of schooling. These proportions have declined to percent for men and percent for women. In only about percent of total work hours were accounted for by those with more than years of schooling compared with more than percent now. Currently about percent of work hours of men and percent of work hours of women are performed by those with or more years of schooling Years of schooling and expenditures are inputs to the process of acquiring human capital ; they do not measure learning. A variety of measures have documented the decline in the academic achievement of American students at every level during the 1960s and 1970s with evidence of partial reversal of this trend in the 1980s. Some of the decline of Scholastic Aptitude Test ( SAT ) scores in the 1960s can be attributed to the increasing proportion of high school students taking the test. But in the 1970s the proportion taking the test declined while scores continued to fall ; now the proportion of students taking the SAT is rising again and scores are rising Concerns about student achievement are due not only to evidence of academic declines but also to indications that achievement has been low relative to perceived requirements for success in today 's economy. Although basic literacy rates have increased steadily during this century a number of surveys document low reading comprehension and other academic deficiencies among U.S. students compared with students in other countries. Young Americans score particularly poorly in science and mathematics. Yet evidence indicates that mastery of these subjects is useful in many occupations not only in science and engineering Not all of the benefits of education are reflected in increased productivity and earnings. Education may contribute to a person 's wellbeing in other ways as well. For many people learning is enjoyable Formal education contributes to continued learning. Education also provides information and skills that encourage fuller appreciation and enjoyment of science art and culture as well as effective participation in public affairs. Schooling contributes to more efficient household management to better health and nutrition and to the higher educational achievement and earnings of one 's children The clearest relationship between education and economic success is indicated by earnings patterns. Workers with more schooling consistently earn more. In for example the median income of persons with only an elementary school education was about $ per year compared to high school graduates ' median income of about $ Persons with or more years of college had median incomes of about $ As Table indicates after declining in the 1970s the relative incomes of those with more education increased in the 1980s. During this decade incomes of those with fewer than years of high school have declined compared to high school graduates while the relative incomes of college-trained workers have risen. Thus the returns to investments in schooling have increased. Gains have been especially pronounced for younger workers who will continue to benefit from more schooling for many years TABLE Relation of Income and Education Selected Years [ Index income of high school graduates = ] Females Males Years years high school years college years college1 years high school years college years college1 Excludes those with more than years of college Note. Data are 3-year averages of indexes of median annual income for year-round full-time workers aged and over Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Changes in relative earnings are due to cyclical and demographic factors and to longer term economic changes. People with more schooling for example usually are more able to maintain employment and earnings during recessions. The relative earnings of college graduates declined during the 1970s as the highly schooled babyboom generation entered the labor market but they rose recently as this group gained experience in the 1980s. Over the longer term increased demand for technical and managerial skills may be expected to raise the future relative earnings of workers with more education Earnings are higher for those with more years of schooling for reasons other than the productive value of education. Personal characteristics such as ability and effort which contribute to success in both school and the workplace account for some of the earnings differential. Higher earnings also are associated with factors such as parental income gender race and geographic location. Research has confirmed however that schooling raises earnings even after accounting for the effects of these other measurable factors Estimated real private rates of return for investments in schooling in the United States have been to percent for secondary schooling and to percent for higher education during the 1970s and early 1980s. These estimates may be biased upward because they can not fully adjust for workers ' ability and effort. Recent increases in relative earnings for more educated workers however suggest that estimates based on data from the mid-1980s would show even higher rates of return. Studies during the last years consistently have shown that rates of return on investments in education have been comparable to those available on alternative long-term investments A number of studies have shown that schooling increases earnings for managers and the self-employed as well as for employees and have suggested that the benefits of schooling are greater in more dynamic economic environments. More schooling for farmers for example increases the payoff from agricultural research increases the rate of adoption of innovative technology and reduces the lag between price changes and appropriate market responses. Returns to schooling are higher in industries with more technical progress and productivity growth Workers with more schooling not only have higher earnings but also safer more comfortable working conditions and lower rates of unemployment. The unemployment rate for workers with fewer than years of high school is double that for workers with years of high school. Workers with a college education had unemployment rates of less than percent throughout the last years and they experienced smaller cyclical swings in unemployment than those with less schooling. But increased schooling of the labor force has not resulted in lower overall unemployment rates ; unemployment rates of all schooling groups have risen over the last years ( Chapter ) Training and Experience The human capital that workers accumulate while employed includes formal training and learning-by-doing. Post-school training is pervasive in the United States. About percent of workers report having taken training to improve their job skills. Workers with more years of schooling also acquire more training on the job While much on-the-job training is of general value some has value only in a specific firm. The worker bears the cost of general training usually in the form of lower wages because its value will be fully reflected in wage growth whether the worker stays at the current firm or goes to another. The cost of firm-specific human capital investment is borne jointly by the worker and the firm and the benefits of future productivity improvements are shared. Thus firm-specific investments encourage both the worker and the firm to maintain the employment relationship. Conversely when job tenure is expected to be long both the worker and the firm have more incentive to invest jointly in training The investment in formal employer-sponsored training has been estimated to be about $ billion per year and has been rising About half this total reflects the wages and forgone output of employees receiving training. The $ billion does not include the value of reduced wages that workers accept for jobs that offer training nor does it include the informal everyday activities of workers and firms to improve productivity In addition to schooling and training the work experience of the labor force is an important source of productive human capital. Unpublished estimates by the BLS indicate an increase in the approximate years of work experience for private business workers from years in to years in Since average experience has fallen by more than percent to years in the mid-1980s For men average work experience has fallen by about percent since peaking in the late 1950s and it has held steady at about years in the 1980s. The average work experience of women rose by about percent between and to years. In the late 1960s and the 1970s many young women entered the labor force and average experience fell back to about years where it has remained since about Four major demographic and labor market factors have contributed to these changes in work experience. First more years in school have meant that workers enter the labor force at a later age. Second with the labor market entry of the baby-boom generation during the 1970s the age distribution of the labor force has shifted dramatically toward younger workers. Third men are leaving the labor force at earlier ages than in the past. In about half the men and over and percent of those to were in the labor force. In the 1980s less than percent of men and over and about percent of those to are labor force participants. Fourth the share of women in the labor force has risen from less than percent in to percent today and women generally have had less work experience than men Wages tend to rise with age through most of work life. Chart shows that older workers have higher earnings and also that earnings rise faster and peak later for those with more schooling. This increase in wages over work life has become more pronounced during the 1980s. Younger workers are paid less because they devote more time and effort to on-the-job learning. Their wages also rise as training and experience increase productivity. Some of the wage gains associated with experience are due to workers ' finding employment that better matches their skills and interests. Younger workers change jobs frequently while they learn about the labor market occupations and particular jobs and while employers learn about the capabilities of particular workers. Job or occupation change is part of a search process and when a better job match is found earnings and profits improve Work experience and training of the U.S. labor force will rise for the next two decades as a result of the large group of workers now Chart Earnings by Age and Education Thousands of dollars or More Years College Years High School Years High School L _L _L _L Age group _L J_ Note. Data are mean annual earnings of male year-round full-time workers average for in dollars Source : Department of Commerce gaining experience and the smaller group of young workers entering the labor market. These demographic factors should contribute to reduced unemployment and improved productivity growth RATIONALES FOR GOVERNMENT SUPPORT Human capital investment contributes to the well-being of individuals and to the long-term performance of the economy. But economic returns alone do not imply that the government should regulate or subsidize investment. Government involvement in human capital formation is predicated on three premises. First there are major social benefits to increased levels of education that are not fully realized in the returns to individuals. Second government support of human capital investment widens economic opportunity. Third there are particular difficulties in private financing of investment in schooling Social political and economic interaction is facilitated by a common language basic skills and shared knowledge. A broad base of educated individuals allows for a more efficient economy and a more viable democratic system. The effectiveness of the military moreover is enhanced by a higher level of general knowledge and skills in the population especially as national security relies increasingly on complex technology. These broad societal benefits of education provide one rationale for government funding and regulation of primary and secondary schooling Giving every child the opportunity for an education is considered necessary for a democratic society. Human capital contributes to individual earnings and public support for schooling has been used to widen economic opportunities. Government support for human capital investment is also one way to help reduce dependence on other transfer programs. Most Federal funds devoted to education and public training programs are directed toward people with low incomes Private financing of human capital investment is relatively difficult because most such investments are made by the young and human capital itself can not serve as collateral. For other investment opportunities one can usually borrow funds by demonstrating profitability and pledging the investment itself as collateral but for investments in schooling it is difficult for a lender to enforce repayment. Thus schooling generally is financed by the assets or income of parents or other family members. Parents commonly borrow to finance investments in their children 's human capital. Adult students use their own resources and if continued employment is assured they may be able to obtain assistance from their employers. For individuals with insufficient access to private resources there may be grounds for public support to help secure financing for education Public support for worker training generally is not provided because training is funded jointly by the worker receiving lower wages and by the firm paying direct costs and allowing work time to be used for learning. Workers and firms realize the rewards from investments in job training through increased future wages and productivity POLICY ISSUES Public policy affects all human capital investment directly through government spending or indirectly through taxation and regulation Education is the third largest object of government spending after national defense and social security. State and local governments provide most of the public spending for education. The Federal Government pays about percent of the approximately $ billion annual direct cost of primary and secondary education and about percent of the approximately $ billion in direct costs for higher education. Federal spending for training programs is about $ billion. The Federal Government also provides training for its own em- ployees spending close to $ billion each year for military training alone Government operation of schools is not a necessary consequence of government support of education. At the primary and secondary levels State and local governments both fund and manage school systems. In post-secondary education almost all Federal support is provided to the student directly allowing choice among public and private institutions. State government support of higher education also allows wider individual choice than at the lower levels Primary and Secondary Education Poor achievement levels in primary and secondary schools have neither obvious causes nor simple remedies. Schools and teachers differ in their effectiveness but there is no consensus on the underlying reasons. Low quality of teachers low spending on teachers relative to school administration curricula that fail to stress basic academic subjects inadequate school discipline poor early childhood preparation and home environments that fail to encourage learning are among the suggested explanations Increased spending has not been effective in improving student performance. Public school expenditures per student rose steadily and most rapidly as student achievement was declining. In the early 1980s real spending per student was more than double that in Student-teacher ratios have fallen and the education and experience of teachers have increased but none of these changes has been linked statistically with better student performance State and local school districts have introduced a number of reforms to promote quality. Some school systems have required students to meet minimum standards and some have rewarded teachers for gains in student achievement. Many States have instituted statewide testing for high school graduation and some withhold funds or exercise other sanctions when local school districts have poor records of academic progress. Several States are using alternative certification to attract new teachers who are proficient in their subject but lack the required coursework in teacher education. Such flexible certification gives school systems wider latitude in hiring teachers and removes barriers that prevent skilled people from entering teaching A dominant role for State and local governments is consistent with principles of federalism. Traditionally Federal spending for primary and secondary schooling has been quite limited and directed toward the disadvantaged. Close to $ billion per year is provided to State and local school districts to serve low-income students. Other major Federal programs support vocational bilingual and special education The Federal Government also supports research and the dissemination of information on student achievement in order to encourage choice and accountability in the Nation 's schools. The ability of families to choose the schools their children attend is a critical factor in improving the quality of education. This Administration has proposed legislation and supported reforms that would encourage wider opportunities for parental choice and greater accountability in education assistance programs. More scope for choice would provide incentives for schools to improve. In school systems that are accountable for the quality of education special programs and good reputations attract students. Schools that perform poorly face declining enrollments and reduced budgets. Magnet schools provide an alternative that incorporates parental choice allowing parents and students to select among particular schools in a public school district One direct way for government to encourage schools to respond to demand for better education would be to provide financial support directly to families through vouchers. Families could use the vouchers at any school that meets basic standards. Voucher-type programs currently are used in Federal food and housing assistance programs medicare and in higher education. The GI Bill which is an example of a successful Federal educational voucher program has helped many veterans complete schooling receive vocational training and increase their earnings capacities. Competition among schools for students and support provides market incentives lacking in the current system of government-operated schools. Even partial voucher systems allowing choice among public schools would offer substantially increased competition and accountability thereby promoting educational achievement Post-Secondary Education Many U.S. institutions of higher education are operated by State and local governments. These institutions provide subsidies to local residents and others in the form of low tuition. Private operation and funding however play a much larger role than in primary and secondary schooling. Private schools account for close to one-third of total college and university expenditures and proprietary schools are a major source of formal occupational education. State systems allow a large degree of student choice. Thus the higher education system in the United States in contrast to primary and secondary education has allowed students and their families some choice among institutions thereby encouraging higher quality. One measure of the success of this approach is the large and growing number of students from other nations that choose to study in this country Consistent with the policy emphasis on choice and accountability the major Federal programs in post-secondary education provide aid directly to students. In the last decade the number of student aid grants has increased by more than percent. The largest Federal expenditure for support of post-secondary education is in the form of grants to low-income students. Close to $ billion in such grants was provided in The Guaranteed Student Loan Program makes funds available by providing government guarantees to banks and other private lending sources. More than $ billion annually is borrowed under this program. Students are responsible for repayment of principal and interest ( after the period of schooling ) but the Federal Government guarantees repayment if students fail to meet their obligations. These loans carry interest rates far below those that would be required without Federal backing. Other aid in the form of loans work-study programs and grants is provided to students through the educational institutions themselves Student loan defaults cost about $ billion in A large proportion of defaults are concentrated at relatively few schools. Student loan default rates exceed percent at more than schools which make up about percent of the post-secondary institutions that participate in loan programs. By more strongly encouraging the repayment of loans the Federal Government can increase the amount available for investment in education. Sanctions now are applied to students but incentives for schools to provide better monitoring and better education also should help encourage loan repayment Worker Training Workers and firms invest in job training and retraining to obtain the future private returns that result from increased productivity Many government policies influence investments in job training and experience. Direct government support of training programs is intended to raise the earnings capacity of the disadvantaged and to ease the adjustment of displaced workers to new jobs. During the last years the Federal Government has spent more than $ billion on training and related programs including classroom training training on the job and job search assistance but there is no consensus that these training programs have significantly increased the earnings of participants. Past evaluations have been inconclusive partly because of methodological problems. Evidence suggests that training for the disadvantaged has improved the earnings of adult women but it has had little and perhaps even adverse effect on the earnings of youths and adult males. This Administration has encouraged recent efforts to develop more effective training programs with designs that facilitate better evaluation Education in Science and Engineering Private and social returns to education and training are affected not only by the years of schooling but also by the student 's field of study. Undergraduate specialization in engineering for example generally leads to high earnings. Because they can command high starting salaries engineers are less likely to postpone labor market entry and forgo current earnings in order to pursue post-baccalaureate education. As a result most Americans with the requisite abilities and interest do not pursue masters or doctoral training. Post-baccalaureate study in the sciences and engineering however is vital for research and innovation. A major factor in maintaining the high level of research and development ( R&D ) activity in the United States is the attraction of U.S. graduate programs for students and scientists from abroad about half of whom remain to pursue careers in this country. Foreign students comprise a growing proportion of full-time graduate students in science and engineering having risen from percent of the total in to percent in Most people who complete doctoral degrees in science and engineering pursue careers in research for which much of the funding is provided by the Federal Government. This close link has encouraged Federal support for graduate studies and post-doctoral training in the sciences. The Federal Government provides fellowships and parttime employment for graduate students in federally funded research projects carried out under the supervision of faculty or other senior researchers. Some of the Federal support for post-baccalaureate training is similar to the joint funding of specific on-the-job training by firms and workers in the private sector. Since the Federal Government is a large consumer of R&D it captures some of the benefits from training through a larger supply of scientists and engineers Furthermore R&D carried out in the private sector may have benefits that extend broadly through society SCIENCE AND INNOVATION Research and development leads to scientific discoveries and new technologies that enhance economic progress. In the United States private and public expenditures for formal R&D have reached more than $ billion per year. The contribution of this investment to the productivity of the economy and the quality of life is large and pervasive Research and development usually is divided into three categories : basic research which investigates scientific questions with no readily foreseeable applications ; applied research which is intended for application ; and development which aims to produce particular prod- ucts or processes. Formal investments in knowledge are described largely in these terms but the distinctions are somewhat arbitrary Solving problems of development can shed light on basic scientific problems and some firms undertake basic research in hopes of eventual commercial applications. In addition many informal R&D efforts are not measured as R&D Technological progress which is at least partly a result of formal and informal R&D investments has led to higher incomes better working conditions and a greater variety and abundance of products Standard productivity measures however can not capture many of the most visible improvements made possible by advances in science and technology. Much publicly supported R&D for example is devoted to public goods such as national defense and public health the benefits of which are not measured as increased productivity. Even R&D that helps create better products and more efficient production processes provides benefits that are not easily measured such as improvements in computers and calculators EXPENDITURES AND RETURNS U.S. expenditures for R&D have increased considerably in real terms since World War II as shown in Chart Expenditures grew at about percent per year from to when they abruptly leveled off. Since expenditures have been rising again with rapid growth of defense R&D growth of privately sponsored industrial research and restoration of government support for basic research. For the last years total real R&D expenditures have been growing at a rate of approximately percent per year Private Investment In approximately half of total national R&D expenditures were funded by private sources up from about one-third in For the last years private sources have provided more than twothirds of U.S. expenditures on industrially performed R&D. About three-quarters of funding for nondefense R&D is provided by private sources and about percent of funding for basic research is private. The emergence of the private sector as a major provider of R&D funding is one of the most important developments in science and technology in the last two decades Private R&D has a strong relationship to economic growth. According to one study from to private R&D investment accounted for an estimated percent of growth in output per hour of work and about percent of growth in productivity in the nonfarm business sector. Estimates of rates of return to private R&D vary considerably but are consistently high. Privately funded basic research Research and Development Expenditures Billions of dollars / Total Federal Government ^ X/ Private ^ ^ ^ z ^ ^ ff rT ' " r ~ t> * T i i i i i i i i i 1i i i i i i i i i i i | * T i | i i | i i i i I i i | ^ " * * ' J/Private includes a small amount of State and local government funds Note. GNP implicit price deflator used to deflate expenditures Sources : Department of Defense ( ) and National Science Foundation ( ) has particularly strong effects on productivity growth in part because its results raise the overall level of technology in an industry The gains to society from private R&D that are not captured by the firm performing it are significant. Knowledge produced by private R&D spreads first to technologically related firms and then throughout the economy. Patent studies reveal that firms whose technological neighbors invest relatively large amounts in R&D produce more patents per dollar of their own R&D and have higher rates of productivity growth than do firms in less research-intensive environments. Firms can not simply adopt research however ; they generally must do a certain amount of research themselves to be able to take advantage of knowledge that other firms produce The extensive spillover benefits from private R&D are also apparent in the fact that firms often imitate the innovations of their rivals One study found that percent of patented inventions had been imitated within years. The fast depreciation of patent values confirms that knowledge created by research and innovation spreads quickly and can be appropriated by other firms Federal Support Federal spending for R&D was about $ billion in almost half of the national total. In addition a special tax credit is intended to encourage private investment in research. Defense R&D has increased from percent of Federal R&D spending in to percent today. From to Federal spending for basic research ( defense and nondefense ) increased by about percent in real terms to $ billion. During the same period nondefense basic research grew from to percent of Federal nondefense R&D From the late 1940s to the mid-1960s federally sponsored R&D advanced mainly defense and space technology. From to overall Federal funding for R&D slowed but larger amounts were devoted to health and applied research especially in the social and environmental sciences. Applied energy research and demonstration projects heavily funded in the 1970s have been curtailed in recent years as unproductive and inappropriate objects of Federal support Recent concerns about international competitiveness health and national defense have prompted a surge in Federal support of basic and defense research Returns to federally sponsored research are sometimes dramatic and easy to see. Federal investment in satellite technology for example revolutionized the communications industry. Federal expenditures on defense and medical research help prevent war and improve health but these results by contrast are more difficult to quantify The results of basic research diffuse gradually into industries and lead to increased innovation. One study of commercial innovations in chemistry has found that university research which was largely federally funded accounted for a large proportion of footnotes in the scientific articles that announced the innovations The most direct measurement of returns to Federal R&D tries to discern its effect on productivity taking R&D ( along with labor and capital ) to be an input and production of goods and services to be the output. Such studies have not shown a strong relationship between industrial productivity and Federal R&D. One study has found a rate of return of only percent to Federal R&D compared to returns to private R&D of between and percent. These meager results have been questioned as a measure of the contribution to overall well-being however because most Federal R&D is directed toward public goods that do not generate significant private returns In some areas such as agriculture and health returns to Federal R&D appear to be robust. If public expenditures stimulate private R&D moreover a portion of the high returns to private R&D could be attributable to complementary Federal research. Studies of wheth- er Federal R&D increases private R&D have yielded conflicting results Case studies of Federal R&D also have attempted to measure returns to investment. Some have shown high returns to particular Federal R&D investments but these results can not be generalized. It is difficult to assign R&D inputs especially in basic research to the appropriate outputs. Furthermore researchers tend to study successful R&D projects and may fail to account adequately for the costs of unsuccessful efforts International Comparisons Because of intense competition in international markets the level of U.S. investment in R&D has been questioned. The United States invests far more in R&D than any other country in the free world spending more than two and one-half times as much as Japan the next largest investor. The United States Japan West Germany France and the United Kingdom all devote about percent of GNP to R&D. If defense R&D is excluded Japan 's and West Germany 's outlays relative to GNP are higher than those of the United States by nearly percentage point. The United States leads Japan and West Germany however in the ratio of nondefense R&D expenditures to manufacturing sales. The U.S.S.R. reportedly devotes the largest share of GNP to R&D. The productivity effects of this spending much of which is probably military appear mixed In part because of its large investments the United States sells much more in R&D outputs such as patent licenses plans and blueprints than it buys. The balance of U.S. receipts minus payments for royalties and fees has grown percent annually in real terms from until reaching almost $ billion in Relatively large amounts of technological knowledge enter the United States in the form of improved products and large amounts diffuse out in the form of licensed technology. Another indication that scientific knowledge is an important U.S. export is the large role American universities play in training scientists and engineers from other countries The United States has led the worldwide advance in science and technology for many years but the size of the U.S. lead has diminished. The number of patent applications made abroad by U.S. citizens for example fell by about half between and while Japanese external patent applications grew by almost percent. The U.S. real trade balance in high-technology products often used as an indicator of competitiveness fell by $ billion ( dollars ) between its peak in and This decline however coincided with a large increase in the value of the dollar and a decline in all other trade sectors The term " competitiveness " suggests to some that growth in one country disadvantages others. In fact the United States gains from scientific and technological progress made by other countries. That penicillin was discovered in England and relativity in Switzerland does not diminish their contributions to U.S. health and scientific understanding. Advances in science and technology which diffuse into and out of the United States and every other country would be deterred by the closing of national borders to the transfer of knowledge The decrease in the the U.S. lead in science and technology has prompted some to call for increased government support for R&D. It is not clear however that U.S. firms invest too little in R&D or that their returns are not competitive. One recent study has suggested that applied R&D yields a higher return to Japanese firms which in some industries may be better than U.S. firms in transforming externally produced technologies into marketable applications. Both the levels and overall returns to R&D investment in the United States however compare favorably to those in Japan. Another study of American and Japanese manufacturing firms found that Japanese firms spend about the same amounts on research relative to sales as U.S. firms and they appear to gain similar returns ROLE OF GOVERNMENT Because returns to investments in knowledge are difficult to measure government research policy has no straightforward guide. Private firms must estimate the appropriate levels of R&D under conditions of greater uncertainty than is common for other kinds of investment. Private firms however unlike governments both bear the costs and realize the gains from their investments in knowledge. The costs of government research by contrast are borne by taxpayers while the benefits accrue to the public at large or to particular industries or firms. Private firms have incentives to invest the amount that produces the greatest net return but governments do not face similar incentives or constraints. Thus governments usually can encourage R&D most efficiently by defining and enforcing property rights so that private researchers and their sponsors can undertake such activities profitably Providing incentives for R&D often involves extending the application of property rights in new ways. The definition of property rights in the use of satellites and their orbits for example has advanced telecommunications substantially. The definition of new property rights creates incentives for continued technological advancement that leads in turn to the more productive use of resources Defining property rights to research in a way that creates incentives for private firms to sponsor it is sometimes difficult or impossible. Purely basic research for example creates new knowledge that spreads into the world at large improving life in unpredictable ways Experience suggests that payoffs from basic research can be very high even if they can not be fully anticipated. The basic research that unraveled the molecular structure of DNA ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) for example led to the birth of a new industry genetic engineering Individuals and firms that sponsor research can expect to capture only a fraction of the total yield it produces. One study estimates that the social returns of industrial innovations are about double the private returns. Firms tend to invest only where their gains are expected to cover costs. Thus for basic research that produces unpatentable but potentially valuable new knowledge an absence of public support would leave social benefits unexploited. The appropriate amount of basic research the desirable level of public support and the best allocation of resources among competing research opportunities are difficult to determine. Policymakers must estimate the prudent level of investment without exact quantitative evidence of rates of return weighing the costs of diverting resources from productive private uses Firms sometimes may capture significant returns from research even without well-defined rights to innovations if the research is applied to a product or service for which they represent a large share of the market. A very large computer firm for example may find it profitable to invest in relatively basic research on superconductivity because it may hope to create highly profitable new products on the basis of resulting innovations If no single firm has a large enough share of the industry to fund research profitably users of that research may form organizations to sponsor it. Private cooperative research efforts in the computer industry and voluntary organizations of farmers that fund research on plant disease are examples For potential innovations with many beneficiaries however the costs of organizing and operating a voluntary organization may be high and access to the innovation by nonparticipants may be almost impossible to preclude. Compulsory funding through specific taxes or if benefits are broad and indirect through general funding is then sometimes used. Government funding of relatively basic agricultural and health research often is justified in these terms Public goods that require large research inputs present a much clearer case for government support. Projects such as the superconducting super collider if they are to be carried out at all must be supported by government. National defense and protection from contagious diseases depend on specialized research for which private individuals do not have adequate incentives. About percent of federally funded R&D is devoted to defense or basic research INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS Investment in knowledge like other investment depends on rights to future returns. Even in research that is publicly supported the incentives created by property rights have powerful effects Patent licensing trademark copyright and trade secrets laws are critical in determining the share of the returns from commercially valuable ideas and inventions to which an inventor or investor is entitled. The dramatic advance of commercial biotechnology since for example was aided by the U.S. Supreme Court decision that microorganisms produced by genetic engineering were patentable Building on the long-established principle that specially bred lines of plants and animals belong to their breeders genetically engineered higher organisms such as improved goats and cattle now are protected by property rights. Legislation such as the Plant Variety Protection Act of and subsequent regulatory changes have made property rights in agricultural innovations easier to establish. As a result research previously supported by government can be undertaken profitably by private firms which now fund more than percent of agricultural research This Administration has supported many actions that protect intellectual property including stronger international enforcement of property rights facilitation of joint ventures and improved procedures for regulatory review. For example incentives for pharmaceutical innovations have been strengthened by reducing the time for regulatory approval and extending patent life to make up for most of the time lost during government review International enforcement of intellectual property rights is increasingly important as national economies become more closely linked by trade and investment. U.S. firms encounter myriad problems in protecting their intellectual property abroad. Some countries offer only limited protection to process patents. Others do not recognize patents on pharmaceuticals and chemicals or copyrights on computer software. Most newly industrialized countries lack rules sufficiently flexible to offer protection to new technologies such as biotechnology and satellite communications This Administration strongly supports protection of intellectual property rights through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and it is working to end piracy that erodes incentives to innovate ( Chapter ) U.S. inventors have been defended against the importation of goods made abroad with unlicensed technology by vig- orous enforcement of existing trade law. The Administration also supports changes in the law to strengthen intellectual property provisions. The United States has proposed that the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) work to establish a framework in which nations cooperatively support basic scientific research and training and enforce intellectual property rights Intellectual property rights broadly conceived include not only the right to exclude others from the use of one 's knowledge but also the right to share knowledge for productive purposes. Private firms may want to conduct joint research in order to realize economies of scope and scale. In the past fear of inappropriate application of antitrust laws has inhibited cooperative research among competing firms By defining antitrust liability more clearly the National Cooperative Research Act of opened the way to research joint ventures which may make research profitable in areas where property rights are difficult to define or enforce. In the computer industry for example cooperative research already has yielded important innovations and marketable products. Fear of antitrust liability sometimes has prevented firms from broad licensing of intellectual property. This Administration supports legislation that would promote the dissemination of new technology by preventing the award of multiple antitrust damages in cases where patent licensing has no anticompetitive effect Federally sponsored research can benefit from the incentives created by property rights. The Patent Law Amendments of provided a uniform system for assigning title to inventions made at universities that conduct government-sponsored research. Between and cooperative ventures increased and the number of patents issued to American academic institutions grew by percent. Before these reforms patenting such inventions was uncertain and cooperative research ventures between private firms and universities were difficult to establish because of the complex regulations that accompanied Federal funding. The Technology Transfer Act of also should allow government scientists to respond better to market demands by simplifying the process by which Federal laboratories ' discoveries may be patented and developed. For example a Federal laboratory and a private biotechnology firm jointly are exploring vaccines against poultry disease INCENTIVES IN GOVERNMENT RESEARCH The Federal Government does not have the appropriate information and incentives to determine the most useful outputs of R&D except when the government is the principal user. For example in areas of defense research such as aviation computers and semicon- ductors the Federal Government was for many years not only the primary funder but also the primary user of the R&D product. Government thus had extensive knowledge of its needs and could guide research toward successful applications Federal support for R&D in health and agriculture often is mentioned as an example of government research that has produced large social benefits. Research in these fields illustrates the importance of close contact between the performers and users of R&D The close association of most schools of agriculture and medicine with the decentralized farming and health care industries may allow scientists to have more contact with the ultimate users of R&D outputs when deciding how to allocate R&D resources than would be the case were research more centrally directed In contrast to research concerning public goods the Federal Government 's efforts to fund innovations in the private sector often have been unsuccessful. Government-sponsored energy research and research into building materials and low-cost housing design produced little that was ultimately marketable Support of synthetic fuels is perhaps the most notable example of inappropriate government-directed investment in recent years. Citing the dangers of dependence on imported oil the previous Administration proposed spending $ billion to speed the development of synthetic fuels. The Energy Security Act of established price supports direct subsidies tax credits and loan guarantees to encourage participation in the program After the synfuel program began higher world energy prices induced greater supplies and conservation. In after deregulation oil prices declined. However the synfuel policy was based on the assumption that oil prices would reach $ to $ per barrel. Weak energy prices and political controversy helped convince the Congress to reduce the Synthetic Fuels Corporation 's funding substantially in With the fall of world oil prices much of the Federal Government 's support of windmills and other quixotic energy projects came to an end. The history of these energy initiatives suggests that government should not try to impose new technologies on an industry which is unwilling to commit its own resources to them and that political influence can make policies that are obvious economic failures difficult to abandon MARKET FLEXIBILITY Economic growth requires many adjustments including the expansion of productive activities and the abandonment of those that prove unproductive. In a dynamic economy markets for all productive fac- tors labor capital and natural resources must accommodate shifting patterns of demand and changing technologies. As the economy grows capital is assembled and used in new configurations and industrial as well as occupational shifts take place in the labor force The value of aggregate output is increased when factors of production shift to more highly valued uses in response to changes in demand and in costs of production. Many changes result from investments in human and other forms of capital and from new technology The development of aircraft and computers for example has opened new opportunities for consumption production and employment Increased income per capita as well as relative price changes lead to shifts in demand patterns. Consumers with higher incomes demand a wider variety of products and more services relative to goods ; they spend a smaller share of their income on the basic necessities of life. At the turn of the century households spent more than percent of disposable income on food compared to about percent today. Thus choices available to consumers have increased as has discretionary spending for travel recreation and other services Changes in output consumption and technology are essential features of economic progress. Rigidities and distortions in markets can impede natural responses to economic change reducing potential gains from investment and slowing productivity and income growth Maintaining the flexibility of labor markets is particularly important for a healthy economy MARKET BARRIERS AND DISTORTIONS Throughout the world there is increasing recognition that economic growth requires the reduction of structural barriers and distortions within domestic markets as well as the reduction of protectionism in international trade. Constraints on capital and labor markets stand in the way of shifts in comparative advantage barring allocation of resources to more productive uses. Taxation and regulation are major sources of market distortion inhibiting activities that otherwise would expand or providing subsidies to activities that otherwise would be curtailed Taxation In general taxes are distortionary because they interfere with the efficient allocation of productive resources and reduce incentives to work save and invest. These burdens can be limited by keeping marginal tax rates as low as possible and by imposing similar tax rates on similar products resources or activities The Tax Reform Act of moved the U.S. tax system substantially in the direction of lower and more equal marginal tax rates. As discussed in Chapter of the Report tax reform reduced the marginal Federal tax rate on labor income from percent to an average percent and it has significantly lessened differences in tax rates on the income from alternative forms of investment. The higher after-tax yield of labor income encourages work and investments in human capital which in turn increase the productivity of labor. More equal taxation of investments also encourages a more productive distribution of capital because investors ' decisions will be made on the basis of expected economic returns rather than tax consequences It is estimated that over the long term tax reform will increase real net national product by approximately percent and raise aggregate consumption by roughly percent. The net improvement in economic welfare is equivalent to about $ billion per year Tax distortions however can not be avoided entirely. Any practical system of taxation induces distortions as discussed in Chapter of the Report. Costs of resource misallocation have been estimated to range between and cents per additional tax dollar collected The costs of private compliance with personal income taxes are estimated to add another to cents per dollar collected. Because government outlays must be financed by tax revenues now or in the future and because taxes have such sizable indirect costs government spending should be undertaken only if the expected value of the activity is substantially higher than its outlay costs. Government services and transfer programs that fail to meet this test should be cut back Regulation Although often intended to correct externalities and other market imperfections government regulation frequently causes distortions that reduce allocative efficiency and impede growth. The regulation of financial services for example has reduced the efficiency of capital markets. While in force Federal interest rate ceilings on bank deposits lowered the returns available to small savers and constrained the amount of credit that depository institutions could provide to businesses and homeowners. Similarly interstate banking laws restrict the flow of funds to productive investments and interfere with diversification of risks thus reducing the gains that would be available to both savers and borrowers in nationwide capital markets During the past years regulation of agriculture has posed significant obstacles to economic efficiency and adjustment. Agricultural regulation has restricted imports subsidized production raised prices and kept land idle. Federal outlays and consumer costs of farm commodity programs are estimated to have been about $ billion in Furthermore the regulation of agriculture has slowed the movement of labor and capital to other industries. It has wasted resources by distorting investment within agriculture and by diverting investment from more profitable activities Rent controls remaining controls on trucking natural gas regulation automobile fuel economy standards ( discussed in Chapter of the Report ) import barriers such as voluntary agreements to restrict imports of automobiles and some rules designed to control environmental risks ( discussed in Chapter of the Report ) are all examples of regulations that reduce market flexibility. Price controls distort resource allocation. Regulation often reduces incentives for investment by insulating firms from competition by creating hidden subsidies and uncertainty about future changes in rules and by requiring adherence to rigid standards that preclude innovation and the introduction of lower cost methods of production. Safety and health regulations that require the installation of particular equipment for example may stifle incentives for developing better ways of improving workplace safety In recent years the United States has made substantial progress in deregulating oil prices as well as major industries such as airlines ( Chapter ) buses and railroads. Deregulation of transportation industries has been associated with a resurgence of productivity growth ( Chapter ) ; one study has estimated savings for the economy of roughly $ billion per year. Procedures also have been established for review of Federal regulations on a systematic basis to ensure that new regulations are worth their costs LABOR MARKET FLEXIBILITY Flexibility in labor markets is particularly significant for allocative efficiency and growth because labor is the dominant input to production. In the United States labor has contributed about percent to output for well over a hundred years. Compensation of employees now accounts for almost percent of national income up from about percent at the turn of the century In addition to improving the allocation of productive resources flexible labor markets expand employment opportunities and further contribute to growth by encouraging investment. Adaptable labor markets increase returns to investment particularly in knowledge by rewarding the acquisition of skills that are in demand and the adoption of cost-saving innovations in production As discussed in Chapter U.S. labor markets have been remarkably successful in generating new jobs for a growing labor force and in accommodating structural change. Primarily as a result of strong growth in productivity the share of the U.S. labor force devoted to agriculture fell from more than percent in to about percent today as shown in Chart The share of the labor force in manufacturing rose earlier in this century but has declined in recent decades also reflecting strong productivity growth. Shares in finance government and other services have increased. Employment has shifted toward jobs that are safer and less physically arduous and that demand more human capital. Work fatality rates in service industries for example are less than one-sixth of those in agriculture Employment in manual and farm occupations which accounted for about three-fourths of U.S. jobs in fell to less than percent in and the decline has continued Chart Labor Force Shares by Industry Percent j j Agriculture | Nonagriculture ^ Manufacturing1 [ H Transportation and Trade Other Services J/Also includes fisheries mining and construction Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor Contrary to popular notions increased unemployment in the postwar years in the United States has not been associated with unusually rapid changes in industrial structure. Measures of the structure of employment by industry in the United States do not indicate greater turbulence or increasingly rapid shifts in employment across either major or more narrowly defined industrial sectors. The level of unemployment accounted for by workers ' changing industry has been steady since Flexible labor markets facilitate change but they do not preclude job attachment or long careers in a single firm. Long-term employment is common among American workers. About half stay with a single employer for or more years and almost percent do so for at least years Most changes in employment patterns take place as a result of employment growth and voluntary job change. Workers particularly the young change jobs as they find opportunities that better suit their skills and preferences. Evidence shows that the changing employment patterns of workers under years of age account for much of the sectoral reallocation of jobs. In manufacturing voluntary quit rates have ranged from about to percent of the work force in recent years and layoffs typically have accounted for less than half of all job separations However job losses that occur in mid-career as a result of declining employment in particular industries or firms can pose serious problems for workers and their families leading to unemployment reduced earnings and other hardships. The BLS estimates that between and million workers lost jobs they had held for more than years due to slack work job abolition or a plant or business closing. On average a little more than one-half million of these workers lost jobs each year because their plants closed or their employers went out of business. Most of the affected workers experienced some unemployment and some had lengthy unemployment spells. Other research based on these data however has found that the duration of joblessness over the year for displaced workers was similar to that of average workers who had spells of unemployment Evidence suggests that earnings losses do not persist over the long term. Losses for workers whose jobs were abolished vary considerably reflecting losses in specific human capital and sometimes higher wages associated with unionization. On average wages upon reemployment have been about percent of prior wages. Losses typically have been higher in smaller and weaker labor markets. Workers with more job tenure experienced larger losses as did those with less education. More educated workers had less unemployment. Workers with more schooling have better access to labor market information a greater capacity to identify new opportunities and more skills of general value. In addition forgone earnings during unemployment are higher for workers with more human capital. Evidence shows that schooling eases the transition for those leaving agricultural as well as industrial jobs Employment growth and a general absence of impediments to mobility have facilitated the voluntary reallocation of labor to expanding sectors. When jobs have been lost involuntarily problems for individ- uals typically have been temporary and usually mitigated by their general knowledge and skills and by the availability of alternative employment POLICIES FOR LABOR ADJUSTMENT The flexibility of the U.S. labor market and the relative ease with which workers can move between geographic areas and avail themselves of better job opportunities have contributed substantially to economic growth. Government can improve labor adjustment by reducing existing market interventions and avoiding the imposition of new ones A number of labor market regulations such as the minimum wage many occupational safety and health rules and occupational licensing impair flexibility and adjustment. Many studies have shown that the minimum wage is a barrier to work and job-training opportunities for inexperienced and unskilled workers. Erosion in the real value of the minimum wage has contributed to substantial recent employment growth and reduced unemployment among black teenagers both of which are documented in Chapter Further lowering of the minimum wage would increase employment and accumulation of human capital among young people thereby raising future wages as well as economic output Providing unemployment insurance and training may produce net economic gains by broadening public support for the removal of trade barriers and other market distortions. But programs intended to ease the transitions of workers to new jobs can slow economic change by creating work disincentives and other sources of inefficiency. Improving current policies that directly address adjustment unemployment insurance pension rules and retraining would increase market flexibility and enhance prospects for growth. Establishing protection for existing jobs such as requiring advance notice of layoffs would introduce new market rigidities Reducing the Inefficiencies of Unemployment Insurance The Federal-State unemployment insurance program established more than years ago provides partial wage replacement for experienced workers who lose their jobs because of temporary layoffs or job terminations. With few restrictions States establish the amount as well as the duration of compensation and the structure of payroll taxes. Weekly benefits replace about percent of prior wages on average ; in most States compensation may be received up to weeks Total benefits were about $ billion in Benefit outlays are greater in years of higher unemployment ; for example they were $ billion in about percent higher in nominal dollars than in Compensation is intended to reduce earnings losses that result from changing market conditions and thus to cushion labor adjustment. By replacing a portion of wages during unemployment benefits support the search for a new job. At the same time benefits tend to prolong unemployment by reducing its costs for workers and allowing them to search longer but they do not appear to increase subsequent wages. Recent Federal reforms and State actions to tighten eligibility and job search requirements have reduced work disincentives substantially. Additional policy options to enhance reemployment incentives and the effectiveness of job search efforts are being explored Further improvements can be realized in the program 's financing Risk rating or experience rating is fundamental to private insurance because when higher premiums are charged to insure against greater risk insured parties have an incentive to reduce risk. Since the unemployment insurance system is only partially experience rated it provides incentives that increase unemployment. When a firm can lay off workers temporarily and spread much of the cost to other firms that also pay taxes into the program it is more likely to generate layoffs Strengthening experience rating would reduce unemployment by making individual firms bear more of the cost thereby encouraging them to explore alternatives to temporary layoffs such as rescheduling work or modifying inventories Financial transfers that are generated by the tax structure of the unemployment insurance system subsidize declining firms and those in seasonal or cyclical industries at the expense of growing or stable firms. Studies have found that agricultural and construction firms are heavily subsidized by firms engaged in trade and in finance insurance and real estate. States have made a number of changes during the 1980s to improve experience rating partly in response to Federal law. The Department of Labor in an effort to increase information and accountability recently has required more complete State reporting of experience rating Improving Pension Rules Pension termination insurance which has been a Federal responsibility since has been funded by a flat premium per worker. As a result firms that fund their pension plans inadequately have been subsidized at the expense of firms that maintain sound funding These indirect subsidies to poorly funded plans have reduced incentives for adequate funding and benefited failing firms at the expense of healthier firms. This Administration strongly supported recently enacted legislation that establishes partial risk rating of pension premiums and improved pension funding rules. This legislation will reduce the automatic financial transfers generated by the system. An additional step would allow pensions to be insured privately provided basic standards are met. Private pension insurance would have major advantages. Premiums would be based on risk thus preserving incentives for adequate pension funding as well as eliminating remaining automatic subsidies and insurance would likely be provided at an even lower cost for well-funded plans Government regulation of pensions can distort resource allocation through the effect on job tenure and training as well as through cross subsidies among firms. Rules such as those requiring early vesting may increase worker mobility but at the same time such rules diminish employer incentives to provide training. Employer investments in job training are based on expectations of future returns from increased worker productivity. To the extent that employment contracts are precluded from offering pension inducements for longer worker tenure with the firm the amount of training is likely to be reduced along with future productivity. Among other features of privately negotiated employment contracts pension provisions reflect the benefits and costs of job attachment to workers and firms. Government mandates with regard to pensions and other employment benefits can prevent employers from offering the most desirable pay packages to workers and can slow investment in human capital Retraining Government-supported retraining may facilitate reemployment following job loss. Job training and retraining however are primarily a private responsibility. Since private firms know best what skills they require they can tailor training to their needs. In its role as employer the Federal Government provides substantial amounts of training for military and other Federal occupations. As discussed earlier however the wider effectiveness of government-run training programs in raising earnings over the long term has not been established The Administration 's proposed Worker Readjustment Assistance Program ( WRAP ) would replace Trade Adjustment Assistance ( TAA ) and other existing retraining programs. In addition to training TAA provides compensation which in combination with unemployment insurance can be received for as many as weeks. Evidence shows that TAA has failed to facilitate adjustment and has prolonged unemployment. WRAP would offer training to all experienced workers who have lost their jobs in recognition that adjustment costs are unrelated to the cause of job loss whether changing trade patterns or other factors. At the options of States vouchers for purchasing training in the market could be offered along with traditional retraining services and job search assistance Costs of Job Protection Government actions to insulate industries and jobs from international competition or to protect existing jobs by requiring employers to provide advance notification of layoffs and plant closings would reduce market flexibility and diminish overall employment opportunities. Proponents argue that advance notice of layoffs would ease worker adjustment. Mandated notice however as called for in proposed trade legislation would constrain the responses of firms to changing market conditions and reduce employment. Because required notice means that employers would incur greater liabilities in the event of business contractions hiring during expansions would be curtailed. Higher costs and increased risks also would discourage new business formation. In contrast when job security provisions are chosen in the marketplace they can be weighed against other forms of compensation according to workers ' preferences and employers ' costs Employers frequently provide their workers with advance notice Recent government surveys have found that advance notice of the specific date of an impending layoff was given in about one-half to two-thirds of the cases surveyed and general notice in one-third to three-fourths of the cases. On average general notice was given days in advance. Notice was not the result of collective bargaining alone ; the likelihood of receiving notice was about equal in union and nonunion establishments Although labor market performance is affected by numerous forces including macroeconomic and tax policies an important reason for high unemployment and lack of job growth in Europe has been labor market rigidities. Many European governments severely restrict an employer 's ability to dismiss workers and they require substantial severance pay and notice prior to layoff. Unemployment benefits are higher and last longer than in the United States commonly replacing at least percent of prior wages for a year or more and more of the unemployed qualify for benefits. Financing moreover is not experience rated. Employment in Western Europe has been flat since ; during the same period employment in the United States has increased by more than percent. Unemployment rates in Western Europe have approximately tripled since the early 1970s and they are now higher than in the United States thus reversing earlier patterns. The incidence of long spells of unemployment is substantially higher in Western Europe than in the United States as is unemployment among youth European governments have realized that the inflexibility of their labor markets due to job security mandates along with a variety of other labor market interventions have impaired growth in employ- ment and spawned high unemployment rates particularly among youth. During the 1980s European countries have begun to reverse previous policies of increasing job protection unemployment compensation and other measures that impose constraints on labor markets and distort incentives. A number of countries have reduced the costs of employment termination by relaxing job protections and increasing the ability of employers to effect dismissals. Governmentmandated severance pay in Western Europe has been reduced from the levels of the late 1970s. In a majority of OECD countries unemployment benefits which had risen during the 1970s have been reduced. Stricter eligibility conditions have been applied and work incentives strengthened. In a number of countries minimum wages have been held constant in nominal terms and reduced in real terms Several countries have reduced minimum wages for youth Policies such as those in Western Europe that had attempted to reduce adjustment costs by preserving existing jobs at the expense of new jobs have been recognized as shortsighted benefiting some workers by shifting high costs to others. In addition to the steps that individual countries have taken to reverse such policies the OECD and the Venice Economic Summit formally recognized the need for removing labor market barriers and increasing flexibility. At its May Ministerial meeting the OECD concluded that improved functioning of labor markets is essential for sustained economic growth CONCLUSION Investments in human capital and in science and technology have made substantial contributions to productivity and economic progress. In the future such investments 'may assume even greater importance. Market incentives provide the primary mechanism for the accumulation and allocation of investments in knowledge and skill as well as in physical capital. Government support for education and research can improve prospects for long-term economic growth but it should be linked closely to private incentives. Public support of most education and training and of research should be limited to investments for which individuals and firms do not have adequate incentives and for which benefits exceed costs including costs that arise from tax distortions. Many government interventions including those that are designed to spur increases in knowledge generate costs and inefficiencies that in the end retard growth Economic progress requires change and to realize the gains from investments in human capital and in research and development it is vital that markets remain flexible and responsive. To resist change and to introduce protection that slows change will stifle investment and diminish opportunities for future growth. Policies that reduce market barriers and strengthen the incentives of individuals and businesses to invest and to innovate are the surest ways to improve economic performance. Government can encourage further advances in knowledge and economic progress by maintaining flexible markets and a stable framework in which property rights are protected and initiatives are rewarded CHAPTER Airline Deregulation : Maintaining the Momentum DURING THE LAST DECADE there have been dramatic changes in the way America 's transportation sector is regulated. The railroad bus trucking and airline industries all have become more efficient as a result. Since virtually all aspects of the economy depend on the transportation system gains in this sector help the overall economy thereby improving U.S. competitiveness. The principal force underlying these changes in productivity has been a deregulatory environment that allowed greater price flexibility for businesses while reducing government interference The deregulation of trucking railroads buses and airlines began in the 1970s when government officials recognized that regulation was stilling competition. After the regulatory bodies began to reduce their control over prices and entry the Congress enacted landmark legislation loosening or abolishing Federal controls over the transportation industries. For example the Staggers Rail Act of allowed railroads to set prices freely in markets where they could not exercise market dominance. Railroads no longer are subject to rate regulation in these markets and price intervention on the part of the Federal Government has been reduced. The Motor Carrier Act of relaxed government regulation of trucking. Because barriers to entry have been lowered many new competitors have entered the market. Trucking firms now have greater freedom in setting rates The Bus Regulatory Reform Act of relaxed both entry and fare restrictions for the intercity bus industry. Although government regulation has not been eliminated entirely from these industries the role of the government has been reduced significantly While deregulation substantially improved productivity and efficiency in the transportation sector the Airline Deregulation Act of has had the greatest immediate impact on the public. The benefits to travelers from airline deregulation have been estimated to exceed $ billion per year The deregulation of the airline industry has permitted greater competition which in turn has led to a dramatic restructuring of the airline industry. The industry has become more streamlined. Fares generally are much lower than they would have been under regulation and a wider menu of travel options is available to the consumer Although there had been concern about air service to small communities following deregulation such service as measured by the frequency of flights and flight length has improved Despite the economic gains from deregulation complaints about a possible decline in the level of safety and an increase in flight delays have increased. It is sometimes argued that regulation should be restored. These concerns must be examined in the context of the evolution of the airline industry since deregulation. While airline safety is a serious public concern the record indicates that safety has not deteriorated under deregulation ; in fact it appears to have improved Moreover while airport and airspace congestion has worsened this is a direct result of the success of deregulation. More people are flying now than ever before but the local and Federal authorities charged with managing the airports and airspace have been unable to adjust to the dramatic growth in demand. Congestion is a natural consequence of the fact that growth in demand for air travel has exceeded the supply of airport and airspace services The solution to the problem of increased congestion lies not in resurrecting an outmoded system of regulation with onerous restrictions on entry and fares. Rather the solution lies in devising economic approaches that will enable the supply of airport and airspace services to keep pace with the growing demands of the American public for air transport THE REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT For nearly four decades before the enactment of the Airline Deregulation Act in the Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) exercised extensive regulatory control over the domestic airline industry. The CAB controlled the entry and exit of carriers on interstate routes and approved the fares charged on those routes. The CAB appears to have tried to stabilize the industry attempting to shield existing carriers from entry and price competition and to provide service to a large number of communities. To the extent that airlines competed they focused on features other than price such as departure frequency and food quality. This competition over service quality limited the CAB 's ability to use price and entry regulation to achieve its goals concerning profits service and stability In order to provide service to more places the CAB attempted to favor short-haul service in two ways. First for long-haul routes fares were set at high levels relative to costs and fares for short-haul routes were set at low levels relative to costs. As a result passengers on long-haul routes paid significantly higher prices than they would have under competition Second direct subsidies were given to airlines that served small communities. The Federal Government frequently has used subsidies to ensure that services were provided to less densely populated areas For example subsidies have been provided for post offices and telephone service in small towns and remote areas. Thus it is not surprising that subsidies were given to the airline industry for similar purposes These direct subsidies have created a number of problems. For example because airlines were subsidized on the basis of the number of departures they had an incentive to schedule flights with multiple stops thereby resulting in lengthy flight times from small communities to major cities. Since the subsidies did not vary with the time of day airlines typically scheduled their service to small communities during off-peak periods. Because the planes used on these subsidized routes often were borrowed from other routes they were not efficiently tailored to the size of the subsidized markets Even with the subsidy program many carriers chose to limit service provided to small communities. From to the CAB permitted certificated carriers to reduce their service to small communities by nearly percent. At the same time unsubsidized commuter carriers not under the CAB 's regulatory jurisdiction were increasing service to these communities Subsidies to airlines peaked in at $ million. As traffic on commuter airlines grew fewer subsidies were needed to maintain service ; consequently subsidies now have fallen to less than $ million. A study by the Department of Transportation ( DOT ) projected that an end to these subsidies would result in a loss of service to of the airports ( excluding Alaska ) currently in the program None of these communities board more than passengers per day and over half board fewer than five passengers per day. In addition almost half of these airports are less than miles from other communities with air transportation and only eight are more than miles from alternative air transport. Although the Airline Deregulation Act would have ended these subsidies in legislation has just been enacted extending the program for another years In order to maintain service to small communities and stability in the industry the CAB regulated entry into the profitable long-haul markets and exit from the less-profitable short-haul markets. The type and extent of route regulation depended on the category of the carrier. Route restrictions were imposed on all interstate carriers except for commuter airlines and charters. For example carriers often were precluded from operating beyond a stated point. In addi- tion carriers sometimes were required to make intermediate stops Restrictions on entry into the major interstate " trunk " markets were particularly stringent. From through the CAB did not permit a single new interstate trunk airline to enter the market The CAB did allow limited entry in some markets. After World War II the Congress pressured the CAB to permit the creation of " local service " airlines. These airlines replaced much of the federally subsidized service that the trunks provided to smaller communities Initially local service airlines were precluded from competing with the trunk airlines. Then in an effort to reduce the growing cost of the subsidy the government allowed local airlines to offer service in selected markets served by the trunks. This policy helped foster limited competition between the trunks and the local service airlines The few areas where the CAB did not regulate rates entry and route structure included small commuter airlines airlines providing charter services and intrastate carriers. However the CAB did limit commuters by setting the maximum gross takeoff weight at pounds which permitted approximately seats. This limitation subsequently was relaxed somewhat but it still served to restrict commuter service to less densely populated markets Intrastate airline carriers had complete flexibility in choosing routes and fares. The intrastate carriers in California and Texas charged significantly lower fares than the interstate trunks charged on routes of similar distances yet made profits. The fare per mile in unregulated markets was often half as much as fares in comparable regulated markets. Fare comparisons between interstate and intrastate markets made it easy to see that there could be substantial gains from deregulation RESULTS OF DEREGULATION Several factors have affected the performance of the airline industry over the last decade. Deregulation while important must not be given undue credit or unjust blame for the recent performance of the industry. Technical innovation for example has contributed to improvements in fuel efficiency and safety. The performance of the domestic economy also is linked to the overall health of the domestic airline industry because more people travel when the economy is doing well. Since the United States has enjoyed its longest postwar peacetime economic expansion. Thus it is important to differentiate between the gains resulting from economic expansion and those resulting from deregulation. Even controlling for such changes in the economy however it is clear that deregulation has had a substantial positive effect LOWER FARES The most important economic benefits that have resulted from U.S. airline deregulation are decreases in fares and increases in the frequency of service. The use of discount fares which offer reductions from the standard coach fare has increased dramatically. In percent of travelers enjoyed discount fares ; by this number had grown to percent. The substantial rise in the availability of discount fares has been accompanied by a percent decrease in these fares adjusting for inflation Since the old regulatory policies tended to keep long-haul fares relatively high the greatest reductions in discount fares have occurred for longer flights. For example discount prices for flights over miles have dropped by percent in real terms. The availability of discount fares has increased significantly in short-haul markets as well. For flights less than miles the prices of discount tickets have dropped by about percent in real terms In contrast to discount fares average full undiscounted coach fares have increased by more than percent in real terms ; however only about percent of current ticket sales are for full coach fare Changes in real coach fares also vary with trip length. For trips less than miles average coach fares have increased. For trips exceeding miles real average coach fares have declined The widespread reduction in fares is caused by several factors. The elimination of regulated fares was important in long-haul markets. In high-density markets two other factors contributed to lower fares First high passenger volumes in these markets permitted airlines to reduce their cost per passenger mile by making more efficient use of their equipment. Second these markets also tended to have more discretionary travelers who could take advantage of discount fares Indeed discount fares are used most widely in those markets with the highest passenger volume EFFICIENT ROUTING : THE HUB AND SPOKE The route structure that evolved under regulation has undergone major changes as a result of increased competition. Free entry into city-pair markets has permitted the airlines to develop much more efficient routing patterns than under regulation. The most significant change has been the growth of a " hub-and-spoke " delivery system As the name suggests airlines have developed a series of networks analogous to a bicycle wheel. The hub represents the center of the network ; the spokes link different origin and destination points. For example a flight from Hartford to San Diego may be routed through a hub at Chicago Leading hubs of all major airlines have shown large increases in traffic since In several cases airline departures from the major hubs have more than doubled. In addition the expansion of the huband-spoke system following deregulation has permitted four major innovations benefiting fliers First service to airports with low traffic volume has been expanded. While demand may not be sufficient to justify direct flights from small airports to certain other locations the new distribution system allows the traffic from small airports to be combined at the hubs with traffic from other spokes. This traffic then is routed through the various spokes of the hub. Thus being connected to a hub allows convenient access to many destinations Second flight frequency is greater at both hubs and spokes allowing the traveler to find more convenient flight times. Pooling traffic at the hubs permits greater departure frequency to and from the smaller airports. The convergence of traffic from the various spokes also permits more frequent hub service. With the expanded set of options most travelers now are able to schedule their departures closer to their preferred times Deregulation appears to have led to an overall increase in the frequency of service ; however there is a wide variation across different markets based on passenger travel demand. Using a random sample of markets from and researchers have found that service improved across all market groups. Significantly markets with the lowest passenger volumes experienced the greatest increase in both service and estimated welfare gain per traveler Although some communities have lost scheduled service only in rare instances has deregulation been the primary cause. A study which took into account the economic and demographic changes in the United States has concluded that the introduction of deregulation has helped to slow the rate at which small communities have lost service. Moreover deregulation has allowed commuters and regional carriers to expand more rapidly feeding passengers into the hubs and thereby strengthening the hub-and-spoke system. Since the regional and commuter airlines have more than doubled the number of their passengers and added service to over airports not previously served by these carriers While the growth of hubs has improved the frequency of service it also has increased average travel time somewhat. Hub-and-spoke configurations are partly responsible for this increase since they typically involve a tradeoff between departure frequency and travel time More flights to a particular destination may be available but some of these flights may involve brief stopovers in other cities. Comparing airline regulation in with a simulated deregulation scenario re- searchers have found that the average time increase for flights under miles has been less than percent while average flight times have decreased about percent on trips over miles. A study has shown that consumers place greater value on the increase in departure frequency than on the losses that result from the small average increase in travel time. In some cases the hub-and-spoke system has had a salutary effect on travel time. For example hub-and-spoke networks have resulted in a dramatic reduction in flights with two or more intermediate stops thus leading to a reduction in travel time for many city-pairs A third benefit from hub-and-spoke networks is that larger aircraft can be used because traffic has been consolidated. Bigger planes cost less to operate per seat mile than smaller planes. In addition to the cost savings larger aircraft usually are thought to afford greater comfort so fliers also benefit in this quality dimension A fourth benefit of the growth of hub-and-spoke systems is that more fliers have the opportunity to book on a single airline for their entire flight. Research has shown that fliers strongly prefer traveling on a single carrier to reach a destination rather than changing airlines on one-stop flights. Benefits include better coordination of flight times and better baggage services. The consolidation of airlines at a hub can provide more opportunities for passengers to choose single-line service. In percent of all connecting passengers changed airlines whereas only percent do today EFFECTS ON LABOR While airline productivity has increased the effects of deregulation on the airline labor market have been mixed. Employment in the airline industry has increased as a result of increased air travel. From to total airline employment increased by more than onethird. Because of general changes in the economy and dramatic changes in energy prices it is difficult to isolate the effect of deregulation on wages. From to it appears that airline wages did as well as other sectors of the economy if not better The aggregate impact on wages masks an important change in the wage structure resulting from deregulation. The introduction of deregulation led to intense pressure to cut costs so that lower prices could be offered. This downward pressure on costs induced airlines to seek work rule changes as well as changes in wage rates. These changes have in some cases led to a dual wage structure in which newly hired workers earn less for performing the same jobs than previously hired workers INCREASES IN PRODUCTIVITY PROFITS AND WELFARE Besides leading to lower fares and increased service airline deregulation has resulted in more productive uses of inputs such as labor and equipment. The hub-and-spoke system for example has helped to deploy aircraft fleets more efficiently so more passengers can be served better using the same resources. For example commercial planes flew with percent of their seats filled in and this load factor increased to percent in Moreover airlines have installed more seats in their aircraft since deregulation to accommodate the growth in demand. U.S. airline productivity increased by percent from to while the productivity of non-U.S carriers decreased by nearly percent over the same period. This comparison lends strong support to the view that deregulation has had a dramatic positive impact on U.S. airline productivity growth The effect of deregulation on industry profits is difficult to estimate. The difference between the average return on capital invested in the airline industry in the period following deregulation and in the decade preceding deregulation is relatively small. Both before and after deregulation the industry experienced financial losses during periods of sharp fuel price increases and economy-wide recessions Attempts to control for macroeconomic factors and changes in input prices suggest that the financial performance of the airline industry is better than it would have been under continued regulation. One study has estimated that profits in would have increased by more than $ billion if the airlines had been fully deregulated at that time To measure the overall welfare effects of deregulation it is necessary to quantify effects on airlines and travelers. Travelers have been affected principally through reduced fares increased frequency of service and changes in travel time between destinations. Both business travelers and pleasure travelers have benefited. Moreover travelers using all sizes of airports experienced a net average gain in welfare. The welfare increase for the average traveler amounts to roughly $ per trip. Summing the estimated aggregate gains to travelers and airline companies yields a total of approximately $ billion in annual benefits from deregulation INTERNATIONAL CONSEQUENCES The U.S. experience with deregulation has been influential in leading other countries to deregulate air travel. Great Britain recently privatized its major state-owned airline. Canada and Japan are considering similar moves. New Zealand has taken steps parallel to those in the United States to deregulate its air transport industry and Australia plans to phase in airline deregulation by the early 1990s. After nearly years of debate the European Community ( EC ) has approved the first steps of a liberalization package that took effect at the start of Greater entry by carriers within the EC will be permitted and it is estimated that fares for flights within Europe will decline by an average of to percent The International Air Transport Association ( IATA ) plays a major role in attempting to cartelize international air travel by providing a forum for price coordination exempt from the antitrust laws. Limitations on international competition also result from government regulation of entry and prices in international markets. Through a series of bilateral agreements countries have divided international markets In many cases only one carrier from each country is permitted to serve a particular route. These restrictions on entry and price competition have led to a market structure reminiscent of the domestic U.S market under the CAB. Fares tend to be higher and firms compete if at all on service rather than on price. Governments sometimes negotiate bilateral agreements that not only limit total capacity but also divide the airline traffic and profits between themselves. The principal source of price competition in European markets comes from charter services which are outside of IATA 's purview. Indeed charter services currently account for more than half of all travel in Europe In order to promote competition in international aviation the United States has entered into a number of bilateral negotiations with other nations to increase the access of U.S. carriers to foreign destinations in return for greater foreign access to U.S. destinations Where these agreements permit greater entry and price flexibility the increased competition on international routes has resulted in lower fares The United States is pursuing further liberalization of international airline travel through similar bilateral negotiations. Although such negotiations are only a first step toward greater international competition they could result in global economic gains. Allowing U.S. carriers free entry into foreign markets would provide significant benefits to consumers and domestic carriers. Offering foreign airlines free access to U.S. destinations would provide much more convenient international direct flight service to consumers worldwide MANAGING THE INCREASED DEMAND FOR AIRSPACE Deregulation has given rise to the highest levels of commercial air travel ever experienced in the world. If not managed properly increased air traffic could lead to greater congestion and in some situations could raise safety concerns. The deregulated environment has been quite effective in maintaining air safety. The growth of air traffic however has raised some important issues concerning the compatibility of airline deregulation with continued government management of airspace and airport services. If the benefits of deregulation are to be enhanced market forces should be introduced to reform those elements of the air transport industry that are still regulated by the government SAFETY Airline accidents have declined steadily since the 1950s and this trend has continued since the advent of deregulation in From to departures increased by percent miles flown by percent revenue passenger miles by percent and revenue passengers by percent. In light of this large increase in air travel the accident rate statistics under deregulation appear even more favorable. The decline in fatality rates is particularly encouraging since load factors and the number of seats per plane have risen since the end of regulation. Chart shows that accident and fatal accident rates for all scheduled passenger and cargo operations have declined dramatically during the last years reaching an all-time low in the period since deregulation Even if extremes rather than averages are compared air safety looks quite good following deregulation. A comparison of the worst year for accidents following deregulation with the previous years shows that in only years prior to were there fewer accidents A similar picture emerges if the best year achieved under regulation is used as the benchmark for safety. In of the years following deregulation there have been fewer accidents than in regulation 's best year notwithstanding the sharp increase in air travel Improvements in flight safety performance have not been confined to the major carriers. Although only recent data are available for nonscheduled service commuters and air taxis their safety records from to can be compared with those from to For nonscheduled operations accidents per flight hours have fallen percent and fatalities per flight hours have declined percent. Accident and fatality rates for commuters and air taxis have shown similar improvement falling percent and percent respectively. These statistics demonstrate that safety performance has improved in all segments of the industry since deregulation Critics of deregulation have argued that airline safety would deteriorate under competition because competitive pressures would induce firms to cut back on safety expenditures. Under such circumstances the incentives to reduce costs could result in the airlines exposing passengers to greater risks. In addition price regulation had Chart Airline Accident Rate Rate * Rate * i i i i I i i i i I i r i i I i i i i i i i 'Accidents per departures Note. ' Data relate to scheduled passenger and cargo operations of U.S. certificated air carriers ; data for are preliminary Sources : Civil Aeronautics Board and National Transportation Safety Board forced airlines to focus their competition on nonprice factors such as safety and deregulation would end that incentive. Thus it was argued airlines would pay less attention to safety in a deregulated environment and the skies would become less safe After nearly a decade of experience with deregulated air travel these fears have proven to be unfounded. Studies have found no evidence of a decline in the safety performance of the airline industry following deregulation. Furthermore there appears to be little or no correlation between safety and financial performance in the airline industry either before or after deregulation. In addition profitability appears to have had no effect on maintenance expenditures and there is no systematic evidence that airlines have cut corners on safety If deregulation were leading to reduced safety precautions then this change should affect the characteristics of accidents that do occur. For example if airlines were taking less time to train pilots or were overworking them then the share of accidents caused primarily by pilot error should rise. Similarly if there were less emphasis on maintenance then the percentage of accidents primarily due to equipment failure should rise. The statistics show however that the proportion of accidents primarily due to pilot error as well as the share primarily due to equipment failure have changed little since deregulation The relative ranking of the factors contributing to fatal airline accidents before and after deregulation also has been quite stable. Pilot error is the most common factor followed by the weather and then by air traffic control. Maintenance is the least common factor. In the decade prior to deregulation pilot error was a contributing factor in fatal accidents while maintenance was a contributing factor in accidents. In contrast pilot error was a contributing factor in accidents and maintenance in only accident in the period since deregulation Recently the public has expressed concern that the rapid growth in air traffic stemming from deregulation has put unusual stress on the air traffic control system. At the same time there have been reports that air traffic controllers may feel overburdened. Since reaching a low in late following the illegal strike by the air traffic controllers union controller staffs have been growing to meet the increasing demand. The evidence does not support the claim that changes in controller staffing have led to a decline in safety. Indeed the share of accidents primarily due to air traffic control error has not changed since deregulation Although the accident and fatality statistics point to improved rather than deteriorating safety since some observers have claimed that the " safety margin " is declining. However measurement of the safety margin is problematic. Near midair collision statistics play a major role in this concept. Unfortunately there is no consistent near midair collision data that would permit a comparison of performance before and after deregulation. In addition a change in the procedures for processing near midair collision reports makes it difficult to discern reliable trends after deregulation A near midair collision is defined as an incident in which the possibility of a collision occurs as a result of aircraft coming within feet of each other. A pilot or crew member also can report a near midair collision if the individual believes that a hazard existed between two or more aircraft even if the 500-foot criterion were not met. Near midair collisions then are categorized as critical ( the most serious ) potential and no hazard ( collision improbable ) Approximately percent of the total increase in near midair collision reports from to has been in the " no hazard " category. The number of reported near midair collisions does not appear to be cor- related with any measure of accidents fatalities or number of actual midair collisions Midair collisions constitute a very small fraction of all aircraft accidents involving a commercial carrier. Most accidents occur at takeoff or landing and do not involve another aircraft. Since the passage of the Airline Deregulation Act of only one midair collision involving a domestic commercial jetliner has occurred in the United States. Since near midair collision reports do not appear to be correlated with air carrier accidents or accident rates and actual midair collisions involving commercial jets have been rare the concern about the safety margin appears to be exaggerated An often neglected but very significant consequence of deregulation is that lower fares and more frequent service have caused air travel to be substituted for other modes of transportation. Since air travel is safer than other forms of intercity travel overall transportation safety is improved as people substitute a safer form of transport for a less safe one. Between and for example deaths per billion passenger miles for passenger car travel averaged whereas for airline travel they averaged Thus for every billion miles of air travel that people substitute for car travel there will be approximately fewer deaths. A study has estimated that more than lives are saved each year because people now travel by plane rather than by car It is important to recognize that deregulation did not affect the Federal Government 's role in the regulation of safety. The Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) has continued to monitor airlines ' safety-related activities. One study has concluded that airlines consider the FAA standards to be " bare-bones " minima for operation and they routinely do more than the FAA calls for. For example the airlines have voluntarily set standards for aviation equipment through a nonprofit corporation owned by the airlines While there is likely to be a valuable role for an external body to oversee safety in the airline industry government regulation represents but one of many approaches that could be adopted. In many other industries private organizations such as Underwriters Laboratories and insurance groups provide monitoring and safety standards The market provision of such services might work similarly in the airline industry As the safety statistics suggest competition does not appear to provide airlines an incentive to reduce safety. In fact market forces may reinforce airline safety considerations. When an airline experiences an accident the price of its stock suffers a loss. If carriers attempted to reduce safety precautions to an unacceptable level they could be affected adversely by FAA enforcement actions increased insurance premiums increased costs of borrowing and a loss of reputation. Thus firms will consider these consequences when they develop their safety management practices In summary the evidence shows that safety has not deteriorated as a result of airline deregulation. Even if safety were declining a return to price and entry regulation would not be the answer. Protecting airline profits through regulation of price and entry is unlikely to result in improved safety since there is scant evidence that changes in financial variables lead to changes in safety performance. With a return to regulation however the safety gains from intermodal substitution of air travel for other less safe forms of transport would be forgone DELAYS One feature not addressed by airline deregulation was the management of delays. Delays occur when the demand for system capacity exceeds the available supply. Delays usually are caused by congestion. Just as highways often become congested during rush hours so do airports and airspace. Most delays occur at crowded airports during peak periods just as most highway delays occur during rush hour traffic jams around major cities. In for example percent of total recorded delays were associated with only airports The primary responsibility for managing the U.S. airspace continues to lie with the FAA. The policies adopted by the FAA have an important effect on the amount and distribution of delays. To understand appropriate remedies for problems related to delays it is useful to have some understanding of how the air traffic control system works In the United States more than airport control towers clear planes for takeoff and landing. To help regulate traffic between airports there are domestic en route air traffic control centers which span the continental United States. These facilities help manage more than million flights per year. To simplify this task the airspace is divided into a number of sectors. Each sector corresponds to a parcel of airspace within which a controller is responsible for the safe passage of aircraft. Of the people employed by the FAA about are air traffic controllers Weather conditions play a major role in contributing to delays. Because bad weather reduces an airport 's capacity to handle flights it can generate delays. The FAA reports that in approximately percent of flight delays were weather-related and percent were volume-related. More specifically the FAA estimates that percent of delays were due directly to traffic volume at airports while percent resulted from high traffic volume at en route centers. Prior to deregulation in the 1970s all volume-related delays constituted less than percent of total delays and weather accounted for roughly percent of total delays Unfortunately incomplete measurement of delays together with changes in the definition of " delay " make it difficult to assess longterm trends. The FAA attempts to measure only major delays due to air traffic control. Prior to only delays over minutes were reported. Since then the FAA has recorded delays of minutes or more. The number of delays varies greatly from one year to the next due mainly to the vagaries of weather While delays are unpleasant some amount of delay at peak periods is usually appropriate. Actions taken to control delays should balance the benefits of reducing delay during peak periods against the cost of additional capacity. Even if it were possible to eliminate all delays such a policy would not necessarily be efficient because the costs of eliminating delays during peak periods would exceed the benefits For example although it might be possible to build a superhighway that could accommodate all rush hour traffic most of the lanes of this highway would remain empty for the vast majority of the day The costs incurred in building such a highway are likely to far exceed the benefits of eliminating congestion and delays at rush hour Current Approaches for Managing Congestion The FAA and DOT have taken a variety of actions to address concerns about air traffic congestion. After the strike by air traffic controllers in the FAA adopted a new policy to minimize the number of aircraft that the system must track at any one time without reducing the overall volume of daily flight activity. When congestion is anticipated at the destination airport the FAA requires that a plane wait on the ground. This policy while perhaps addressing safety actually may have introduced significant delays. If planes were allowed to circle in the vicinity of destination airports waiting for weather or congestion to clear unnecessary delays could be avoided To help ease the delay problem the FAA has undertaken a major restructuring of the airspace along the east coast. The FAA significantly expanded air traffic capabilities through an improvement in routing procedures. This change required only a very small addition of personnel and equipment. The airspace reorganization is analogous to reducing traffic jams by increasing the number of lanes on a roadway and improving the timing of stoplights. The creation of additional departure routes and airways was accomplished primarily through better charting efficient realignment of existing paths and increased coordination among air traffic facilities. Similar plans for restructuring airways along the west coast are under development The Department of Transportation periodically has attempted to enlist the help of the airlines in sorting out scheduling problems. In and again in the DOT brought the airlines together to engage in scheduling discussions aimed at reducing delays. The DOT believes that these meetings have helped to reduce excessive bunching of departures at peak periods Since pricing mechanisms are not used to allocate takeoffs and landings at the most desirable times the airlines have little incentive to transfer some of their peak traffic to off-peak periods. Reliance upon DOT meetings to deal with scheduling issues arises at least in part because pricing of airport usage does not reflect congestion costs Due to the increasing concern about delays and service the DOT recently required airlines to provide information on all delays except those related to maintenance. Beginning in September monthly tabulations covering approximately percent of all flights have been made available on a flight-by-flight basis. Delay statistics for all flights at the reporting airports also are being calculated If airport services were priced to reflect congestion costs accurately then prices would convey much of the information that this disclosure rule attempts to provide. In the absence of price signals the DOT statistics may encourage some travelers to switch to flights that are less likely to experience delays. The response of travelers would provide an incentive for the airlines to improve scheduling and operations While the publication of delay statistics provides consumers and planners with some information about the specific sources of delay the disclosure requirement may not lead to improved consumer service. For example the willingness of an airline to hold a connecting flight for the late arrival of another flight may be affected. Particularly at a hub one plane arriving late could cause a number of other planes to be held for connecting passengers. If the airline holds the connecting flights its on-time performance record will be harmed. If it does not hold the flight and passengers miss their connections the airline 's performance may appear better. Thus actual delays experienced by travelers could increase as the reported statistics appear to improve To meet capacity needs in the longer term the FAA is attempting to increase the pace at which the airport and airways system is being modernized. The agency is in the process of designing and building a new system of radars communication devices and computer hardware and software as part of the National Airspace System Plan These improvements will allow the system to handle more air traffic The FAA is also in the process of training more controllers. Unfortu- nately the implementation of many aspects of the National Airspace System Plan are much behind schedule. Technical problems have slowed the development and introduction of improved facilities to accommodate more volume In the United States there is only one major new commercial passenger airport planned to be built before the turn of the century Direct airport capacity expansion faces a number of significant obstacles. There is strong opposition in many communities to the construction of new airports as well as to the expansion of existing local airports. Local noise standards limit traffic growth at many airports A number of communities recently have passed ordinances explicitly restricting airport traffic. The Federal authorities who manage the overall capacity of the system often have goals conflicting with those of the local communities The Federal Government and the airlines have taken a number of steps to address the problems related to delays with varying degrees of effectiveness. The recent trend in delays looks promising. Total delays as recorded by the FAA declined by percent from to even though traffic volume continued to climb. Despite this improvement it is likely that the delay issue will resurface periodically unless fundamental structural changes are made in the way the airspace is managed and in the way decisions about investment in capacity are made MAKING THE SYSTEM MORE RESPONSIVE AND EFFICIENT Because traffic volume has risen since deregulation it has become increasingly difficult for the supply of airspace services to keep up with the demands imposed upon the system. Part of the problem is the way the system currently is financed. Instead of paying for services actually rendered by the air traffic control system operators and travelers pay taxes only indirectly related to costs. The primary source of funding for the system is an percent tax on each airline ticket sold. In the ticket tax yielded $ billion in revenues accounting for percent of the revenues collected from users. The remaining revenues come from a tax on aviation fuel a percent tax on cargo and a $ passenger tax on international departures. These revenues flow into the Airport and Airway Trust Fund out of which part of the Federal spending related to air transportation is financed FAA expenditures for fiscal totaled $ billion. The difference between FAA expenditures and revenues raised from user taxes in was $ billion. Not all of this difference represents a subsidy from the general public since the public should pay for the use of the airspace by government agencies such as the Department of Defense. Nonetheless a sizable portion of this revenue shortfall does represent a subsidy from U.S. taxpayers to the aviation system. The FAA estimates that commercial airlines pay roughly percent of the costs they impose on the system. General aviation which includes small privately owned aircraft and business jets pays less than percent of the costs they impose on the system. The total subsidy from taxpayers to the beneficiaries of general aviation and air carrier activity was approximately $ billion for fiscal There are two basic problems with this policy for funding air traffic control and safety services. First the primary beneficiaries of airline travel are not bearing the full cost. Ending the subsidy to the air transport sector not only would help allocate the supply of airspace services rationally and result in better allocation among transportation modes but it also would result in a small decrease in the Federal budget deficit. The second problem is that the payments made by travelers and operators are not linked to the use of specific services The charges are related only tangentially to the costs they impose on the system To develop a sensible response to short-term congestion problems and long-term planning issues it would be useful to obtain information on the value people place on airspace services a task best accomplished by asking users to pay for services actually rendered More accurate information on how travelers value capacity would make it possible to determine where adjustments in system capacity are needed There are a variety of short- and long-term options that could enhance the efficiency of the air traffic control system. In the short term the most attractive options include the introduction of realistic pricing of services that could ease particularly troublesome bottlenecks in the system. In the longer term it is possible to design efficient approaches which avoid the types of delays that have been experienced in the recent past and that also can meet the demands of a rapidly changing airline industry Short-Term Options for Easing Congestion Virtually none of the measures developed by Federal authorities to address the short-term congestion problem incorporates economic approaches. Because of the way the system currently is managed airlines have very little incentive to consider the costs they impose on others when flying at peak periods. Charges to aircraft operators do not reflect the full costs of using the airspace and airport facilities at these times. For example if a plane lands at a congested airport during a peak period all other planes waiting to land are delayed Similarly if a plane takes off during a peak period planes waiting in line behind it are delayed. Operators will not take these costs into account unless a system is implemented in which they are charged for them There are two basic approaches that would help alleviate the congestion problem during peak periods while at the same time promote a more efficient use of available capacity. One would set a price for takeoffs and landings that adequately reflects direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include normal operating and maintenance costs while indirect costs include the costs of congestion. The other approach would limit the quantity of takeoff and landing slots during peak periods and allow these slots to be bought and sold. Both the fee system and the slot system would allow passengers who value peak-period travel the most highly to have access to airports during these periods. Those passengers who have greater flexibility could elect to take flights during off-peak periods and thus take advantage of the lower fares that would be offered then The best way to strike an appropriate balance between the costs and benefits of congestion is to introduce tradable slots or variable fees that reflect the costs that each individual imposes on other travelers at peak times. These economic approaches would ensure that operators and customers take congestion costs into account in their travel decisions. Reducing the level of congestion at airports would increase the value \ pf peak-period flights and would promote economic efficiency Variants of these approaches already are in use. Airports typically assess landing fees based on aircraft weight because runway wear is generally thought to be related to aircraft landing weight. Few of these fees however vary with airport usage or time of day. Distinctions between peak and off-peak periods rarely are made. In addition the fees typically are quite low. For example a small private plane can land during a peak period at Washington 's National Airport for no more than $ Airports receiving funds from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund are constrained to some extent in the fees they may charge to users Fees must be nondiscriminatory ; this is interpreted to mean that they must be related directly to costs. Such a condition does not preclude the use of peak landing and takeoff fees provided that costs are interpreted to include the congestion costs that each airplane imposes on others. These congestion costs should be included in the calculation of peak prices to the extent feasible Under the current fee system on-time performance can not be purchased. Those travelers who incur high costs when delayed have no way to signal their costs to the system. Passengers can not simply pay a premium to assure that their flights will arrive on schedule. Except at a very limited number of airports airlines wishing to offer better on-time services can not pay more to obtain a takeoff or landing preference. The current system rations airspace and airport services through waiting time and delays whereas a pricing mechanism would permit a more efficient allocation of landings and takeoffs among those who place different values on their time. Without accurate information on the costs of delays the airlines and airports lack the criteria to decide how to improve flight schedules to suit passenger demands If landing fees adequately reflected congestion costs some passengers and flights would be induced to switch to off-peak periods when fees were lower. Some airports have begun to use such fees. For example in peak and off-peak fees were introduced for general aviation at three major New York airports. The peak-period fee was raised to $ while the off-peak landing fee remained at $ This fee schedule resulted in a percent decrease in peak-period traffic and a percent overall decrease in general aviation activity. In addition there was a marked decrease in delays This example shows that the introduction of peak/off-peak pricing differentials can be quite effective. Recently Boston 's Logan Airport announced plans to implement general aviation fees intended to address congestion problems. In London 's Heathrow Airport adopted a peak-load pricing approach. Some U.S. airlines have objected to the charges at Heathrow on the grounds that they discriminate against transatlantic traffic. These arguments notwithstanding it is clear that proper application of peak-load pricing has the potential to reduce congestion and enhance the efficiency of airline service significantly An alternative to peak-period fees is a restriction on the number of landing and takeoff slots available during peak periods. At most airports there are no restrictions on landings and takeoffs other than those imposed by air traffic controllers. Planes typically are handled on a first-come first-served basis. At O'Hare La Guardia Kennedy and National Airports however the FAA has limited the number of takeoff and landing slots available. The FAA in consultation with the airlines has allocated slots to the carriers by criteria related to historical usage. The FAA can change this allocation and require one airline to transfer slots to another Beginning in April the FAA authorized the purchase and sale of slots at the four " slot-constrained " airports. Although all airlines currently are free to participate in this slot market the FAA retains the right to withdraw this privilege and reallocate slots at its discretion. An initial 6-week experiment in in which over slots were bought and sold provided evidence of the workability of a slot market. During this experiment a private firm began to offer special- ized brokerage services for the airlines. Since April there have been more than slot transactions at the four slot-constrained airports. However many of the slots have been transferred on only a temporary basis. The uncertainty surrounding the FAA 's ability to direct the reallocation of slots or even to close the slot market may make short-term leasing arrangements more desirable for the airlines than outright purchases or sales Allowing purchases and sales of slots is a major improvement over the previous system which allocated slots by committee. The committee process did not allocate slots on the basis of their most highly valued use. In contrast the slot market allows firms that have a better product to expand their operations by buying slots from other firms. Since the exchange is voluntary both the buyer and the seller are better off. In addition consumers generally will be better off since the airlines have more flexibility to respond to the demands of travelers with different valuations of time. Thus the tradable slot system is similar to the fee system in that it tends to reduce delays while increasing efficiency Slots and fees can be tailored to meet particular problems that arise in the air traffic control system. For example two types of service could be offered in the event of bad weather or problems with the air traffic control system. In the event of such a contingency some firms could receive priority service which would entitle them to have priority in taking off or landing. Operators would be assessed a fee for this service or alternatively special rights to priority service could be auctioned or allocated to operators The details of a tradable slot or variable fee approach would vary depending on the needs and characteristics of the various airports But overall such economic incentives could help address short-term congestion problems. Moreover these schemes could be extended to other aspects of the airspace system. For example a cost-based pricing system for air traffic control and other airspace services could be explored. In Europe charges are assessed for the usage of some airspace services. At present users are not charged directly for using the air traffic control network in the United States. By effectively leaving these services unpriced the system encourages overutilization of this resource. As in the case of allocating services for landing and takeoff it is important to develop pricing schemes that reflect the actual costs that users impose on the air traffic network. Such schemes could provide valuable information on ways to improve services provided by air traffic controllers Economic incentives are but one means of addressing some of the short-term congestion problems. Airport capacity is determined by more than the number of runways. Many other factors limit the over- all capacity of the air traffic system. The FAA already has increased capacity through improved routing and planning. It is also possible to increase capacity by adding more support staff at terminals by changing the distribution of air traffic controllers and by improving air traffic control procedures. The effectiveness of these changes will depend on where the bottlenecks in the system lie. However all such changes can be used in conjunction with economic incentives to help address short-term congestion problems Long-Term Options for Air Traffic Management Variable fees and tradable slot systems two useful approaches for controlling short-term congestion also could aid in expanding air travel capacity over the long term. For example revenues from fees or the auction of slots could be used to expand the capacity of the system where it is most needed. In some cases such expansion might include adding runways ; in other situations new controllers or computers might be more appropriate. Even if the revenues from fees or slots were not used to add directly to capacity these approaches could provide very useful information for long-term planning. The price of a slot during the peak period at an airport provides a good measure of what people would be willing to pay for a small increase in capacity at that airport. When this value exceeds the cost of adding capacity then an increase in capacity is warranted To reap the full benefits of deregulation it is necessary to have a system that is responsive to changes in capacity needs. The current system for planning capacity was developed under an environment in which change was predictable. Routes and traffic patterns were stable as a result of CAB regulation. This stability disappeared with deregulation. The FAA has found itself in the unenviable position of trying to manage the capacity of a rapidly changing industry without having the necessary information Capacity planners could make two changes that would help enhance the benefits of deregulation. First the planning function needs to be linked to data on the value of capacity additions. At present very little information is available on the value of adding capacity because users are not asked to pay directly for the services they are offered. Second planning should be more responsive to the needs of local airports. Decentralizing planning would help achieve this goal There are several alternatives for restructuring the current system that could help address some of the basic concerns related to congestion. These include redefining the role of the FAA restructuring the FAA and changing the organization of the air traffic control system The FAA currently must try to implement two largely independent mandates : the regulation of aviation safety and the general promotion of aviation. Some observers have argued that the FAA is well- suited to handle aviation safety regulation but a government agency may be less well-suited to meeting the capacity needs of an industry that is evolving quickly One proposal would have the FAA retain its primary role in regulating safety but relinquish its role as a central planner in the air traffic control system. Some groups have recommended that the control of air traffic be placed under the supervision of a special Federal corporation that would distribute airport grants hire air traffic controllers and contract out services. The corporation would have more flexibility than a Federal agency in hiring and paying its employees and in procurement. A board of directors representing the users of the system would help make the corporation more responsive to the needs of its users than the current system is Recognizing the potential for inefficiency in a federally sponsored corporation another proposal calls for placing the supply of air traffic services in the hands of the private sector. Instead of a Federal corporation a nonprofit corporation owned by the various users would be created. Unlike the current air traffic control system such a corporation would be funded from user fees including charges for the use of the controller network. Financing the system on the basis of user fees would provide improved information on where capacity expansion is most needed. A private user-funded corporation would be free from the constraints of the budget process faced by a Federal corporation and would have a strong incentive to provide services that meet the needs of travelers. A similar nonprofit user-owned corporation has operated for over years providing extensive airline radio communications and navigation services. In addition this corporation has played an important role in setting aviation engineering and communications standards Another possibility is for local airports to own and operate their own air traffic control towers. These control towers still would follow the standards set by the FAA and the entity in charge of controlling air traffic. The staffing and investment decisions for such control towers however would be made by the management of the local airport. By returning this function to the local airports the system could become more responsive to the needs of users. The FAA currently allows small Level I control towers to be operated privately Moreover a private concern has expressed interest in buying and managing the remainder of the federally owned Level I control towers In contrast to the United States Great Britain implemented a system in which encouraged widespread use of the private sector in managing various airspace functions. A private company now competes with a governmental body in the training of air traffic controllers. Airports in Great Britain contract with this company or with the government to supply their air traffic control needs. The largest British airports charge variable landing fees and use these revenues to finance airport growth. In this way local British airports can respond directly to changes in demands for their facilities Two main themes underlie these proposals to reorganize the air traffic control system. The first relates to the value of separating safety regulation from the provision of air traffic services. While the two activities are linked the Federal Government may not be in the best position to implement policies that ease congestion. The second is that user fees directly related to services are necessary to understand more clearly the level of services needed now and in the future Only with a pricing system that allows operators and air travelers to register the extent to which they value various services will it be possible to plan sensibly for the needs of the future. Moreover this pricing system can be used to generate the revenues needed to improve the system CONCERNS ABOUT MARKET ORGANIZATION AND MONOPOLY Deregulation has led to greater price competition lower average fares for travelers and a more efficient industry structure. The evidence suggests that the industry is much more competitive now than under regulation and that attempts to reregulate would produce substantial net losses for both consumers and the airline industry. Nonetheless concern has been voiced that the emerging industry structure is oligopolistic in character allowing firms to exert substantial control over various markets. Four specific issues have been raised. First the viability of new entrants and smaller carriers in the deregulated marketplace has been a source of concern. Second the growth of particular airlines at hub airports along with some recent mergers have raised questions about consolidation in the industry. Third since information about flights and fares has become more important in airline competition the influence of airline-owned computerized reservation systems used by travel agents has come under scrutiny Fourth by making entry more difficult capacity limitations set on airport usage may pose a threat to competition THE VIABILITY OF NEW ENTRANTS AND SMALLER AIRLINES Deregulation has radically transformed the organization of the airline industry. Freedom of entry has played an important role in this change. Under regulation the existing interstate airlines were pro- tected against new entry. The number of carriers gradually dwindled until when there were only certificated airline operators left Since deregulation many new airlines have emerged. More than firms have been certified since As in any dynamic industry some firms have failed some have merged and others have grown on their own. As of July there were certificated airline carriers although nearly one-half operated outside of the continental United States. More than three-fourths of carriers flying today received their certification following deregulation There was some initial concern that smaller carriers would have difficulty entering the industry to compete against large incumbents Studies indicated that larger airlines had lower costs per seat mile than smaller airlines ; however company size itself was found to confer no advantages on a particular route. The differences instead were found to be attributable to the different types of service offered by large trunks and local carriers. Smaller airlines tended to make shorter flights with smaller planes than the major carriers. Bigger planes flying longer distances operated at lower costs per seat mile In other words there appear to be economies of scale in aircraft size and usage but not necessarily in overall airline size The evolution of airline operations toward hub-and-spoke systems following deregulation however may provide some advantages to larger airlines. The ability of a single airline to offer a variety of routes at convenient departure times may be valuable to prospective passengers. Carriers may be able to use their aircraft more efficiently by having multiple hubs rather than a single hub. The economics of disseminating fare information and using this information for developing fare structures also may favor larger firms Since deregulation the success of local and regional airlines has helped to relieve concerns about the viability of smaller airlines coexisting with the trunks. Local and regional carriers have enjoyed greater profitability than the large trunk airlines. The common stock of small carriers has performed better than stocks of the larger airlines. Furthermore many smaller airlines have found market niches in which they have prospered such as feeder services to larger carriers or connections between less densely populated areas New entrants generally have enjoyed cost advantages over the established airlines. The employment contracts and management organization developed under regulation were not compatible with a deregulated environment. New carriers have been able to achieve lower labor costs and improved utilization of equipment. The established airlines have responded to the competitive pressure by reducing operating costs thereby mitigating the advantages of entrants MERGERS AND CONSOLIDATION AT HUBS In order to coordinate and consolidate traffic in a hubbing network a carrier must have a large number of flights at its hub airports. Naturally as an airline routes more of its traffic through its hubs its share of flights at those airports will grow. Thus some increase in airline concentration at individual airports is a consequence of building an efficient route structure Airline hub-and-spoke networks have expanded in two ways : through internal growth by offering more flights and leasing more gate space ; and through mergers of existing airlines. Expanding the reach of an airline 's network by adding new hub locations and spoke routes affords more opportunities for single-line travel Yet expansion of a carrier at an existing hub through the merger of two airlines ' operations at a particular airport has raised concerns that firms may be able to exert market power. Potential anti-competitive problems from mergers can be addressed through normal antitrust review. The application of the antitrust laws to the airline industry is not an issue of deregulation per se but a matter of general competitive policy Changes in airline organization and operation that cause traffic at a hub airport to be concentrated in the hands of one or two airlines do not by themselves reveal much about the competitive level in the industry. Where barriers to entry are low and alternatives are available the benefits of competition can be achieved regardless of airline concentration or the actual number of competitors in a market Where those conditions do not hold conclusions about the vigor of competition must be drawn with more caution. Thus the potential impediments to competition must be analyzed in order to evaluate the consequences of consolidation in the airline industry At hubs where one or two carriers already use a large share of the gate space another airline may find it difficult to establish a major presence there. The relevant statistic however may not be the concentration at the individual airport. Competition among hubs at different locations provides a significant disciplinary force. The hub airports in one carrier 's system are the spoke airports of other carriers ' systems. If travelers living near a concentrated hub become dissatisfied with the fare and service of the dominant carrier ( s ) they often have the option of taking another airline to its hub and flying to their destinations from there For long journeys passengers can choose among a number of hubs in order to reach their destination. A traveler from Boston to Phoenix for example can choose among nine connecting points including Chicago Kansas City and St. Louis. Many hubs have been created since deregulation and airlines are continuing to add new hubs to their systems such as Charlotte Cincinnati Dayton Philadelphia and Raleigh-Durham. In addition metropolitan areas with multiple airports may experience competition among them since an attempt by an airline to raise its fares at one airport may be disciplined by travelers switching to an airline at another airport Competitive conditions for shorter flights are different from those for longer ones. Interhub competition is most effective for the longer flights. On shorter routes flying through an out-of-the-way hub to arrive at one 's ultimate destination may not be a feasible alternative For example flying from Minneapolis to Madison via Chicago may not be a very good substitute for a nonstop flight from Minneapolis to Madison. On thinly traveled shorter routes service from small commuter airlines may provide alternatives to the dominant carriers feeding into the hub. For shorter distances surface transportation such as cars buses and trains may provide a viable alternative means of travel On routes where reasonable alternatives are quite limited there have been complaints of monopoly pricing. These cases often involve markets with small traffic volume that can accommodate only single plane scheduled service. In some cases regular air service to small communities is feasible only as a result of pooling passengers which is made possible by the existence of a hub into which traffic from small communities can feed. A policy that would weaken the hubbing structure also would reduce the network economies available from careful route coordination. Such a policy could result in the denial of air service to these communities altogether Recent research has found that fares tend to be higher on routes on which there are fewer competitors. Yet it is not clear if increases in concentration actually imply higher prices. Moreover even if this were true if travelers paying these higher prices received higher quality service they could be better off. More research will be necessary to determine how specific changes in industry concentration have affected consumer welfare While the concentration of major carriers at the national level and at some hubs has increased recently it is not clear that concentration has risen in the economically relevant markets namely individual city-pair markets. Easier entry into these markets appears to have brought more airlines into competition on more routes. Preliminary research suggests that the average number of carriers per route is higher today than it was under regulation COMPUTERIZED RESERVATION SYSTEMS The development of computerized reservation systems ( CRS ) by a few airlines has been pointed to as a danger to free competition among the airlines. Prior to CRS most travel agents would look up flights and fares in the Official Airline Guide. Then they would call each airline individually to check seat and fare availability. CRS provides an up-to-date listing of flights fares and seat availability on a terminal screen. Reservations seat assignments and ticket purchases then can be made by computer The initial plans to develop a computerized system of reservations and flight information dates back to Technical difficulties in implementation were formidable. The data processing requirements stretched the limits of existing computer hardware and software. In the late 1960s and early 1970s attempts were made to develop a common system for airlines and travel agents. After an industry-wide effort to develop a CRS broke down in the early 1970s two airlines invested heavily to develop and market their own systems. The success of these systems spurred others to enter and now three other domestic airline-owned systems compete for travel agents While CRS was developed prior to deregulation it is well-suited to a market environment in which prices are changing constantly. The key benefit provided by CRS is information. The development of the hub-and-spoke structure has made finding convenient connections extremely important. While fare structures have grown more complex CRS allows prices schedules and routes to be accessed and conveyed to the traveler in an inexpensive and timely manner CRS also has played an important role in managing the information that enables airlines to offer deep discount fares. The airlines themselves had to develop sophisticated techniques for monitoring the inventory of seats on their flights in order to plan their route structure and thus to use their aircraft efficiently. CRS has helped contribute to the rapid advances in the management and productivity of the U.S. airline industry Because CRS provides airlines with the ability to react quickly change their fares and disseminate information it functions as an important marketing and advertising tool. The order in which the offerings appear on the travel agent 's computer screen however has been a point of controversy. The owner-developer of each system initially listed its own flights first and permitted others to purchase preferential placement on the screen There are two sides to the CRS market. CRS owners negotiate with travel agents to use their services. They also negotiate with other airlines to list their flights on a particular CRS Since entry into the travel agency business is unrestricted agents compete with each other to offer the best service to their customers Thus travel agents will choose a system that best helps them to in- crease earnings so CRS services and screen presentations are developed to suit their demands and those of their customers Airlines purchasing CRS services argued it was unfair for CRS owners to charge airlines different prices for their booking services In response to these concerns the CAB required CRS owners to charge the same price for all airline bookings. Whether in fact CRS prices could be anticompetitive is a matter that currently is being litigated Airlines without their own CRS have complained that the preferential placement of the CRS owner 's information puts the non-owners at a competitive disadvantage. Just before its demise the Civil Aeronautics Board issued an order requiring nondiscriminatory flight listings on a CRS. This order effectively limited the options available to CRS owners in listing flights on the computer screen. There has been vigorous debate over the desirability of the rule. Proponents argue that the airlines that owned CRS systems have been able to capture excessive profits as a result of having access to all the information in a CRS system. Opponents argue that the government 's attempt to regulate screen display places an unnecessary restraint on competition and that the potential to exercise monopoly power is limited by the existence of several firms that currently offer CRS services AIRPORT CAPACITY LIMITS Capacity constraints can present obstacles to entry and competition. Setting well-defined limits on airport landings and takeoffs could reduce delays. The price of such a measure however could be a weakening of competition since a major disciplinary force in the airline market is the threat of entry by another carrier. The working of competitive forces could be compromised significantly by capacity restrictions that make it more difficult for carriers to expand service at an airport The difficulties generated by capacity limitations may be eased through the introduction of appropriate market incentives. When there are such constraints the allocation method for these limited landing rights has important competitive consequences. Without flexibility to reallocate the slots among rival airlines those airlines holding the slots are protected against the entry of other carriers. If these slots were tradable however new airlines could bid for slots and enter the market. In this way some of the cartelizing effects of capacity limits could be mitigated Regardless of whether the landing and takeoff rights are tradable or not the setting of capacity limits may create incentives that could result in airline operators being reluctant to have the airport expand in the future. Airlines holding slots could have an incentive to oppose an increase in the capacity of the airport because such expansion would lower the value of the slots. Thus temporary capacity constraints could turn into long-term limits on capacity growth. A very similar situation has arisen with the issuance of taxi medallions in major cities. The number of authorized taxis in many cities today was set many years ago. There has been much reluctance even in the face of consumer dissatisfaction to augment the number of medallions. Taxi owners argue the local authority would be acting improperly if it took actions to diminish the value of the taxi owners ' existing assets The structure of contracts between airports and airlines also may provide some incentives to slow capacity expansion. Airlines play an important role in determining capacity changes at airports. Airports typically are operated by local authorities and airport construction usually is financed through the issue of revenue bonds. In order to assure a stream of revenue to support the bond issue the airport authority signs long-term leases with the airlines for the use of the airport facilities. In return for long-term commitments as is common in similar long-term agreements the airlines receive some voice in future capital investments at the airport. These lease contracts typically grant to the airlines leasing a majority of the facilities the power to veto major airport alterations and capital improvements There have been some complaints that the current operation of slot markets has not been fully effective in allocating landing rights efficiently and periodic lotteries and auctions have been suggested as a remedy. At the four slot-constrained airports the FAA can take back a certain percentage of slots from the incumbent airlines and hold a lottery in which new entrants and smaller carriers have a greater chance of winning slots than the larger incumbent airlines While this procedure may facilitate entry by new carriers it does so in an inefficient manner. The slots are not allocated by a price mechanism ; they are distributed arbitrarily. The careful coordination of incoming and outgoing flights is extremely important for effective route planning. Taking slots from existing hub-and-spoke operations and reallocating them without regard to route structure does not promote airline efficiency An alternative allocation mechanism to those involving explicit capacity limits is variable landing and usage fees. Such fees would allow the number of operators who can choose to land during a period to vary subject to safety considerations. Instead of setting a predetermined limit on takeoffs and landings changes in technology airport staffing and airway management then can be used to augment capacity at ppiiits of peak demand The effective limit will be determined by the demand for airspace at the specified fee. A variable fee structure avoids the incentives for airlines to be opposed to capacity growth. The airlines will prefer lower fees at peak periods so they will desire an increase in airport capacity as mentioned above. The use of variable fees also allows the airport to observe demand at different prices for different time periods. Moving toward variable landing and usage fees may help to avoid potential threats to competition posed by capacity limits and to foster capacity expansion CONCLUSION The passage of the Airline Deregulation Act of has led to substantial gains both for the airline industry and the general public Productivity within the industry has improved air fares have declined on average and airlines are providing more frequent service. The total social benefits resulting from airline deregulation during the last decade are estimated to be on the order of $ billion The U.S. experience with deregulation is beginning to have an impact on the way other countries manage air travel. Several countries are following the lead of the United States in relaxing price and entry regulation thereby enhancing the efficiency of the world 's transportation system. Changes designed to reduce barriers to international competition would be the next step. An opening of all markets would bring benefits to travelers airlines and the global economy One of the principal benefits of deregulation has been to make air travel available to many Americans who would not even have considered this transportation option years ago. The rapid growth of air travel has however strained the limits of the air traffic system in some areas. The Airline Deregulation Act eased entry constraints and promoted greater competition among airlines but it did not foresee the changes that would be needed to accommodate a revitalized airline industry To make the system more responsive to future changes it might be helpful to introduce variable landing and takeoff fees at airports Revenues from the fees then could be used to enhance the capacity of the system. It is time to reexamine how planning decisions are made with an eye toward developing market-based approaches that are better suited to meeting the needs of air travelers. The introduction of such changes is the key to increasing the benefits from airline deregulation Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Beryl W. Sprinkel Chairman Thomas Gale Moore Member Michael L. Mussa Member Council Members and their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier. Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Hermit Gordon Gardner Acktey John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M Okun.. James S. Duesenberry... Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker.. Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiet Charles L Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum. William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L Mussa Position Oath of office date August August ( November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August t November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman. Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member... ChairmanMember. Member Member ChairmanMember Member Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Member ChairmanMember Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Chairman.. Member Member Member.... ChairmanMember Member Chairman. Member Member Member ChairmanMember lYlBfflDCf ...i ChairmanMember ChairmanMember Member... Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide economic analysis and advice to the President and thus to assist in the development and implementation of national economic policies. The Council also advises the President on other matters affecting the health and performance of the Nation 's economy Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore and Michael L. Mussa continued to serve as Council Members in with Dr. Sprinkel as Chairman MACROECONOMIC POLICIES As is its tradition the Council devoted much of its time during to assisting the President in formulating economic policy objectives and designing programs to achieve them. In this regard the Chairman kept the President informed of important macroeconomic developments and advised the President and senior Administration officials on major policy issues. Briefings were conducted on a variety of domestic issues especially the economic outlook and on international issues especially in preparation for the Venice Economic Summit The Council chaired an interagency forecasting group that also included the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget. The forecasting group developed economic projections that were presented to the President and used in the Federal budget. The Council also participated actively in discussions of macroeconomic policy issues within the Administration in conjunction with outside agencies and with international organizations. The Council testified before the Congress several times on the economic outlook and on the conduct of monetary policy The Chairman of the Council continued to serve as the Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee ( EPC ) of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Through its participation in other OECD committees and meetings the Council continued to analyze a number of economic policy issues including macroeconomic performance in a multinational context problems of international policy coordination and payments imbalances and bar- riers to economic development and structural adjustment. During the year the Chairman led discussions on structural adjustment at the EPC. The Chairman also represented the EPC at the Ministerial Meeting where the EPC 's recommendations on structural reform were adopted MICROECONOMIC POLICIES A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during the year. The Council actively participated in the Cabinetlevel Domestic Policy Council and Economic Policy Council which addressed a number of issues including : stratospheric ozone which resulted in an international agreement on controlling and reducing chlorofluorocarbon emissions ; international trade policy which culminated in the signing of a Free-Trade Agreement with Canada ; and agricultural policy which led to the U.S. proposal under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to abolish all distortionary subsidies for and barriers to agricultural products. The Council also continued its membership on the Vice President 's Task Force on Regulatory Relief ; its membership on the interagency working groups on acid rain energy security health policy research and development policy including superconductivity alternative fuels antipoverty policies the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation and steel pensions and farm credit. The Council retained its chairmanship of the Working Group on Privatization and began chairing the Working Group on Corporate Sentencing. The Council also devoted a great deal of attention to issues considered by the interagency Trade Policy Review Group including : intellectual property rights textile and apparel trade competitiveness initiatives Generalized System of Preferences and a number of Section cases dealing with foreign trade practices and market-opening initiatives The Council testified before the Congress on mandated health benefits corporate control issues and agricultural policy reform. The Council also participated actively in various OECD fora working on a variety of issues including the economic effects of agricultural policies and tax policies PUBLIC INFORMATION The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Annual distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress and has a distribution of approximately Information also is provided to the public through speeches testimony and other public appearances by the Council Chairman Members and senior staff ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views to the President through personal discussions and written reports on economic developments. The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the Economic Policy Council and the Domestic Policy Council daily White House senior staff meetings weekly issues lunches with the President and many other formal and informal meetings with the President senior White House staff and other senior government officials. The Chairman guides and oversees the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the Members and the professional staff. This year the Chairman was elevated to Cabinet rank COUNCIL MEMBERS Members of the Council are involved in the full range of issues within the Council 's purview and they are responsible for supervising the daily work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention The small size of the Council permits the Council Chairman and Members to work as a team on most policy issues. There continued to be however an informal division of subject matter. Dr. Mussa has been primarily responsible for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis and economic projections. Dr. Moore has been primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis and regulatory issues PROFESSIONAL STAFF The professional staff of the Council consists of the Special Assistant the Senior Statistician senior staff economists junior staff economists and research assistant. The professional staff and their respective areas of concentration at the end of were : Special Assistant to the Chairman Margot E. Machol Senior Staff Economists Deborah J. Danker Earl L. Grinols Robert W. Hahn Craig S. Hakkio Arlene S. Holen Robert J. LaLonde J. Steven Landefeld Thomas A. Smith Daniel A. Sumner Peter M. Taylor Macroeconomics Money and Finance. * * International Macroeconomics and Trade Energy Transportation Environment and Regulation International Macroeconomics Labor Health and Regulation Macroeconomics and Labor Macroeconomics and Taxation Law and Economics Agriculture and Labor Macroeconomics and Forecasting Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Junior Staff Economists Peter H. Barlerin Lesley A. Cameron Andrew J. Filardo Julie Ann Hewitt Randall S. Kroszner Scott Schuh International Macroeconomics and Trade Macroeconomics and International Finance Macroeconomics and Finance Microeconomics Agriculture and Environment Industrial Organization Regulation and Finance International and Labor Macroeconomics Research Assistant William A. Teichner Macroeconomics and Forecasting Mrs. Furlong manages the Statistical Office assisted by Natalie V Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Deborah D. Miller. They administer the Council 's statistical information system overseeing the publication of Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report as well as the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches Thomas L. Super from the Environmental Protection Agency provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report Four former staff members returned to assist in the preparation of the Report : Richard H. Clarida ( senior staff economist ) John J Dziak ( research assistant ) Lorraine A. Ambrosio ( administrative aide ) and Dorothy Bagovich ( statistical assistant ) H. Hague Ollison ( Georgetown University ) Jana C. Stull ( Nebraska Wesleyan University ) and Ellen H. Zimmerman ( Johns Hopkins University ) joined the staff in early as student interns for the winter semester SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office which provides general support for the Council 's activities consists of Elizabeth A. Kaminski Staff Assistant to the Council and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant The secretaries for the Council of Economic Advisers during were Lisa D. Branch Gerardo Garcia Mary E. Jones Sandra F Medwid Francine P. Obermiller Margaret L. Snyder Suzanne M Tudor and Alice H. Williams DEPARTURES The Council 's senior staff economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or are from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Many of the senior staff economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are : Richard H. Clarida ( Yale University ) Stephen J. DeCanio ( University of California Santa Barbara ) Steven L. Husted ( University of Pittsburgh ) Randall P. Mariger ( University of Washington ) Aline O. Quester ( Center for Naval Analyses ) and Gordon C. Rausser ( University of California Berkeley ) Others went on to new positions. They are : J. David Germany ( Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc. ) Carol A. Leisenring ( Philadelphia National Bank ) J. Gregory Sidak ( Federal Communications Commission ) and Susan E. Woodward ( Department of Housing and Urban Development ) Staff economists usually have just completed their dissertations and spend year at the Council as additional preparation for their professional careers. Staff economists who took new positions are : Edward T. Gullason ( University of Hartford ) and Ellen L. HughesCromwick ( Trinity College ) Junior staff economists generally are graduate students who spend year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are : Douglas A. Irwin ( Columbia University ) and Marjorie B. Rose ( University of California Los Angeles ) Junior economists who went on to new positions are : Diana E. Furchtgott-Roth ( American Petroleum Institute ) and Darrell L. Williams ( Securities and Exchange Commission ) After graduating from the University of Chicago Lisa E. Bernstein spent a year at the Council as a research assistant and has now begun studies at Harvard Law School In addition a number of other staff provided support to the Council during the year. David K. Carlson ( now at Goldman Sachs & Co. ) continued to serve as an intern through the first half of while he was completing his studies at the University of Maryland and John J Dziak ( University of Chicago Graduate School of Business ) served as a research assistant during the summer of Hannah R. Hopkins served as a student aide during the summer of Support staff who resigned in were Bonnie D. Brown Audrey L. Carlson and Sheila J. Moat Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : Page B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-12 B-l3 B-14 B-15 B-16 B-17 B-18 B-19 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 B-30 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross national product by industry Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Personal consumption expenditures in dollars Gross and net private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars Relation of gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : Page B-31 B-32 B-33 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 Population by age groups Population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment by demographic characteristic Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-48 B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : B-58 B-59 B-60 B-61 B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : Page B-67 B-68 B-69 B-70 B-71 B-72 B-73 B-74 B-75 Money stock liquid assets and debt measures Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Commercial bank loans and securities Bond yields and interest rates Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-76 B-77 B-78 B-79 B-80 B-81 B-82 B-83 B-84 B-85 B-86 Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-87 B-88 B-89 B-90 B-91 B-92 B-93 B-94 B-95 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business State and municipal and business securities offered Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : Page B-96 B-97 B-98 B-99 B-100 B-101 Farm income Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Balance sheet of the farm sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-102. U.S. international transactions B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-105. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-106. International investment position of the United States at year-end B-107. International reserves selected years B-108. Foreign exchange rates B-109. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-110. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B- Growth rates in real gross national product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies during and early NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable Services Total Total Total ' : IV.. : IV.. : IV.. : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV : II... III.. IV Producers ' Residuedential able equipment See next page for continuation of table Structures TABLE B-l. Gross national product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Percent change from preceding Government purchases of goods and services Federal Year or quarter Net Exports Imports exports I960 P IV : IV 1984-IV II lit IV II III IV : | | Ill IV P -is l.B Total Total Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis National defense Nondefense State and local A Final sales Gross national product * Final sales " 5.fi TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter ill ! : : : : : : : : : : : : * : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Gross national product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable Services goods Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential See next page for continuation of table Change in business inventories TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Federal Year or quarter Net Exports Imports exports I V II III IV : II III IV P Total National defense " : IV : IV IV If Ill Total Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from pniceding per Government purchases of goods and services Net exports of goods and services Nondefense State and local Final sales Gross national product Final sales TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter p : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : lILl IV : II Ill IV. Gross national product Fixed investment Presidential Total Durable goods Nondurable Services goods Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment 1U.2 See next page for continuation of table Gross private domestic investment ' TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services l Year or quarter Federal Total Exports * P : 1V : 1V IV It Ill IV : II til I V : II Ill IV * > Government purchases of goods and services Total Imports National Nondefense defense mi State and local Final sales m.i Percent change from preceding period GNP implicit price deflator2 Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Year or quarter Personal conGross national sumption product expenditures Fixed investment Total Government purchases of goods ana services Exports and imports of goods and services1 Nonresi- Residen- Exports dential tial Imports Percent Federal Total Total National defense Non- State and local from preceding period GNP fixedweighted price index2 " : 1V.. 11U : IV.. : IV.. : II III.. IV.. : II... III IV : II III.. IV P Separate price indexes are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter " IV IV : IV : tl III IV : ! Ill I V : II Ill IV P Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars _3 _ Implicit price deflator Personal consumption expenditures Chain price index Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars _9 Implicit price deflator Chain price index Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type ofproduct [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Durable goods Total Total Final sates Nondurable goods Services Inventory change Final Inventory change Final sales Inventory change Structures = U = % = = " = : IV : IV : IV : 1> = = IV : II IV : IV = Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis = TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Total Final sales Inventory change Final sates * Nondurable goods Services Total Durable goods : IV : IV : IV : I I HI IV : I I Ill IV Final sales Inventory change Structures Auto output : II Ill IV '... Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory change TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business1 Total Total1 Nonfarm1 Farm Statistical discrepancy ) I960. ) ) U48.7 " ' : IV : IV IV : II Ill ) IV II Ill IV " Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Federal Rest of the world lit Total State and local IV Government2 Households and institutions ^ ( ? TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter Gross national product Business1 Total Total > Nonfarm Farm Statistical discrepancy Households and institutions Government2 Total Federal State and local -l.B " : IV : 1V : IV : H Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P... Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -l ! ~ io Rest of the world TABLE B-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Manufacturing Year Gross national product Agriculture forestry and fisheries Mining Note. The Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable Transportation and utilities Serv- Government and government enterprises Statistical discrepancy Rest of the world = 29S.7 = industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based -on the Standard Industrial Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Classification TABLE B-U. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Year AgriGross Connational culture forest- Mining strucproduct ry and tion fisheries Manufacturing Total FiTranspor- Whole- nance tation sale insur- Servance and and Dura- Nonices and ble durable public retail real goods goods util- trade estate ities Government and government enterprises Statistical discrepancy Rest Resid- of the world ual > = = = = lf494.9 I960. Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product by industry Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Cross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : I.. II Ill IV : II Ill IV Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital Total consumption adjustment U43.3 Net domestic product Domestic income Indirect business tax etc. * Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total lt981.4 Compensation of employees Profits Total 227J Profits Profits before tax tax liability Total \ A Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inven- Capital tory convalu- sumpation tion Undisadjust- adjustDivitributed ment ment dends profits Profits after tax = = = ~ L0 ~ Z5 = = = = = = = = = = = = = ~ L7 = = = = = ~ L2 = = = = = = = = = : = = = = = = TABLE B-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) l Gross domestic product of Year or quarter nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total cost and profit Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjust * ment Compensation of employees Indirect business tax etc. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax Output per hour of all Net interest Compensation per hour employof all ees employ ( ees dollars ) ( dollars ) P : IV : IV. : IV. : : : ! IV. Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter P. Personal consumption l expendi- Total tures Nondurable goods FurniMotor ture vehiand cles house- Total Food and hold parts equipment and shoes Gasoline and oil Cloth- Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Totall Housing2 TransElecportation tricity Total and gas 36J : IV. : IV. : IV. : II.. III. IV. : III. IV. : II... Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Personal consumption expenditures in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures Nondurable goods Motor vehicles and parts Furniture and tousehold equipment Cloth- shoes Total ] Gasoline and oil Food Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing Total ] Electricity and gas Transportation * : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment I960 P : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV fl Ill IV II III IV P Equals : Net private domestic investment consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Net fixed investment Nonresidentia1 Total Total = = = Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures = _3 Producers ' durable equipment = _ Residential = = = = Change in business inventories = TABLE B-17. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Equals : Net private domestic investment Pam'tal Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment consumption allowwith capital consumption adjust- ment Net fixed investment Nonresidentta Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories ^ * IV IV IV II... III. I V I I III IV.. | | II I IV * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories Quarter Fourth quarter : : IV : IV : IV : I II Ill IV : I It III IV : I II Ill IV Nonfarm Total Farm Total Manufacturing trade Final sales ^ Retail trade Other Total 33J Nonfarm * End of quarter Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Invento ry-final sales Nonfarm Quarter Total2 Farm Total Fourth quarter : Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Final sales3 Retail trade 3.0fi 2.9C 2.8> I960 P : IV IV IV | | Il l III IV III IV P Nonfarm I V Total Other End of quarter Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts from foreigners Exports of goods and Year or quarter Total Total Merchan- Serv- Payments to foreigners Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) Imports of goods and services Transfer payments ( net ) Merchandise From persons ( net ) Total Total Services Total '.8 * : IV : IV From Interest paid by government to Net ffjrpjgn investment ( " net ) ! A A A '.6 '.S A : IV : II Ill IV : II Il l IV : II Ill Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis = TABLE B-21. Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter " : IV... : IV.., : IV... : II III... IV... : II III... IV... : | | III... IV * Total Total Durable goods Imports of goods and services Services Merchandise Nondurable goods Total Merchandise Factor income l Other Total Total Durable goods Services durable goods Factor Total 65J Factor income exports less factor income imports equals rest-of-the-world product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions cf dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Less : Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product PIUS : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Equals : National income ' " IV : | | Ill I V ! : | | Ill IV | | IV P 1982-.IV IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-23. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter P IV IV : IV II III IV | | III I V | | Ill IV National income U89.1 T i Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Equals : Plus : Less : Corporate profits with GovernWage inventory ment Contribu- accruals Personal valuation transfer Personal dividend Business Personal tions for Net transfer less and payments interest income payments income social interest income disbursecapital insurance ments to consumppersons tion adjustments o o o o o o \ l o _ '.B TABLE B-24. ~ National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV H III IV f | III IV : | | II I IV P National income1 : Farm Wages and salaries Supplements to wages and salaries2 Total Nonfarm Total Proprietors ' income3 Capital consumption adjustment = = = = ' = = = = = = = = = Total Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments -'.2 -'.3 = Total Proprietors ' income4 Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adjust- adjustment ment = ~ '.2 -A ! -l'.O ~ '.8 National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-22 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-24. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment adjustment Year or quarter Total I960 " : IV IV IV II III IV II III I V : II III IV P Rental Capital conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment k Capital Net conInventory sumption interest Profits after tax adjustvalument ation Divi- UndisTotal dends tributed adjustment profits Profits Total Total Profits Profits before tax tax liability With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis _ _2 -2A TABLE B-25. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietor s income Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Government and government enterprises * : IV : IV : 1V. : II. III IV : II. III IV ; I II. III IV Other labor income1 valuation and cap mi consuniption adjust nents Farm Nonfarm The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-25. Sources ofpersonal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Rental income of persons Personal Personal with capital dividend interest income income conption adjustment I960. * * : IV : IV : 1V : III IV : II Ml IV : II Ill IV " Transfer payments Total Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployand ployment Veterans ees health insur- benefits retireinsurance ment ance benefits benefits benefits i ! o A Aid to families with depend- Other ent children ( AFDC ) A A Less : Personal contribu- Nonfarm tions for personal income2 social insurance '.S 2f215.8 Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors ' income farm wages farm other labor income and farm net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-26. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Personal Interest transfer paid by payconconsumsumption ers to ments to expendibusifortures ness eigners ( net ) Personal Total Personal outlays Equals : Personal saving Total Personal consump- Personal saving tion expenditures : IV : I | | III IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV " : IV : IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ! s ^ TABLE B-27. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) ' Current dollars dollars i ; P : IV : IV : IV... : II Ill IV... : It Ill IV... : II III IV P Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars Population of the United States including Armed forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-28. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross investment Government surplus or deficit Capital StatisGross grants ( ) national income and tical Net private foreign discrepreceived Gross product accounts by the Total domestic investbusiancy investState United ness ment ment and States savTotal Federal local ( net ) ^ ing Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total Personal saving i ! o ~ ! o l " U.I ~ L5 -2.Z -U j.8 U l iiis " ~ ii : ; P : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) except as noted in footnote Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net In February the U.S. Government paid to India $ million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners i.e. a $ billion entry in capital grants received by the United States net Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-29. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase Year or quarter Total Total Checkable Time and depos- savits ings and cur- derency posits ; : II Ill IV.. : I II III.. IV.. Govern- Corpoment rate securi- equities ties * Money market fund shares : : Ill 403J Conon sumer Other8 non- credit debt farm homes Mort- ' $ Other finan- Owner- Concial occu- sumer aspied durasets homes bles Noncorporate business assets Insurance and pension reserves Other securities Less : Net increase in ffoht Securities Net investment in T in financial assets Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Corporate and foreign bonds and open-market paper Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-30. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race selected jears Persons below poverty level Families > fclOW poverty level Median income of persons years old and over with income Femdies lYldiCi Year ALL RACES Number ( millions ) $ WHITE BLACK Median income rerridit : Total Number ( millions ) Rate householder Number Rate ( millions ) Number ( millions ) Rate All persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround fulltime work- ers $ $ $ $ The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Prior to data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex ana age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-31. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-32. Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Labor Employforce Civilian ment noninsti- Resiinclud- including dent tutional Armed resident popula- Forces * tion Armed Armed Forces Forces Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor Civil- force merit/ parian work- work- tici- popers ers pation ularate All Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over 1953s * * 1977s * : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-32. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Period Labor EmployCivilian force ment Resinomnstiinclud- including dent tutional Armed ing resident popula- Forces1 resident Armed tion Armed Forces Forces Civilian labor force Unemployment rate Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Labor Civil- force All parian work- work- ticiers pation ers rate3 Thousands of persons years of age and over Employment/ population ratio4 Percent : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. JuneJuly.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan * Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Civilian Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population * Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows.- Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagriculturaf employment Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population ana labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-32 through are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total l * ' ' : Jan Feb Mar years and over Total years years and over Total Total Females years years and ' fc : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Juty Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec years Unemployment Males Females years 3>34 See footnote Table B-32 Note. See Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Total TABLE B-34. Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other Total Males Females Both sexes Total Black Males Females Both sexes Total Mates Females July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. Jun July Aug... Sept.. Oct : Jan Feb Mar Apr : : : : Nov... Dec.. Note. See footnote and Note Table Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Both sexes month TABLE B-35. Civilian unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Total Males Black Black and other Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes Total Males Fe- : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec... Note. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment/population ratio3 Labor force participation rate Civilian Civilian Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mr a Ar p May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr fay June Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total FeTotal Males males Both Black sexes and White other Black years * ) R9 V H S9fi S9 S8 S9R fin ? fiO9 t ) fiSl 6S4 fiM KM BSfi 6S7 Total Total Males Females Both sexes years White Black and other Black S ? ? fi5 Labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional population including resident Armed Forces Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in croup specified Employment as percent of noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total years Males Males Females years Total and over years years Total Total and over years Females years Total and over years Black and other " : Jan Feb Black Mar fezi June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Jay " " ! '.'.. " ' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38 Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent1 ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month A ! ) civilian workers Black and other or black Males Females Total years years and over Total Males Total years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July Aug... Sept.. : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July... Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec.. Black Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-39. Unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Unemployment UnemployMales Females ment All rate civil20 all ian 1616work- work- Total years Total years and and ers ers years over years rate civilian workers Both sexes years Black White and Black other Experienced wage and salary workers Married men spouse present : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. May " ! ! JuneJuly.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-40. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; l monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or blaclt White Year or month All civilian work- Total Total ers Females Males years years and over Total years ernaies Males years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over Black and other ( ? ? Jan Feb fi ? ? ? ? ? Black Mar JfayZZZZ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June July Oct Nov Dec SeDt Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ? ? ? in TABLE B-41. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks and over Thousands of persons years of age and over Reason for unemployment Average ( mean ) duration Weeks I. : Jan Feb... Mar... U16 Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec... Median duration Job losers Job leavers trants Thousands of persons years of age and over M72 l | Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Data for by reason for unemployment are not strictly comparable with those for later years and the total by reason is not equal to total unemployment Note. See footnote and Note Table Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-42. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered Insured unemployment ( weekly aver- State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) * ' Initial claims Exhaustions s Insured unemp ! oy ~ merit as percent covered Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekfy check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands Thousands Insured unemployment June. * * July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. fc June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec.. 5S " Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) z ' Includes State. UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal Supplemental Compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year * For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry ^ [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods-producing industries Manufacturing Year or month p : Jan Feb... Mar.. May " ! ! June. : : It : Nov... Dec.. : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. IKPSV'.'.' June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec " Total See next page for continuation of table Total ting Construction Total ' NondurDurable able goods " goods 1U75 TABLE B-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Year or month P : Jan Feb Mar.... May ' " " June.. July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May... June.. July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec. Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade trade Finance insurance and real Government Services Total Federal State and local Note. Data in Tables B-43 through B-45 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( B-32 through B-41 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-44. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average hourly earnings current dollars Average weekly hours Year or month Adjusted hourly earnings total private nonagricultural2 Total private nonagricultural Index = Total private nonagricul- Manufacturing Construction ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; I960 1968'. ; ; ; " " ; ; ; ; ; * $ : Jan... Feb... Mar... fc June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar... May * ; ; ; July,.. Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec " Retail ManufacConturing struction Retail trade Percent change from a year Current Current dollars dollars dollars ' $ $ $ Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table Adjusted for overtime ( in manufacturing only ) and for interindustry employment shifts Current-dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Monthly percent changes are computed from indexes to two decimal places and are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table B-43 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-45. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average weekly earnings Year or month Total private nonagricultural1 Current dollars I960 " 1986-Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July AUB Sept oct.. : : : : : : ; : : : : : : : Nov Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct : : : : : : : : : : : : Nv o Dec * $ dollars2 $ Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ Percent change from a year earlier total private nonagricultural3 Construction ( current dollars ) Retail trade ( current dollars ) Current dollars $ $ dollars g Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-43 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Based on data not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table B-43 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-46. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Voar nr Tear or Hours of all persons Output1 Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Unit labor costs Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector ! All " " 47i 50i " : IV : IV quarter no.5 Business : IV : II Ill IV : in ' " " ! ! IV : II Ill IV " Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed < Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for alt urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-47. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Hours of all persons2 Output * Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator6 Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector * Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector = = Z.S _2 _ = U.9 ! : ; ~ 2J ' " " ! " ; ; : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * * l ! s U Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries ana supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers i fc Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Data relate to all persons engaged in the sector. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-46 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-48 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] proportion I960 P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar Apr May. June July Aug sept : : : : : : : : : ; ; ; ; : : : : ; : : : : : : : : : ; : : : : oc ? p Nov Dec ' : : : : Total Durable Nondurable ocf Nov Manufacturing Total industrial production Year or month X26.4 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Min lltiti ing ties TABLE B-49. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Materials Consumer goods Total Equipment Total l Automotive products Home goods Total Busi- Defense and space Intermediate products Total Durable " ; Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nondurable goods proportion Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec U7.2 Includes clothing and consumer staples not shown separately Two components oil and gas well drilling and manufactured homes are included in total equipment but not in detail shown Includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-50. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total proportion ; Z ! * " I " : Jan Feb Mar niay'ZZ " ! June { my Aug Sept Oct NOV Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June J " iy Aug Sept Oct N o v p Dec : .iz Iron and steel FabriNonElectricated eleccal metal trical machinprod- machinery ery ucts Transportation equipment Lumber Apparel Textile Printing Chemicals and and mill prod- prod- publish- and Motor products vehicles proding ucts ucts Total ucts and parts Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-51. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry : Jan Feb Mar fe : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar wfayZ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec " Durable goods Nondurable goods Primary processing Advanced processing Utilities Mining " Total Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Industrial materials TABLE B-52. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Tntal Year or month new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction ' Residential buildings1 Total New Total a housing units Total Federal State and local6 Total Commercial3 Industrial Other4 New series Ho ! ! K New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-52. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Trttal Year or month new construction Residential buildings > Nonresidential buildings and other constructionl Total Total housing units Total Total Commercial a Industrial Federal State and local5 Other May June Ar p July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Oec p * Jan Feb Mar Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Includes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-53. New bousing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized2 New housing units started Private and public ' Year or month Type of structure Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm " Type of structure Private ( farm and nonfarm ) * Total unit to units Total unit units or more to units units or more Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar SE Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec.. Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in pfaces for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-54. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Industries surveyed quarterly Manufacturing Year or quarter ! ! ! : III " " " ! ! ! ! IV : III ! ! ! ! ! ! ! I IV4 : I All industries Total Addenda Nonmanufacturing NonDurable durable Total l goods goods ComMin- Trans- Public mercial ing porta- utiliand tion ties other Total nonfarm busi-2 ness Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Total Surveyed quarterly Surveyed annually3 Excludes forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; medical services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate which effective with the April-May survey are no longer surveyed quarterly. See last column ( " nonmanufacturing surveyed annually " ) for data for these industries " All industries plus tne part of nonmanufacturing that is surveyed annually Consists of forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; medical services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and.real estate Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in October and November corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-55. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Year or month Sales : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ; Jan Feb Mar June... July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p.. Inventories Ratio1 Manufacturing Sales ' Inventories Merchant wholesalers Ratio Sales Inventories Ration Retail trade Sales Inventories2 Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Beginning annual data are averages of monthly figures except for manufacturing and trade combined which are based on December inventories and monthly average sales for the year. For earlier periods data are weighted averages. For monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-56. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Year or month ; ; P : Jan Feb Mar... Apr MayJune.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr... MayJune. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec P Total Inventories2 Durable goods industries Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total : Materials and supplies Total Work in process Nondurable goods industries Finished goods Total Monthly average for year and total for month. Seasonally adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for prior periods Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods TABLE B-57. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unfilled orders New orders Unfilled orders shipments ratio Durable goods industries Year or month Capital Total Total ! ! " : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " tries nondefense Nondurable Total industries NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total Durable goods industries Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-58. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Food and Year or month : Jan Feb Mar All items iday " .'. ' " " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec... ; : Jan Feb Mar A/Pay " " " " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total1 Housing Food Total Other hold Apparel TransEnterFuel and furnish- and portation Medical tainment goods and care ings upkeep Shelter other services utilities and operation Energy3 360.C Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Series beginning not comparable with series for earlier years See Tables and B-60 Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ = except as noted ] Food Total ! " : I960 96i : : : ! ' : : \ Z : Jan Feb Mar fez June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar. fe : : j * June Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec At home Away from home Total Rent residential Total | Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately December = See next page for continuation of table Homeowners ' costs Maintenance and repairs Total Total ? Fuel oil and other household fuel commodities Household fuels Renters ' costs Year or month Total * Fuel and other utilities Shelter Food and beverages Gas ( piped ) and electricity Other utilities and public services ; TABLE B-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportatior Year or month Total : Jan Fb e Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec 1987-Jan Fb e Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec Total New cars Used cars Motor fuel * " Automobile maintenance and repair Other Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services Includes direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ = ] Services Commodities Commodities less food Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar... All items ! fc : June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar... fiJay " ' ' June.. July.,. Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. MaHt All commodities * Food * * Al l : * * ^ All NonDurable durable services 19U ! * \ 2ZA * 333I3 363'0 * Meatcal care services * m 133'3 * 35g'O * Special indexes Services less medical care mi 230'l All items less food Ait items less energy itomc All items less food and energy Energy * * Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-61. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items less food All items Year or month Dec to Dec : Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less energy Year to year Year to year Dec to Dec All items less food and energy Dec to Dec All items less food energy and shelter Dec to Dec.1 Year to year ' Year to year Change from preceding month Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted 1986-Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar May June SS : : : : : : Sept oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec ! Unadjusted _3 * Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Unadjusted : \ z : i \ l -A '.5 A : i Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted : i 'A A Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-62. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] All items Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Commodities Food Year to year Dec to Dec Year to year Dec tn Dec.1 " ! " ; ; ! ; ; ; ; ISA _ -l'.l -l'.6 _.l ll.l _,4 _ l ! ; ! year Year to services Dec tn IU Dec Dec Year * n year to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year tn lu year Medical care Total less food Dec to Dec.1 Energy * Services Commodities Total Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-63. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ) Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer oods Tntal Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Total Total Durable Capital Non- equipment durable finished consumer goods I960 l 1986-Jan Feb Mar Ar p May June July Aug Sept Ot c Mv o Dec 1987-Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p May June julv Augi Sept Ot c Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-63. Producer price indexes by stage ofprocessing Continued [ = ] Crude materials for further processing Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Foods Total and feeds * For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Materials and components Other Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other M2.3 233<O * : Jan... Feb... Mar.. June. .l July... Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec.. ? : Jan... Feb... Mar.. * lay.. JSPaj A MaV : June. July Aug> Nov Dec Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. AH data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-64. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Finished goods Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods exclud- Total Foods and Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other and energy : Jan Feb Mar Jufy Aug y June. July Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb... Mar. Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power l Chemicals and allied products1 : Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June 21L4 Year or month Farm products Processed foods and feeds U7.2 I960 Total ; : : : : : : ; : : July Aug Sept oct Nv o Dec : Jan Feb Mar : : : : : Ar p May June July Aug2 Sept oct Nov Dec : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Total Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month ; the lag for refined petroleum items was eliminated beginning with the June data See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ ] Industrial commodities Continued Year or month Pulp NonMetals Machinery Furniture Rubber Lumber paper and and metallic and and and and wood metal equipment household mineral plastic allied durables products products products products products 1986-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1987-Jan Feb Mar Anr May : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and Miscellaneous products ssr Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are ubject to revision months after original publication Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-66. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Finished consumer foods Total finished goods Year or month Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Finished goods excluding foods and energy Consumer Capital Total goods equipment Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec.1 to year Dec.1 to year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec to year = _ \ -I o \ i = Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Seasonallu Unadjusted justed : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Season- tl SeaUnadjusted = Unadjusted justed justed A sonal in A A Seasonad ^ justed = Unadjusted Seasonollu ad- justed SeaUnadjusted sonal i Unadjusted allu tl justed justed = = = = = = Season- = = = = DataTiave been revised through August to reflect'the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source-. Department of Labor Bureau of labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT A N D FINANCE TABLE B-67. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml Year and month M2 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) M2 plus large time deposits term RPs ; term Eurodollars and institutiononly MMMF balances Debt M3 Ml plus overnight RPs and Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and small time M3 plus other liquid assets Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average ) Percent change from year or months earlier2 Ml M2 M Debt December : : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May... June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct Now Dec Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local government and private nonfinancial sectors ; data from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at an annual rate Note. The nontransactions portion of M2 is seasonally adjusted as a whole to reduce distortions caused by substantial portfolio shifts arising from regulatory and financial changes in recent years especially shifts to MMDAs in A similar procedure is used to seasonally adjust the remaining nontransactions balances in M l See Table B-68 for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Currency Travelers checks Demand deposits Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) net plus overnight Eurodollars NSA Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances NSA Institution only market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) NSA General purpose and broker/ dealer NSA Savings deposits December : I960 June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov Dec p p Jan Feb.. Mr a Apr My a June : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May " See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Urge denomination time deposits1 Term repurchase agreements <RPs ) Term Eurodollars NSA Year and month Small denomination time deposits ' NSA Savings bonds Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances Commercial paper December : I960 ^ : Jan Feb Mr a Ar p May June July Aug " sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ; : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec * Jan Feb Mr a Apr /ay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted See also Table Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-69- Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirementsl Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Reserves of depository institutions Year and month Total December : Nonborrowed rowed plus extended credit Monetary Required : Jan Feb... Mar... l/ayl June.. y June- July Aug Sept.... Oci Nov " Dec.. Sz Nov Dec : Jan Feb. Mar. 57f756 Total Seasonal Extended credit Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act and other regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Note NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-70. Commercial bank loans and securities [ Monthly average billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ' ] Loans and leases Year and month December : Total loans and securities Total Commercial and industrial loans U.S Government securities Other securities " : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * fez June July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar. Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of weekly data for foreign-related institutions beginning July Prior to July data for foreign-related institutions are averages of current and previous month-end data. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-71. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) * 3-month 6-month Constant maturities2 3year 10year Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa<> Ba a Highgrade NewCommunici- home mercial pal mortgage paper bonds yields ( Stand- ( FHLBB ) * months5 ards Poor 's ) nice mtnt Prime rate charged by banks * rate Federal Federal funds Reserve rate Bank of New York ! " ! ! " .'. ! * ! " ! lO3 U02 ^ 2'.10 " " " i'.78 ^ " " High-low : Jan Feb Mar.... " Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec High-low Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department a Series excludes public utility issues for January through October due to lack of appropriate issues Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates Deginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-71. Bond yields and interest rates 7929-S7- Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3-month : Jan Feb Mar Apr lyfay 6-month Constant maturities2 3year 10year Corporate hnnrlc bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa HighMQIJU grade rtewCommunicihome mercial pal paper bonds months5 ( Standard & ( FHLBB ) SET Prime rate charged by banks6 Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York Poor 's ) Federal funds rate7 Dec " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec June .'. " Z July Aug Sept Oct Nov Jan Feb Mar May " ; ; ; " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar xJune July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the ' Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-72. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Other debt instruments U7.6 Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors.. U.S. Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector : State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S. Government loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Foreign funds U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources See next page for continuation of table At banks Credit market instruments TABLE B-72 Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors... Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other 55J By borrowing sector : State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Bank loans n.e.c U.S. Government loans Total domestic plus foreign Bonds Foreign net borrowing in United States Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase ageements Foreign deposits Deposits and currency Private domestic nonfinancial sectors At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Credit market instruments Foreign funds Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Debt capital instruments Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Agency issues and mortgages Treasury issues U.S. Government : TABLE B-73. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional2 Government underwritten Total Multi- Com1- to family mercial family proper- properhouses ties ties to 4-family houses Total i Total VA FHA guarinsured anteed Total : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Includes FHA insured multifamity properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-74. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings institutions Commercial banks Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others 9L4 II Ill I V : II Ill IV : ) | Ill Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Beginning date reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Pubfjc Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source.- Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-75. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month Total consumer credit Installment credit ' Total Automobile RevolvingE Mobile home a Other Noninstallment credit4 December : ) * : Jan. Feb.. Mar Apr.. May. June July.. Aug.. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb... Mar.. June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec " Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded z Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Excludes 30day charge credit held by travel and entertainment companies. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning 197/ includes open-end credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Oata are shown here as a general indication of trends Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-76. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selectedfiscalyears [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period Off-budge t On-budge Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Addendum : Gross national product Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) i ^ Transition quarter.. Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit { ) Total Held by the public Not strictly comparable with later data Annual rate Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B-77. Federal receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts. Total outlays.. Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts. On-budget outlays.. On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts... Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit { ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts. Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET. Individual income taxes. Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions.. ; = See next page for continuation of table Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget.. Off-budget. On-budget.. Off-budget. Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Central Federal credit activities Net interest On-budget.. Off-budget. National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services. Health Medicare Income security Social security OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET.. Excise taxes Estate and toft taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve SystemAll other On-budget.. Off-budget. TABLE B-77. Federal receipts outlays and debt,fiscalyears Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Estimates RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts... Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts. On-budget outlays.. On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts. Off-budget outlays... Off-budget surplus or deficit ( _ ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System. Other Gross Federal debt. [ l,510o National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services. Health Medicare Income security Social security OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System.. Allother On-budget.. Off-budget. Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET. On-budget... Off-budget.. Veterans benefits and services... Administration of justice General government Central Federal credit activities.. Net interest On-budget.. Off-budget. Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts.. On-budget.. Off-budget. Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis. Beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-78. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts. EXPENDITURES Total on-budget and off-budget outlays Lending and financial transactions Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Defense timing adjustment Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases. Geographic exclusions Other. Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures. Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Timing adjustments Geographic exclusions RECEIPTS Total on-budget and off-budget receipts. Note. See Note Table B-76 See Special Analysis B " Special Analyses Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for description of these categories Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-79. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter P : IV. : IV. : IV. : I Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV " Federal Government Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts ^ Receipts Expenditures State and local government Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts -L8 Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts -LI Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-80. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year Of quarter Total " : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : II HI IV : II III IV Expenditures Personal Corpotax rate and profits nontax tax accruals receipts Indirect busi- Contriness tax for and social non- insurtax ance accruals : ii Surplus or Subsidies deficit Less : less ( ) DivicurLess : dends narent Intertional resurest received plus of income ceived and by govern- prodby govern- govern- ment uct acment enter- counts ment prises Net interest paid Purchases Transof fer payments Total Total Interest paid = '.S '.S Z \ \ = -'.3 Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis U = TABLE B-81. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year or quarter Total Expenditures Contri'ersonal Corpo- Indirect butions rate tax and profits business for tax and social Total nontax nontax receipts tax accruals accruals insurance Fiscal : * ? Calendar : P : IV : IV.... : IV... : It III... IV... : II III... IV... : II HI... IV Purchases of goods and services Total Transfer payments Grantsin-aid to State and To To forNational persons eign- local govdefense ers ernments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises ; ; Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts = = = = = = = = = = = Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July I through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-82. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter L946 " : IV : IV : IV : I I III IV I I II I I V : II til IV Total Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-insocial nontax tax nontax receipts accruals accruals insurance '.B Total Subsi- Surplus or dies Transdeficit Net less Purfer chases pay- interest current ( ) paid surplus national of less income goods ments diviof to and and per- dends govern- product services sons received ment enter- accounts prises '.1 '.I Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-83. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source2 Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Fiscal year Total Individual income taxes General expenditures by function z Corpo- Revenue from ration All Federal net income Govern- other ment Total Education Highways Public welfare All other * 20,9U Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development sanitation other than sewerage financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other governmental administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years which ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-84. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Fiscal year : Total interestbearing public debt securities Marketable Total : Jan Feb Mar fc : June... st Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June... July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec M,449,859 '1,464,094 U,481,953 U,487,226 Treasury bills Nonmarketable Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total U.S savings bonds Foreign government and public2 series Government account series Other3 L * 340/ " " : Includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately in millions of dollars : in January ; in FebruaryMay ; in August ; in September 1986-September : and in October-December Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreign ' currency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-85. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Months Years Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-86. Estimated ownership ofpublic debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; l billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month Total Commercial banks Individuals3 Total Total Savings bonds * Other securri- Insurance nies SB Corpora funds State and local governments Foreign and international Other investors : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June. Dec : June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June... ? " " Dec : Mar June... : Mar June a : Mar June Dec : Mar June U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and3 Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts * Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investment of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored agencies Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS A N D FINANCE TABLE B-87. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments p ' : IV : IV : IV : III IV If III I V ; | | Ill Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-88. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Nonfinancial Financial Year or quarter Total I960 " : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV | | til IV : II Ill Total Federal Total Re- Other serve banks o o o g ii.4 Total Manufacturing2 Rest Transporta- Wholeof the tion sale world and and Other public retail utili- trade ties Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-89 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-89. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products Nondurable goods Electric Motor Iflachinand vehicles elecand except tronic electri- equip- equipment cal ment Other Total Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Other I960 $ : 1& : IV : IV * IV H Ill I V : II Ill I V I I II I p fs IS Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-90. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Profits Year or quarter Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity * Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes taxes Stockholders21 equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes * taxes Stockholders ' equity2 : IV New series : : IV Z : II Ill IV : II III IV. : II III. In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-91. Relation ofprofits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations .Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV New series : IV | | Ill IV I I III IV | | III ' Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-90 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-92. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Uses Sources Internal Year or quarter InvenTotal External Credit market funds Dpmes- valuation Capital and conForeign tic Total undis- capital sumption earn- Total tributed conallow- ings1 profits sumption ances adjustments Total Securi- Loans and Other2 ties and shortmort- term gages paper Discrepancy Increase Capital ( sources in Total expendifinancial less uses ) tures assets U : II III... IV... : II III... IV... : II III... Foreign branch profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad Consists of tax liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-93. State and municipal and business securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter : First three quarters : IV : II lit State Business securities offered for cash and municipal Type of security Industry of issuer securities offered Total for cash offerings Common Preferred Bonds Electric Manufac- gas and TransporCommuni ( princiand stock stock turing tation cation pal notes water amounts ) i ; Other Business securities offered include securities offered by corporate and non-corporate business enterprises such as limited partnerships. Beginning excludes private placements Common stock combines the conventional ownership shares of corporate business and securities issued by non-corporate business e.g. limited partnership interests voting trust certificates and condominium securities Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Beginning business security offerings exclude private placements Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and business securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks Intercorporate transactions and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment company issues are included beginning Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-94. Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices1 New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) z Year or month Composite : Jan.. Feb. Mar. May ' " June. July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! ! June... July.... Aug Sept... Ocf Nov Dec Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Common stock 6yields ( percent ) Dow Jones industrial average3 Standard & Poor 's composite index ( = ) * Dividendprice ratio 2f275.99 Earningsprice ratio Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange a Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-95. Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) Number of failures business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over 3r486 Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec : Jan Feb... Mar.. inlay " ! ! ' June. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data for based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data Data for are subject to revision due to amended court filings Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation AGRICULTURE TABLE B-96. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Net farm income Gross farm income Year or quarter Cash marketing receipts Total Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 Production expenses Current dollars : II... III.. IV. : II.. III. IV. : II... III. dollars3 ^ a s h marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the GNP implicit price deflator ( Department of Commerce ) Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-97. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Crops2 Year Totall Total3 Feed grains Food grains Oil crops Livestock and products2 Farm output per unit of total input Crop production per acre4 Farm output per hour of farm work Total Crops Livestock and products n '..' ..' " " HI Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-98. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population l Farm employment ( thousands Anril April1 Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Crops harvested Fami- Hired ( millions of work- work- acres ) ers ers Mechanical Farm Farm power real and labor estate machinery Feed seed and livestock purchases Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population2 ' U.5 I960.. M.177 Year Total Total cultural chemicals Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-32 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides e Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Includes agricultural service workers working on farms Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-99. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month : Jan Feb Mar All farm products Ar p Mv a June July Aug Sept Crops " Ot c Nv o Dc e Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p Nfey June Julv Aug Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e no Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest taxes and wage rates * Adden- Production items Aver- Total Tractors and selfpropelled machinery Fertilizer Fuels and energy Wage rates age farm real estate value per acre3 Includes items used for family living not shown separately Includes other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through for February for for April for and for February for Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-100. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Imports Exports Year Total Food Feed grains grains Oilseeds and products I,4 } \ : Jan-Nov : Total l Crops frufts and fes3 Animals and products Coffee AgriCocoa cultural beans trade and prod- balance ucts U A ! Tobacco Cotton Animals and products \ l '.4 '.3 : i ! o A '.S '.5 '.Z '.4 '.6 '.5 L4 Total includes items not shown Rice wheat and wheat flour separately Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Hess than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-101.- Balance sheet of the farm sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets End of year Total Real estate liveMachinstock1 ery and motor Crops vehicles Household e s * Financial assets ) eposits and currency InvestU.S ments in savings cooperbonds atives Total Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt * Proprietors ' equities ntcul and furnishings I960 e p Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note.-Data include operator households. Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source. * Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-102. / $ international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits { ) debits ( ) ] Investment income3 Merchandise Year or quarter Exports Imports Net Receipts Payments Net Net travel Other Net servand military transac- transpor- ices net tation tions receipts Balance on goods and services4 Remittances Balance pensions on and other current unilateralJ account4 transfers = = = = = = : I ii III iv : | ii in IV : I n Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts ( and the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts ) although the series differ because of different handling of certain items ( gold capital gains and losses etc. ) revisions etc See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-102. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital Inflow ( ) ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy U.S private assets Statistical discrepancy -1>36 Other U.S Government assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDKs ) -/,833 ^ : II III IV... : II Ill IV : II Ill P m l * Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonpetroleum products Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total Agricultural prod- Total ucts IndusCapital trial inai goods supplies except and automomatetive rials Total Automotive Other Petroleum and products 9i.4 : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Other Automotive Total IndusCapital trial goods supplies except and automomatetive rials TABLE B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] first Item Exports 142f054 Industrial countries Canada Japan " ! Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Eastern Europe OPEC32. Other International organizations and unallocated Industrial countries.. Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC Other Eastern Europe quarters at annual rate Canada Japan IZI....Z Western Europe Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Industrial countries OPEC ^ Other Balance ( excess of exports ) Other countries except Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Australia New Zealand and South Africa Other countries except Eastern Europe Imports Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-105. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Billions of dollars ] Year or month F.a.s. value7 Exports { f.a.s. ) teSS IfTipvi ia customs value or f.a.s value Total { c.i.f value ) Exports ( f.a.s. ) c.i.f. value Not Not AdjustAdjustadjustadjusted ed ed ed co co Not Adadjusted justed Merchandise trade balance Merchandise imports Merchandise exports General imports6 Total Domestic export S domestic and foreign exports { aajusieo ano Food Food Crude not adjusted bever- Crude beverto include mate- Manumate- Manu1 undocument- Total ages rials factured Total * ages rials factured and ed exports to and and goods4 and goods tobac- fuels3 Canada ) > tobac- fuels Customs value = = = F.a.s. value * * * * * * Customs value : Jan Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept Feb.. Mar. Apr.. Nfay. June July. Aug. ? : Nov. * i2 ! e Oct Nov Dec : Jan.. * ^ * 3L3 = Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments through and exclude them thereafter Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Note. -Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data beginning include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands except that for Virgin Islands exports are reflected only in the figures for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports and trade balance * Data for for domestic and foreign exports combined total domestic exports total general imports and trade balance include trade of the Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Investment Analysis Trade Statistics Division ) TABLE B-106. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States.. : Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. Government assets other than official reserve assets U S loans and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. shortterm assets Direct investment abroad Foreign securities : Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Foreign assets in the United States Foreign official assets in the United States US. Government securities U S Treasury securities Other Other U S Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks/ not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States Direct investment in the United States U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. liabilities to unafftliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere. U.S official reserve assets U S assets abroad U S private assets Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-107 International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country ber Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Spain L : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere MemoOil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries. United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Industrial countries All countries # # ; Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-108. Foreign exchange rates [ Currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ] Period Belgium ( franc ) Canada ( dollar ) France ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) March : I I Ill IV : Il l IV Period Netherlands ( guilder ) Sweden ( krona ) Switzerland ( franc ) United Kingdom ( pound ) x Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Real2 Nominal March : I I Il l IV : I I tl | IV Cents per unit of foreign currency Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-109. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada European Community1 Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) IV ; : II II ) IV : | | III... IV. " : II.. Ill IV.. II Ill Consumer prices ( = ) Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom West Germany Portugal and Spain. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in Data for Portugal ana Spain which became members in January are excluded prior to All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Investment Analysis Trade Statistics Division ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-llO. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France : II III I V : | | H I I V United Kingdom ? Italy e ( percent ) ( 'ivilian unem West Germany Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( = ) I960 " Civilian unemployment rates viewed as less precise indicators _ survey resulted in a large increase _.. r r._ sought work in the past days. Such persons have been provisionally excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts ; their inclusion would about double the rates shown for Italy. There is a break in the series for West Germany as of ; based on the former series the2 rate for was percent Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-lll. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] annual average annual average annual average annual average OECO countries2 United States Canada Japan European Community3 Developing countries Communist countries4... ( ) Area and country FranceWest Germany Italy United Kingdom U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China.. * Preliminary estimates OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) includes Australia Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece. Iceland Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey and United Kingdom not shown separately Includes Belgium Denmark Greece Ireland Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal and Spain not shown separately Includes North Korea and Yugoslavia not shown separately Not available Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers