Transmitted to the Congress February Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER BUILDING ON SUCCESS CHAPTER DEVELOPMENTS IN AND FUTURE PROSPECTS CHAPTER DESIGN OF FISCAL MONETARY AND FINANCIAL POLICIES CHAPTER INVESTING IN AMERICA 'S FUTURE CHAPTER HUMAN RESOURCES IN THE 1990s CHAPTER THE ECONOMY AND THE ENVIRONMENT CHAPTER GROWTH AND MARKET REFORM IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF ECONOMIC STATISTICS APPENDIX C. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report seepage ( iii ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The United States enters the 1990s as a prosperous nation with a healthy and dynamic economy. Our living standards remain well above those of other major industrialized nations and our prosperity is spread widely. Since American firms and workers have produced the longest peacetime expansion on record and created more than million jobs. The containment of inflation during this long economic expansion is a milestone in postwar U.S. history In we regained our position as the world 's leading exporter and retained our position as the world 's leading job creator with the fraction of the population employed reaching its highest level ever. In all 2x/2 million jobs were created in The unemployment rate fell to levels not seen since the early 1970s as did jobless rates for blacks and teenagers. The unemployment rate for Hispanics was the lowest since when the United States began regularly reporting it We have proven to the world that economic and political freedom works. After years of economic decline the people of Eastern Europe are turning toward free markets to revive economic growth and raise living standards. I remain strongly committed to aiding the efforts of these brave men and women to transform their societies and thereby to change the world Despite our successes we can not be satisfied with simply sustaining the strong record of the 1980s. We must improve on that record deal with inherited problems and meet the new challenges and seize the new opportunities before us GOALS AND PRINCIPLES The primary economic goal of my Administration is to achieve the highest possible rate of sustainable economic growth. Achieving this goal will require action on many fronts but it will permit progress on many more. Growth is the key to raising living standards to leaving a legacy of prosperity for our children to uplifting those most in need and to maintaining America 's leadership in the world To achieve this goal we must both enhance our economy 's ability to grow and ensure that its potential is more often fully utilized than in previous decades. To these ends as explained in the Report that follows my Administration will : Reduce government borrowing by slowing the growth of Federal spending while economic growth raises revenue until the budget is balanced and reduce the national debt thereafter ; Support a credible systematic monetary policy program that sustains maximum economic growth while controlling and reducing inflation ; Remove barriers to innovation investment work and saving in the tax legal and regulatory systems ; Avoid unnecessary regulation and design necessary regulatory programs to harness market forces effectively to serve the Nation 's interest ; and Continue to lead the world to freer trade and more open markets and to support market-oriented reforms around the world In advancing these principles we must be both ambitious and realistic. There is room to improve and there is much to be done to prepare for the next century. We must not fear to dream great dreams. But we must not fail to do our homework ; the American people are ill-served by promises that can not be kept MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND POLICIES The economy 's performance during the seventh year of economic expansion has set the stage for healthy growth in the 1990s Growth in national output was more moderate in than the very rapid pace in and But in sharp contrast to most past periods of low unemployment and high capacity utilization inflation was kept firmly in check. Measured broadly the price level rose percent during down from percent during If my budget proposals are adopted and if the Federal Reserve maintains a credible policy program to support strong noninflationary growth the economy is projected to expand in at a slightly faster pace than in Growth is projected to pick up in the second half of the year and to continue at a strong pace as the level of output rises to the economy 's full potential Fiscal and monetary policies should establish credible commitments to policy plans aimed at maximizing sustainable growth over the long run. A steady hand at the helm is necessary to produce rapid and continuous increases in employment and living standards My budget proposals reflect a strong commitment to the principles of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law which has helped reduce the Federal deficit from percent of GNP in fiscal to percent in fiscal That is why I insisted last fall that the Congress pass a clean reconciliation bill and stood by the sequestration order that resulted from my strict adherence to the GrammRudman-Hollings law I have also proposed a fundamental new rule for fiscal policy that would ensure that projected future Social Security surpluses are not spent for other purposes but are used to build the reserves necessary to guarantee the soundness of Social Security. Moreover it would transform the Federal Government from a chronic borrower draining savings away from private investment to a saver providing funds for capital formation and economic growth by reducing the national debt I remain strongly committed to the principles of low marginal tax rates and a broad tax base developed in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of and the Tax Reform Act of Steady adherence to these principles reduces government 's distorting effect on the market forces that drive economic growth I strongly support the Federal Reserve 's goal of noninflationary growth and share with them the conviction that inflation must be controlled and reduced in a predictable fashion. Accelerating inflation not only erodes the value of families ' savings it produces economic imbalances and policy responses that often lead to recessions The United States is part of an increasingly integrated global economy in which domestic fiscal and monetary policies affect the economies of other nations though the main impacts are on the domestic economy. My Administration remains committed to participating actively in the valuable process of coordinating macroeconomic policies internationally ENCOURAGING ECONOMIC GROWTH As we begin the 1990s a central focus of my economic policies will be to build on the successes of the 1980s by creating an environment in which the private sector can serve as the engine that powers strong noninflationary economic growth America 's continued economic progress depends on the innovation and entrepreneurship of our people. I will therefore continue to press for a permanent research and experimentation tax credit for increased Federal support of research with widespread societal benefits and that private firms would not have adequate incentives to undertake for removal of regulatory and legal barriers to innovation and for a lower tax rate on capital gains We must remove impediments to saving and investment in order to enhance the economy 's growth potential. The fiscal policy I described earlier will raise national saving. In addition I have asked the Congress to enact the Savings and Economic Growth Act of which contains a comprehensive program to raise household saving across the entire income spectrum. This program would help American families plan for the future and in the process make more funds available to finance investment and spur productivity thus raising living standards enhancing competitiveness and expanding employment opportunities One of my highest legislative priorities this year is to reduce the capital gains tax rate. This tax reform would promote risk-taking and entrepreneurship by lowering the cost of capital thereby encouraging new business formation and creating new jobs. A capital gains tax cut would stimulate saving and investment throughout the economy Government can encourage economic growth but can not manage it. I remain strongly opposed to any sort of industrial policy in which the government not the market would pick winners and losers. Second-guessing the market is the way to raise government spending and taxes not living standards The growth of our Nation 's labor force is projected to slow in the 1990s and demands for skilled workers are expected to continue to increase. These developments will shift attention away from worries about the supply of jobs that have haunted us since the 1930s and toward new concerns about the supply of workers and skills We can not maintain our position of world leadership or sustain rapid economic growth if our workers lack the skills of their foreign competitors. As I demonstrated last fall at the Education Summit the Federal Government can lead in improving the inadequate performance of our elementary and secondary schools. Because school systems must be held accountable for their students ' performance the Nation 's Governors and I have developed ambitious national education goals. To meet these goals we must give students and parents the freedom to choose their schools and we must give schools the flexibility to meet their students ' needs More disadvantaged Americans must be brought into the economic mainstream not just to enhance our Nation 's economic growth but as a matter of simple decency. To this end I have supported legislation to open new opportunities for the disabled increased assistance to the homeless helped implement welfare reform proposed more effective job training programs and introduced initiatives that will bring jobs and better housing to depressed inner cities. I have proposed substantial increases in spending for Head Start to prepare children from disadvantaged families for effective learning Those who can not read and write can not participate fully in the economy. Mrs. Bush and I will continue to support the difficult but important struggle to eliminate adult functional illiteracy REGULATORY REFORM The improved performance of U.S. markets that were deregulated during the 1980s showed clearly that government interference with competitive private markets inflates prices retards innovation slows growth and eliminates jobs. But in some cases well-designed regulation can serve the public interest My proposals for reform of food safety regulation and the Clean Air Act follow the two key principles that apply in these cases : the goals of regulation must balance costs and benefits ; and the methods of regulation must be flexible and cost-effective. One of my top legislative priorities is to improve the Clean Air Act in a way that preserves both a healthy environment and a sound economy When confronted with a threat to the solvency of our thrift institutions my Administration moved swiftly to resolve the crisis. We must continue to reform the regulation of financial institutions and markets to preserve the soundness of the U.S. financial sector while encouraging innovation and competition THE GLOBAL ECONOMY The 1980s have underscored the increased importance of global economic events in shaping our lives. We have all been touched by the movements toward political and economic freedom in Eastern Europe. We have been impressed by the rapid growth of marketoriented Asian economies. And we have great expectations for the movement in the European Community toward a single open market by Reductions in trade barriers between nations have raised living standards around the world. Investment has become more globally integrated as citizens of other countries recognize the great strength and potential of our economy and as Americans continue to invest abroad My Administration is strongly committed to supporting the historic efforts of the governments and people of Eastern Europe to move toward market-based economies. Similarly under the Brady Plan we will continue to support heavily indebted nations that adopt sound economic policies to revive economic growth. In both cases reform must be comprehensive to succeed but the rewards of success will be great America will continue to lead the way to a world of free competitive markets. Increased global competition is an opportunity for the United States and the world not a threat. But we can not remain competitive by avoiding competition. My Administration will therefore continue to resist calls for protection and managed trade. To serve the interests of all Americans we must open markets here and abroad not close them. I will strongly resist any attempts to hinder the free international flows of investment capital which have benefited workers and consumers here and abroad And my Administration will work to reduce existing barriers to international investment throughout the world My highest trade policy priority is the successful completion this year of the current Uruguay Round of negotiations aimed at strengthening and broadening the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) Successful completion of these negotiations will expand the world 's gains from free and fair trade and raise living standards in all nations LOOKING AHEAD When I look back on the 1980s on what the American people have accomplished it is with pride. And when I look forward to the 1990s it is with hope and optimism. Our excellent economic health will allow us to build on the successes of the 1980s as we prepare for the next century. Clearly there is much work to be done. But with the economic principles and policies that I have proposed I am confident that the United States can enjoy strong sustainable economic growth and use the fruits of that growth to raise living standards solve longstanding problems deal with new challenges and make the most of new opportunities THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY ( / THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Michael J. Boskin Chairman Richard L. Schmalensee Member John B. Taylor Member / CONTENTS Page CHAPTER BUILDING ON SUCCESS The Current Expansion and Future Prospects Macroeconomic Policy Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy International Macroeconomic Issues Promoting Economic Growth Investment and Technology National Saving Human Resources Regulatory Policy Principles of Regulatory Policy The Environment and the Economy Financial Markets Growth and Market Reform in the Global Economy Toward Free Trade and Open Markets Encouraging Economic Change Abroad Conclusion CHAPTER DEVELOPMENTS IN AND FUTURE PROSPECTS The U.S. Economy in Fiscal and Monetary Policies During Growth of GNP and Components Business Conditions Wages and Prices Summary of The Economic Outlook Why the Expansion is Expected to Continue The Outlook for Fiscal and Monetary Policies The Prospects for Growth Summary of the Outlook Concluding Comments CHAPTER DESIGN OF FISCAL MONETARY AND FINANCIAL POLICIES The Design of Macroeconomic Policy Advantages of Systematic Policies Importance of Credibility A New Rule for Fiscal Policy Fiscal Policy The Impact of the Instruments of Fiscal Policy The Design of Fiscal Policy Summary of Principles for Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy The Effect of Monetary Policy on the Economy The Costs of Inflation and Recession New Challenges for Monetary Policy The Design of Monetary Policy in the 1980s and 1990s Importance of a Credible Monetary Policy Summary of Principles for Monetary Policy International Aspects of Fiscal and Monetary Policy Increased Openness of the U.S. Economy External Balance and Exchange-Rate Objectives Macroeconomic Policy Tools International Policy Coordination Summary of Principles for International Macroeconomic Policies Financial Evolution and Financial Soundness Banking-Type Institutions and Their Competitors Changes in the Financial Industry Adaptation to Change Policy Actions and Proposals Summary of Principles for Financial Regulation Summary and Concluding Comments CHAPTER INVESTING IN AMERICA 'S FUTURE Determinants of Growth Technological Change Investment in Physical Capital Investment in Human Capital Technological Progress and Economic Growth Factors that Affect Technological Progress Trends in R&D Spending The Role of Government Strengthening the U.S. Research Base Capital Investment Capital Accumulation in the United States How a Higher Investment Rate Benefits the Economy Allowing Capital to Find its Most Productive Use Investing in Infrastructure Capital Financing National Investment Foreign Sources of Financing for National Investment Domestic Saving and Net Capital Inflows Domestic Saving to Finance National Investment Ill Ill Ill Page Policy Toward Investment Factors that Affect Domestic Investment Implications for Domestic Investment Policy Factors that Affect Foreign Direct Investment Implications for Policy Toward Foreign Direct Investment Policy Toward Saving Government Saving Household Saving Business Saving Removing Impediments to Saving Summary CHAPTER HUMAN RESOURCES IN THE 1990s Introduction Achievements of the 1980s Challenges of the 1990s The Changing U.S. Population Skills and Education : Investing in Human Resources The Growing Need for Skilled Labor Education and Productivity Trends in Basic Skills Trends in Higher Education On-the-Job Training Improving the Education and Skill Levels of U.S Workers The Challenge for the 1990s Labor Shortages Worker Mobility and Immigration Labor Mobility Geographic Mobility Occupational Mobility Immigration Policies to Address Skill Shortages Improving the Opportunities of Low-Income Households. Poverty in the United States Distinguishing Among the Poor The Value of a Healthy Economy Targeted Antipoverty Programs Future Directions Maintaining Low Unemployment and Low Inflation The Secular Decline in Unemployment in the 1980s. The Effects of Demographic and Labor Force Trends Labor Market Mismatches and Structural Unemployment Other Changes in Labor Markets Looking Ahead Summary Page CHAPTER THE ECONOMY AND THE ENVIRONMENT Principles for Environmental Regulation Market Failure Environmental Regulation The Clean Air Act Experience under the Current Law The Clean Air Initiative Tradable Allowances for Sulfur Dioxide Emissions... Automobile Emissions Control Risk and the Regulation of Agriculture Soil Conservation Reconsidered Improving Conservation Program Design Pesticides : Benefits Risks and Regulation The Administration 's Proposals for Pesticide Policy Reform Environmental Effects of Federal Farm Programs Global Environmental Issues Stratospheric Ozone Depletion Global Climate Change The Costs of Reducing Carbon Dioxide Emissions Policy Tools to Implement a Reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions Impacts of Climate Change Summary Conclusion CHAPTER GROWTH AND MARKET REFORM IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY Market-Oriented Reform in Centrally Planned Economies Centrally Planned Versus Market Economies Economic Performance of Centrally Planned Economies Elements of a Reform Package Recent Developments Summary Supporting Growth in Indebted Developing Countries History of the Developing Country Debt Crisis U.S. Policy for Developing Country Debt Summary Developments in Japan and Other Asian Pacific Rim Economies The Asian Pacific Rim 's Economic Expansion Japan and the World Economy Summary Economic Integration in Western Europe Potential Gains Potential Risks Summary Trade Liberalization and GATT The Uruguay Round Agricultural Policy and GATT Agricultural Policy Reform in GATT Toward U.S. Policy Reform Summary Conclusion APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Improving the Quality of Economic Statistics C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production LIST OF TABLES CHARTS AND BOXES Tables Growth of Real GNP and Components Economic Outlook for Effects of Alternative Projections on the Budget Administration Economic Assumptions Accounting for Growth in Real GNP GRH and Budget Deficits : The Record R&D Expenditures for Five Major Industrial Countries The Changing Finance of Investment Foreign Direct Investment Estimated Percent Loss of Productivity from Years of Erosion Fuel Share in Electricity Generation Average Annual Growth Changes in Reported Exposure of Groups of U.S Banks to Non-OPEC Developing Countries Charts Growth of Real GNP Real Federal Purchases Federal Funds Rate M2 Opportunity Cost M2 and M3 Personal Saving Rate Mortgage Interest Rates Real Inventory-Sales Ratio Federal Budget Deficit as Percent of GNP Velocities of Ml and M2 U.S. Real Effective Exchange Rate Consumer Prices Charts Gross Fixed Investment as Percent of GNP Real Gross Investment as Percent of GNP Real Net Investment as Percent of NNP Gross National Saving as Percent of GNP Gross Saving as Percent of GNP Foreign Direct Investment and the Current Account Deficit Age Distribution of the U.S. Population Trends in Occupations High School Completion Rates by Race College Completion Rates by Race Poverty Rate Poverty Rates by Age Poverty Rates by Race Civilian Unemployment Rate Unemployment Rates by Age and Sex Carbon Dioxide Emissions by Region Real Wheat Prices Wheat Stocks International Comparisons of Economic Performance.. Policy Credibility. and the Economic Projections The GRH Process : How It Worked in Fiscal Definitions of the Monetary Aggregates The Link Between Lower National Saving and Net Export Performance The User Cost of Capital Widening Earnings Differentials The Proposed Educational Excellence Act The Determinants of Nominal Wage Growth A Glossary of Environmental Regulation Terms Problems with Command-and-Control Regulation Acid Rain and Sulfur Dioxide Discounting Over Long Horizons Difficulties in the Transition from Central Planning : Food and Food Aid in Poland What is GATT ? Boxes CHAPTER Building on Success IN THE U.S. ECONOMY marked its seventh consecutive year of economic growth the longest peacetime expansion on record and the second longest expansion in U.S. history. The American economy has created more than million new jobs since The average unemployment rate in was at its lowest level since and was lower than in any major European country. America 's standard of living as measured by per capita income is the highest of any major industrialized country in the world fully one-third higher than that of West Germany or Japan In exports reached an all-time high and the United States once again became the world 's leading exporter. Moreover unlike any other expansion since World War II inflation has been contained laying a solid foundation for continued strong growth in the 1990s The successes of the 1980s stand in sharp contrast to economic performance in the 1970s when inflation soared and unemployment simultaneously increased. In that earlier decade tax rates climbed for a growing segment of the population. Productivity growth collapsed. Government interference in private markets escalated. The result was an inefficient economy and stagnant living standards America 's economic successes in the 1980s also stand in sharp contrast to the poor performance of countries that had severely restricted economic and political freedom. Indeed this contrast along with U.S. support for democracy in the 1980s helped to spur the most historically significant events of the revolutionary transformation of the countries of Eastern Europe. Along with the rapid adoption of democratic principles has come a recognition that economic freedom is also essential to raising the quality of life. By the end of the year bold economic reform programs were being developed to turn away from central planning and government ownership toward free markets and private ownership. It is significant that as the United States marked the seventh year of its economic expansion last November the President signed legislation providing for U.S. support for economic reforms in Eastern Europe The Nation now has an opportunity to build on its recent economic successes. It can address problems from the past and con- front current and likely future challenges. The Nation must save and invest a larger share of its income. The performance of U.S elementary and secondary schools must be dramatically improved Employment and housing opportunities available to disadvantaged Americans must be expanded. The quality of the Nation 's environment must be preserved and enhanced. And at this crucial moment in history U.S. support for democracy and market reform movements around the world can not diminish. The success of these market reforms will be a significant determinant of political freedom and economic progress throughout the world in the 21st century Strong sustained economic growth is the key to providing rising real incomes and resources for the needs desires and aspirations of the American people. Sustained economic growth will also provide employment opportunities for American families and offer people the dignity and self-respect that come with participating fully in the economy Therefore the Administration 's primary economic goal for the 1990s is to achieve the highest possible rate of sustainable economic growth. Government policy must enhance the economy 's potential for growth and ensure that its potential is more often fully utilized than in previous decades. Keeping inflation in check is essential to achieve this goal. In designing policies to meet this goal it is important to be ambitious but realistic. Setting the Nation 's sights too low guarantees mediocre performance. Setting hopelessly unrealistic goals guarantees disappointment Economic research and the policy experiences of the 1970s and 1980s have led to an improved understanding of the appropriate role for the Federal Government in achieving the Nation 's goals. In general government 's role should be modest with limited targeted and cost-effective policies aimed at augmenting the economic power of the private sector. The Federal Government 's monetary and fiscal policies should be systematic and credible and should focus on the long run. The demonstrated success of free markets has brought a new appreciation of the power of economic incentives and has encouraged efforts to maintain maximum flexibility in markets. An increasingly integrated global economy has demonstrated the simple truth that a freer and more open trading system stimulates worldwide economic growth and rising living standards The Administration 's economic policy principles are designed to achieve the maximum sustainable rate of economic growth both by enhancing the economy 's ability to grow and by ensuring that its potential is more fully utilized than in previous decades. The principles are as follows : Reduce government borrowing by slowing the growth of Federal spending while economic growth raises revenue until the budget is balanced and reduce the national debt thereafter ; Support a credible systematic monetary policy program that sustains maximum economic growth while controlling and reducing inflation ; Remove barriers to innovation investment work and saving in the tax legal and regulatory systems ; Avoid unnecessary regulation and design necessary regulatory programs to harness market forces effectively to serve the Nation 's interest ; and Continue to lead the world to freer trade and more open markets and to support market-oriented reforms around the world Specific programs and proposals to implement these policy principles in the evolving economy of the 1990s are summarized in the balance of this chapter and discussed in detail in the remainder of this Report THE CURRENT EXPANSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS The economy 's performance during has set the stage for a continuation of the expansion into the 1990s. Adjusting for the rebound in farm production from the drought real ( inflation-adjusted ) gross national product ( GNP ) rose percent during the year well below the strong pace of and Significantly pressures for increased inflation evident in were contained The broadest measure of economy-wide inflation the GNP fixedweighted price index rose by percent during down from percent in and about the same as in Continued growth in employment and income in provided new economic opportunities. A substantially better balance between domestic spending and domestic production was achieved Growth in government purchases slowed while net exports and business investment grew more rapidly. Both government and household saving rates rose. These patterns have provided a foundation for sustained strong economic growth The Administration 's outlook is contingent on implementation of the President 's proposals to reduce the Federal budget deficit steadily to zero by fiscal and to reduce the national debt thereafter. It is also contingent on the Federal Reserve maintaining a credible monetary policy program to support strong noninflationary growth. With these policies the Administration projects that the U.S. economy will enjoy sustained growth in at a slightly faster pace than in Real growth is expected to pick up in the second half of relative to the first half. In the economy 's growth rate is expected to increase further as the level of output rises to its full potential ; the growth rate is then anticipated to return gradually to its longer run expected potential pace of about percent. Inflation is anticipated to remain close to its rate in and then to decline gradually in later years The remarkable length of the current expansion by itself does not increase the likelihood of an imminent recession. To be sure occasional episodes of economic contraction will occur in the future. Adverse external events can not be ruled out even in the near term. But with the right economic policies in place expansions in the future can be longer than expansions in the past. The success in containing inflation in this expansion offers an important protection against future recessions. Since World War II sharp increases in inflation have usually caused policy responses or private-sector imbalances that have led to a recession MACROECONOMIC POLICY Economic research and the lessons of the past two decades suggest a macroeconomic strategy for meeting the challenges of the 1990s and beyond. If fiscal and monetary policies are systematic and credible rather than characterized by the frequent exercise of short-sighted discretion strong sustainable noninflationary growth can be achieved Popular accounts of economic ideas typically focus on controversies and areas of disagreement. This focus is particularly common in discussions of macroeconomics where monetarists supply-siders Keynesians new classical macroeconomists and others are often paired off against each other. While such controversies exist and have been important in the development of economic thinking they mask two key areas of consensus concerning macroeconomic policy First agreement is now widespread on the detrimental effects of a short-sighted discretionary approach to macroeconomic policy that attempts neither to lay out policy plans nor to maintain a commitment to such plans. Because policymakers are regularly praised and criticized for short-run developments they experience pressures to approach economic policy from a short-run viewpoint Stating a plan or program as clearly as possible tends to counteract such pressures Second research and experience have demonstrated the great advantages of establishing a credible commitment to a policy plan Improved credibility which is enhanced by achieving stated policy goals and consistently following stated policy principles can favorably affect expectations. It can help resolve the uncertainty that arises when changes in the structure of the economy complicate the interpretation of policy actions. It also enables households and businesses to plan for the future thereby promoting saving investment and economic growth FISCAL POLICY The Administration 's commitment to the principles of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law clearly demonstrated by the President 's actions last fall constitutes an important step toward a credible and systematic fiscal policy. Moreover the Administration supports the principle that any supplemental spending increase in the current fiscal year must be offset by decreases in other parts of the budget The Administration has proposed a new rule for fiscal policy that would extend the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law by requiring the Federal Government to maintain a balanced non-Social Security budget after The projected future surpluses in Social Security could not be spent for other purposes but would be devoted to building reserves through a proposed Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund. This rule would reduce the national debt free up substantial funds for private capital formation and increase economic growth. Higher growth would not only protect the integrity of Social Security by increasing the resources available to cope with the retirement of the baby-boom generation but would also raise national output to meet other private and public needs and wants The Administration remains committed to the principles of low marginal tax rates and a broad tax base developed in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of and the Tax Reform Act of Steady adherence to these principles reduces tax-induced distortions of private incentives and increases the economy 's growth potential MONETARY POLICY Monetary policy should be designed and credibly committed to sustaining strong economic growth and macroeconomic stability while predictably controlling inflation. Changes in the relationship between the monetary aggregates and the economy have made it difficult to be precise or mechanical in designing monetary policy Nevertheless it is important both to state clearly the basic intentions of monetary policy and to recognize the long-run significance of the monetary aggregates as an anchor for price stability. The Federal Reserve generally increases interest rates when inflationary pressures appear to be rising and lowers interest rates when inflationary pressures are abating and recession appears to be more of a threat. Judgment about such factors as inflationary expectations is of course required to determine the degree of inflationary pressures and the size of the appropriate interest rate response. But the demonstrated consistency of the Federal Reserve 's behavior is evolving into a monetary policy procedure with a considerable degree of credibility. That credibility has been enhanced by the strong record of achievement built in the 1980s. The Administration firmly supports the Federal Reserve 's goal of strong non inflationary growth and believes that continued vigilance in controlling inflation is necessary INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC ISSUES Greater international trade and financial flows have fueled economic growth both in the United States and abroad. This increased integration of the world economy has significant implications for macroeconomic policies. Both monetary and fiscal policies in the United States have fundamental effects on exchange rates and trade flows. These policies also affect the economic performance of other economies although to a lesser extent than the U.S. economy itself The first priority of U.S. macroeconomic policy should be to maintain an environment conducive to strong noninflationary growth of the domestic economy. Pursuit of this goal will benefit the U.S. economy and contribute to economic growth and stability abroad. A sustainable trade balance and relatively stable exchange rates are part of such a policy environment International macroeconomic policy coordination can help governments to maximize sustainable growth worldwide while taking into account the spillover effects of domestic policies and their implications for trade flows and exchange rates. The regular economic summits of the G-7 nations ( United States West Germany Japan United Kingdom France Canada and Italy ) provide a framework for the discussion of economic issues of mutual concern This cooperation has been an evolving process but it has achieved some important successes. Economic growth has been strong inflation rates among countries have tended to converge and trade imbalances have declined. These successes argue for continued efforts to improve the international macroeconomic policy coordination process PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH In order to maximize sustainable growth the Federal Government must remove obstacles to saving investing innovating and working. Even the modest changes in growth rates that government policies can create would have a substantial impact on future living standards and on America 's world leadership Over the long haul growth in the Nation 's capacity to produce goods and services depends on increases in the work force and in worker productivity. Productivity growth in turn depends mainly on investment in physical capital ( new buildings and equipment ) intellectual capital ( advances in knowledge and technology ) and human capital ( increases in the skills and abilities of the work force ) Entrepreneurial activity plays a critical catalytic role in starting new businesses and bringing new technology to market Investments in plant equipment technology and education are all more attractive the more robust is economic activity. A strong business climate not only spares people the short-run costs of unemployment and lower living standards but is also conducive to the investment on which their long-run prosperity ultimately depends. Sound fiscal and monetary policies thus enhance economic growth INVESTMENT AND TECHNOLOGY In order to enhance the economy 's long-run health the Federal Government should aim for a prosperity marked by a high ratio of investment to GNP through policies that reduce obstacles to both saving and investment. U.S. investment in physical capital increased in the 1980s but it remains low by international standards Moreover the United States invests a smaller fraction of its GNP in nondefense research and development which builds intellectual capital than some of its major competitors. If the Nation is to achieve robust economic growth government policy must create a climate in which private firms find it attractive to make productive investments both in physical and intellectual capital. The government should also support research that is likely to have widespread societal benefits but that no individual firm would have the incentive to undertake A key item on the Administration 's economic agenda reducing the tax rate on capital gains will enhance all types of investment Cutting the capital gains tax rate will lower the cost of investment funds and thus stimulate investment. Much of the reward to entrepreneurial activity such as generating new technology and bringing it to market comes in the form of an increase in the value of businesses. Reducing the capital gains tax rate will thus reward these efforts and encourage invention and innovation The Administration has recommended substantial increases in Federal investment in research that has broad relevance and that would be underfunded by the private sector alone. Basic research builds the knowledge base on which technological progress depends and augments the ability of U.S. universities to train the scientists and engineers in whose hands the Nation 's technological future rests. In order to enhance incentives for private investment in the Nation 's intellectual capital the Administration also proposes to make permanent the research and experimentation tax credit and will work to remove unnecessary legal and regulatory barriers to innovation But the Administration remains strongly opposed to any sort of industrial policy which would involve second-guessing private in- vestment decisions by selecting particular firms industries or commercial technologies for favorable tax treatment or direct subsidies. History provides strong support for the view that private market participants who have profits and jobs at stake have sharper incentives and better information than government decisionmakers and as a consequence make sounder investment decisions Similarly the Administration recognizes that participation in an efficient global capital market benefits all nations. Foreign capital inflows amounting to about one-sixth of U.S. domestic investment in recent years have strengthened investment and productivity in the United States. The Administration strongly opposes the erection of barriers to foreign investment in the United States and is continuing to work to reduce formal and informal barriers to investment throughout the world Foreign direct investment in the United States has grown rapidly in recent years in large part because America has become a more attractive country in which to invest. Despite this growth foreign-owned firms play a smaller role in the U.S. economy than in the economies of many other industrialized nations. Moreover U.S. companies continue to make substantial investments abroad Increases in direct investment by U.S. and foreign firms reflect the increasing integration of the global economy and benefit both host and investor nations NATIONAL SAVING Business households and governments all save at a lower rate in the United States than their counterparts in other advanced economies. Moreover during the 1980s the U.S. national saving rate the sum of what households businesses and governments save was substantially below its average over the previous three decades. A higher rate of national saving will reduce the cost of investment funds to U.S. firms. A lower cost of capital will in turn encourage investment enhance productivity and spur growth The most direct and important step that can be taken to increase U.S. national saving is to reduce the Federal budget deficit. The Administration 's new rule for fiscal policy discussed above will eliminate the budget deficit and then reduce the national debt. The Administration 's program for increasing national saving also includes policies to increase private saving by reducing the tax rate on capital gains and by establishing Family Savings Accounts to encourage saving for pre-retirement objectives HUMAN RESOURCES The new jobs created by the U.S. economy increasingly require high levels of skills and education and the growth of the working- age population is slowing. Together these trends are creating a new set of labor market concerns. The future may well bring occasional episodes of cyclical unemployment associated with shortfalls in the demand for labor. But concerns about the availability of jobs that have dominated macroeconomic policy discussion since the Great Depression are giving way to new concerns about the availability of workers and skills The U.S. economy will continue to benefit significantly from the remarkable flexibility of its labor markets. Employers and workers have generally adapted well to labor market changes including the entry of the baby-boom generation and the sharp increase in female labor force participation. However the Federal Government can lead in promoting excellence in education and can help to bring less advantaged groups into the economic mainstream thereby expanding the supply of workers and skills Increasing the skills of the Nation 's work force building human capital requires improving the performance of the Nation 's elementary and secondary schools. By international standards U.S outlays for education are high but U.S. students regularly do less well than their peers abroad on tests of knowledge and achievement. The most pressing task therefore is not to invest more money in education but to invest more effectively. Elementary and secondary education is primarily a State and local responsibility but the Federal Government and the private sector can play important leadership roles Last fall the President called together the Nation 's Governors and the Cabinet to lay the foundation for a national performanceoriented education policy. This historic summit only the third of its kind in U.S. history has already led to an ambitious set of national education goals. The proposed Educational Excellence Act and other Administration iniatives seek to give students and their families more choice to give local schools more flexibility and to hold school systems accountable for the performance of their students. The Administration 's budget calls for increased funding for education programs. Particularly large increases are targeted for Head Start to help prepare young children from disadvantaged families for effective learning In order to expand economic opportunity at both the individual and national levels the Administration has supported a number of initiatives designed to bring the disadvantaged into the economic mainstream. These include the Americans with Disabilities Act increased funding for assistance to the homeless reforms of welfare and job training programs and programs designed to increase homeownership and the supply of affordable housing and to bring jobs to depressed inner cities REGULATORY POLICY All levels of government engage in regulation that potentially serves the public interest. But too many regulatory programs have pursued unrealistic goals with excessively costly methods and offered society only meager benefits in exchange for slower growth higher prices and lower living standards PRINCIPLES OF REGULATORY POLICY A key function of government in a private enterprise economy is to construct a legal framework that enhances the health and vigor of the private sector. Sensible and vigorously enforced antitrust policies promote competition which in turn reduces prices and spurs innovation. Innovation is also encouraged by policies that protect intellectual property from unauthorized use. Current product liability law often discourages innovation by imposing unrealistic safety standards on new products. The Administration has proposed reforms that would restore balance to this area of the law While it may seem obvious that governments should not try to do what the private sector can do better this important principle is often ignored in practice. Government regulation can rarely improve on well-functioning private markets ; it usually makes things much worse. The renewed vigor of industries that were deregulated during the 1980s including telephone equipment airlines overnight delivery services and trucking has made clear how regulation hobbles competitive markets and thus inflates costs and prices reduces consumer choice discourages innovation and ultimately eliminates jobs Government action may be called for where competitive private markets do not exist or can not function. For example even though many consumers may be willing to pay for cleaner air no unregulated private economy has a market in which they can do so Imperfections in private markets do not suffice to justify regulation however. It must be demonstrated that these imperfections can be addressed by a regulatory policy itself inevitably imperfect with benefits that exceed its costs. Regulatory targets should be chosen by careful cost-benefit analysis and the methods of regulation should minimize the cost and disruption of reaching their targets. Cost-minimization often requires carefully structuring the incentives faced by the private sector as well as granting firms and their workers flexibility in meeting regulatory requirements. Government policies should generally be designed to strengthen not weaken market forces and where appropriate to harness them in the public interest THE ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY These principles underlie the Administration 's policies toward the environment. The United States can and must have both a sound growing economy and a healthy environment. Economic growth is critical to provide the resources necessary to protect the environment ; the wealthiest nations are the most willing and able to devote substantial resources to environmental protection. But environmental policies that pursue unrealistic goals through inflexible regulation waste the Nation 's valuable resources. Such poorly designed programs not only slow economic growth and eliminate jobs ; their excessive costs also reduce support for the goal of environmental protection The economy and the environment both benefit if the goals of environmental programs are selected through careful cost-benefit analysis and are pursued through flexible programs that enhance the private sector 's incentives to minimize costs. The Administration 's proposed amendments to the Clean Air Act apply this approach. While the Administration plan calls for significant reductions in automobile emissions it explicitly rejects the application of unreasonably stringent emissions standards whose costs would be far out of proportion to their benefits ; other measures can achieve similar goals at much lower costs. The Administration 's proposal for acid rain control employs tradable emissions allowances a costminimizing approach advocated in this Report for more than a decade The Administration 's proposals for reform of pesticide regulation also reflect its principles of regulatory policy. An unworkable zerorisk standard now applies to processed foods. The Administration proposes employing instead the standards that apply to unprocessed foods and that balance benefits and risks of pesticide use. The Administration proposal would also strengthen and simplify the pesticide regulation process. These proposals would benefit both the public health and the agricultural economy Discussions of many environmental concerns including the possibility that human activity may lead to future changes in the Earth 's climate are dominated by scientific and economic uncertainty. In such areas the Federal Government has an important role to play in supporting research to develop the knowledge base that is critical to intelligent decisionmaking. This Administration has proposed substantial increases in funding for scientific research on the processes that might lead to future climate change Many feel the costs of substantial reductions in the emissions that might produce global warming are high ; much better information on the corresponding benefits is necessary to decide if those costs should be incurred FINANCIAL MARKETS When financial markets and institutions work well they encourage saving and channel it efficiently into the most productive investments thus stimulating economic growth and contributing to rising living standards. The Federal Government must design its regulation of financial markets and institutions carefully to ensure the soundness of the U.S. financial system while encouraging competition and innovation. This Administration 's prompt actions to resolve the savings and loan crisis have laid a solid foundation for further progress and reform GROWTH AND MARKET REFORM IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY Political and economic events in the 1980s underscored the growing importance of free markets and an open trading system to economic growth and prosperity. Revolutionary political and economic change is occurring in Eastern Europe. Economic reforms in some of the severely indebted developing countries aided by new initiatives to reduce debt burdens hold the promise of reviving growth The market-oriented economies of Asia have grown rapidly. The move in Western Europe toward a single market by can benefit producers and consumers worldwide TOWARD FREE TRADE AND OPEN MARKETS As global integration advances and competition intensifies the United States must increase its efforts to lead the world toward a system of free trade and open markets. The Administration remains strongly committed to those efforts and staunchly opposed to managed trade. That commitment means actively removing trade barriers and resisting inevitable calls for protection thereby opening markets not closing them The President 's highest priority in trade policy is to further the role of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) as a rules-based system for liberalizing trade and settling trade disputes. Widening the scope of products and practices covered by GATT is especially important to move the world toward marketoriented trade. U.S. proposals in the current Uruguay Round negotiations include bold workable plans for integrating agriculture and services into the GATT system for establishing common rules governing intellectual property rights and for reducing the barriers to trade-related investment The removal of barriers to the movement of goods capital and labor among the countries of the European Community ( EC ) by will increase the productive potential of the economies of those countries. The reduced barriers can also benefit Americans by creating a larger more integrated market for U.S. goods and by lowering prices to consumers as European goods are produced more efficiently. While concerns that economic integration under the EC initiatives will lead to a Fortress Europe are exaggerated it is essential that the United States remain vigilant in monitoring the EC directives to ensure that new barriers are not raised to trade with the United States and other countries outside the EC ENCOURAGING ECONOMIC CHANGE ABROAD Market-oriented reforms are essential to improving living standards in the nations of Eastern Europe. These reforms will not only increase output they will give families the freedom to choose the products they want rather than having to accept what central planners want them to have. Reforms underway in some countries demonstrate a recognition of this fact : Poland in particular has undertaken ambitious reforms. Along the way such reforms may at times be difficult and painful but they must be comprehensive to succeed In heavily indebted developing countries only continued implementation of appropriate macroeconomic policies and reforms that strengthen market forces can produce strong economic growth. Negotiated reductions in debt burdens can encourage such reforms and help to ensure their success The Administration is deeply committed to supporting marketoriented reforms around the world. The major responsibility for their success rests with the peoples of these countries themselves and their ability and desire to implement the measures necessary to improve their economies. In Eastern Europe the United States has taken an initiative in providing technical and financial assistance in order to increase the likelihood of success. For developing countries the United States continues to lead in forming and implementing a strategy of debt restructuring and in supporting economic reforms that aim to revive economic growth and to restore access to world capital markets CONCLUSION The economic goal prescribed by the Employment Act of a goal that is echoed in this Report was " maximum employment production and purchasing power/ ' Sustained robust growth will raise living standards maintain the Nation 's position of global leadership bring greater opportunity to Americans and provide the resources necessary to make progress toward satisfying an array of public and private needs and wants. But as this Report endeavors to explain the experience of four decades has led to a better understanding of how to achieve these goals In pursuing these goals the United States will confront a host of economic challenges and opportunities in the next decade. The Federal Government must remove impediments to national saving investment and innovation to create an environment in which rapid growth can occur. Educational excellence especially in the K-12 grades must be promoted. The flexibility of U.S. labor markets must be preserved. Employment income housing and education opportunities available to disadvantaged Americans must be enhanced. The Nation must confront persistent environmental problems and new global concerns. The continuing integration of the world economy has increased the importance of free markets and an open trading system and of resisting misguided calls for protectionism. Free people working producing innovating investing and consuming in free competitive markets both domestic and international are the engine driving economic growth It would be unrealistic to expect all of these issues to have been resolved by the end of the 1990s. The successes of the 1980s have left the Nation with the economic capability to make significant progress but obstacles remain. The benefits to surmounting these obstacles will raise the quality of life in the United States for present and future generations. These benefits will spread worldwide if the United States is able to maintain its international economic and political leadership. As the 1980s and in particular have shown America 's response to these challenges can make a critical difference to the well-being of people all over the world CHAPTER Developments in and Future Prospects THE UNITED STATES STARTED the eighth consecutive year of economic expansion during adding another months to what was already the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history The duration of this expansion has been remarkable and steady fiscal and monetary policies aimed at strong noninflationary growth have been essential for this achievement The Administration forecasts that growth will continue in Historical and international evidence shows that economic expansions do not die of old age. Expansions end because of particular external shocks to the economy policy errors or widespread imbalances such as an overaccumulation of inventories developing throughout the economy. Such imbalances were not evident in and with a continuation of fiscal and monetary policies aimed at deficit reduction and strong noninflationary growth the chances of policy errors are reduced. Moreover containing inflation during has set the stage for both sustained economic growth and continued reductions in inflation in the 1990s THE U.S. ECONOMY IN Adjusting for the effects of the drought real gross national product ( GNP ) grew percent during a more moderate pace than the very rapid rates of percent in and percent in ( Chart ) ( Table includes an explanation of the effects of the drought on GNP. ) The civilian unemployment rate remained low throughout the year ending the year at percent. The average unemployment rate for also percent was at its lowest level since Moreover inflation was contained : the fixedweighted GNP price index increased percent over the year down from percent in FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICIES DURING Fiscal and monetary policies played important roles in the economic performance of The path of fiscal policy reflected the Administration 's commitment to deficit reduction without new taxes. The near-term emphasis of monetary policy shifted in the Chart GROWTH OF REAL GNP. GNP growth moderated in following two years of rapid expansion Percent change ( Q4/Q4 ) Hi Drought-adjusted in and Not drought-adjusted Source : Department of Commerce TABLE Growth of Real GNP and Components | Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter GNP GNP drought-adjusted Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Government purchases of goods and services Annual level billions of dollars Inventory investment Net exports of goods and services Preliminary Mote. The loss of farm output from the drought lowered GNP in the last three quarters of reaching a loss of $ billion in the fourth quarter. The loss reduced real GNP growth in by percentage point. The subsequent rebound of farm production to more normal levels added approximately the same amount to growth in Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis spring of During and early monetary policy had aimed to keep inflation in check. By the spring of signs that economic growth was slowing and inflation was abating led to an easing of monetary policy Fiscal Policy Real Federal purchases of goods and services as measured in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) fell as a fraction of real GNP in calendar continuing a trend that began in ( Chart ) Reducing the Federal deficit helps to raise national saving and economic growth and is part of the Administration 's strategy to achieve better long-run economic performance. Hence controlling Federal spending remained a priority throughout the year despite the moderate slowing of economic activity during the latter half of Chart REAL FEDERAL PURCHASES. Real Federal purchases of goods and services continued to fall as a percent of real GNP in Percent IV Note : Transactions of the Commodity Credit Corporation are excluded Source : Department of Commerce An important aspect of fiscal policy during was the higher yield of the individual income tax system : personal income tax receipts as a percentage of personal income were above forecasts This may partly reflect better compliance as a result of the tax rate reductions in the 1980s. Federal receipts as measured in the NIPA increased by $ billion in calendar reaching a total of $ billion. The increased revenues stemmed primarily from higher personal income tax and social insurance tax receipts During the last quarter of fiscal policy reflected the formulation of the budget for fiscal The President had submitted initial proposals in February and reached agreement with the Congress in April on a budget plan of spending restraint that met the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ( GRH ) deficit target for fiscal As the year progressed however the Congress did not implement the April agreement. Indeed by the start of the fiscal year in October the Congress had not passed most of the fiscal appropriations bills or budget reconciliation legislation In the absence of a completed budget two successive continuing resolutions provided funds for Federal activities. The Administration estimated that the resulting deficit for fiscal exceeded the allowable GRH target by $ billion. Following the procedures in the GRH law the President then ordered a sequester a mandatory reduction in budget resources designed to reduce outlays during the fiscal year by $ billion. ( Box in Chapter of this Report contains a detailed discussion of the sequester in fiscal ) Further in the absence of a legislated budget containing genuine deficit reduction the President announced his willingness to operate with a sequester for the entire fiscal year if necessary The Reconciliation Act passed by the Congress and signed by the President in December met the Administration 's goals for deficit reduction. Importantly the reduced outlays during the period were not restored : the President issued a revised sequester order intended to reduce outlays by $ billion the equivalent of the $ billion sequester for roughly one-third of the fiscal year Federal purchases of goods and services measured on a NIPA basis totaled $ billion in calendar compared with about $ billion each in and Other expenditures by the Federal Government transfer payments grants to State and local governments net interest paid and so on reached $ billion in Thus expenditures by the Federal sector totaled $ billion for an increase of $ billion over The Federal Government budget deficit as measured by the NIPA was $ billion The Administration 's goals for fiscal policy in included a reduction in the tax rate on capital gains. As a result of tax reform in the United States now taxes capital gains at a rate as high as that on other income. During its consideration of the budget the Congress did not enact either the President 's proposal for capital gains tax rate reductions or any of several congressional alternatives Much of the debate over a cut in the capital gains tax rate concerned its effect on the Federal budget. It is now generally agreed that these capital gains tax rate proposals would raise revenue in the short run by encouraging the sale of previously " locked-in " assets. There is however debate over their long-run impact. A review of the available studies of this topic suggests that a careful ly designed capital gains tax rate reduction is not likely to lose revenue in the long run. Moreover these studies do not include the beneficial effects of a capital gains tax rate cut on economic growth. By reducing the after-tax cost of capital a cut in the capital gains tax rate will augment saving and investment and is likely to generate enough extra revenue to avoid long-run revenue losses. A reduction in the capital gains tax rate remains a priority for Administration fiscal policy in Monetary Policy The increased levels of resource utilization associated with the vigorous economic expansion during and created a concern by many that inflation would accelerate. To reduce the threat of rising inflation the Federal Reserve began to tighten monetary policy in the spring of and continued to tighten until the spring of In February the Federal Reserve announced ranges of growth for monetary and credit aggregates for the year. The ranges were to percent for M2 3x/2 to % percent for M3 and 6V2 to lOVfe percent for the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors. ( Box in Chapter of this Report contains definitions of the monetary aggregates. ) The range for M2 was percentage point lower than that for and the range for M3 was one-half percentage point lower. In establishing the ranges the Federal Reserve noted that slower growth of money and credit was consistent with its goal of reduced inflation. At the same time the Federal Reserve viewed the ranges of money growth as being sufficient to accommodate continued economic growth during Over the early part of M2 and M3 were at or below the lower bounds of their ranges The Federal Reserve continued to tighten policy by reducing the availability of bank reserves in early This tightening raised short-term interest rates and damped growth of money and credit ; it can be seen in the increase in the key Federal funds interest rate the rate on overnight interbank credit ( Chart ) Between the spring of and the spring of the Federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates rose about percentage points Interest rates on retail bank deposits also increased over this period but by considerably less than market rates raising the " opportunity cost " of holding M2 deposits ( Chart ) The opportunity cost of M2 is defined as the difference between the return on an alternative asset measured here as the interest rate on 3-month Treasury bills and the average interest rate paid on the components of M2. That is the opportunity cost is the interest forgone by holding funds in the form of M2 deposits rather than placing them in the market. The opportunity cost of M2 rose from about percentage point in early to around percentage points by early and was the major factor behind the slow growth of M2 over the first months of During the following months households evidently drew down balances in order to meet unexpectedly large tax liabilities. As a result M2 barely grew in April and actually contracted in May Chart FEDERAL FUNDS RATE. Federal Reserve actions raised the Federal funds rate in and early but lowered it in the spring of as inflation pressures abated Percent per annum Note : Data are quarterly Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Chart M2 OPPORTUNITY COST. The opportunity cost of holding M2 deposits peaked in the first quarter of and declined over the rest of the year Percentage points Note : Data are 2-quarter moving averages Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System By the spring a number of factors suggested that the balance of risks was shifting from accelerating inflation to sluggish growth These factors included the following : the slow growth of the mone- tary aggregates moderating demands for goods and services the strength of the dollar on foreign exchange markets a lack of acceleration in wages and total compensation rates and a flattening of commodity prices. Low long-term interest rates relative to shortterm interest rates added to the evidence. A low or negative spread between long-term and short-term interest rates is often viewed as an indicator that monetary policy is putting downward pressure on inflation. In the past it has also frequently preceded recessions Accordingly the Federal Reserve began to increase the availability of reserves to depository institutions. After remaining relatively flat from March through May the Federal funds rate fell more than ll/2 percentage points in the following months bringing the rate to about 81A percent by early January of Other shortterm market interest rates also declined substantially Lower market interest rates boosted the demand for monetary assets. Returns on M2 deposits fell less rapidly than did market interest rates and the opportunity cost of M2 fell significantly. M2 was also increased by a rebuilding of tax-depleted balances. Over the May-to-December period M2 growth averaged about percent at an annual rate a sharp pickup from the 0.2-percent average over the first months of the year. For the year as a whole M2 growth was about percent a little below the middle of its 3percent to 7-percent target range ( Chart ) M3 growth was also relatively weak over the first part of the year. In contrast to M2 growth however expansion of M3 remained sluggish following the easing of Federal Reserve policy over the second part of the year. A number of thrift institutions restrained growth in their balance sheets in order to comply with the more stringent capital requirements mandated by the Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of For the year as a whole M3 expanded only percent slightly below the lower limit of its 3x/2 percent to 7l/2 percent target range ( Chart ) GROWTH OF GNP AND COMPONENTS The more moderate expansion of real GNP between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of reflected slower growth of interest-sensitive sectors ( consumption of durables and residential investment ) and of government purchases. In addition increased national saving contributed to further improvements in net exports and continued growth of business investment even in the face of higher interest rates. These tendencies represent continued progress toward increased national saving and investment better balance between domestic spending and domestic production and a foundation for improved performance in the 1990s Chart M2 AND M3. While M2 finished the year within its target range M3 was slightly below at the end of Billions of dollars M2 % Dec June Mar Sept Dec Billions of dollars M3 7-1/2 % 3-1/2 % Dec Mar Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System June Sept Dec Consumption and Saving Because consumption expenditures constitute about two-thirds of GNP changes in consumption are important influences on GNP growth. The growth of real personal consumption expenditures slowed to a 2.3-percent pace in down from percent in ( Table ) Growth in real personal disposable income was percent in close to the 4.0-percent pace of Consequently the less rapid rise in personal outlays was reflected as an increase in the saving rate compared to As Chart shows the personal saving rate moved up to percent in substantially above its low of percent. Nevertheless it remained considerably lower than its 7.2-percent average for the period The slower growth of overall consumption purchases reflected continued strength in expenditures on services but weaker growth in purchases of durable and nondurable goods. Among services real purchases of medical care continued to increase at a particularly strong pace. The weakness in purchases of durables largely reflected sluggish automobile sales. Over the first two quarters of the year real spending on motor vehicles and parts fell below the average pace for In the third quarter auto sales jumped Chart PERSONAL SAVING RATE its historical average The personal saving rate rose above its low but remained below Percent of disposable personal income Average Note : Data are quarterly Source : Department of Commerce owing to the sales incentive programs introduced toward the end of the model year. In the fourth quarter auto sales slumped again. For the year as a whole auto sales fell from about million units in to about million units in the slowest rate since Residential Investment Housing investment declined in as higher mortgage interest rates reduced demand. As Chart shows rates on adjustable-rate mortgages rose from around percent in April to about percent by June before easing over the rest of the year. Yields on fixed-rate mortgages rose less but nonetheless in averaged nearly percentage point above their levels in Sales of existing single-family homes were million units in compared with million units the previous year. Likewise sales of new single-family homes declined by percent from to In response to lower sales housing starts tumbled from a recent peak of million units in to about million units in the lowest rate since Similarly expenditures on real residential investment in the NIPA fell percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Chart MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES. Mortgage interest rates rose in and early reducing housing demand ; rates fell starting in the spring of Percent per annum Adjustable Rate Note : Data are quarterly effective rates Source : Federal Housing Finance Board Nonresidential Fixed Investment Nonresidential fixed investment investment by firms in structures and equipment is an important determinant of economic performance. Over the business cycle it is among the most volatile components of spending. Over longer periods it is a critical input to economic growth. Real nonresidential fixed investment rose a solid percent in The increase was spurred by the relatively high levels of capacity utilization and the need for firms to enhance their productivity in an increasingly competitive world economy. A Department of Commerce survey suggests that gains in investment spending during were widespread with particularly strong gains occurring in nondurable goods manufacturing and in nonmanufacturing industries The rise in fixed investment was entirely in equipment rather than in structures. Computer purchases were particularly robust rebounding from a lull late in Spending on most categories of structures was weak. Construction earlier in the 1980s may have been boosted by accelerated depreciation allowances which were reduced by the Tax Reform Act of In addition while energy prices rose temporarily during late and early lower average energy prices since the mid-1980s have contributed to the sluggishness in oil and gas well drilling Inventory Investment Like nonresidential fixed investment inventories are an important contributor to the cyclical behavior of the economy. Since the mid-1980s inventory-sales ratios have declined owing at least in part to improved inventory management techniques and at the end of the inventory-sales ratio remained close to the level of the previous years ( Chart ) From a macroeconomic perspective these lower ratios are welcome because they reduce the risk of widespread inventory imbalances which in the past have often been associated with recessions Chart REAL INVENTORY-SALES RATIO. During most of the 1980s the inventory-sales ratio for the nonfarm business sector declined Ratio Note : Data are quarterly Source : Department of Commerce In increased real inventory investment contributed $ billion to growth in real GNP on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis. Inventories in the farm sector fell at an annual rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter of but rose $ billion in the fourth quarter of The swing in accumulation of farm inventories thus contributed $ billion to GNP growth The pace of nonfarm inventory investment in the fourth quarter was below the level in the fourth quarter of but picked up appreciably from the pace in the third quarter. Nonfarm inventories increased $ billion in the fourth quarter up from $ billion in the third quarter. The swing in inventory accumulation largely reflected developments in the auto sector which experienced sluggish demand in Government Purchases Federal State and local government purchases of goods and services which account for close to percent of GNP were essentially flat in real terms in A moderate 2.5-percent increase in purchases by State and local units offset a 3.0-percent decline by the Federal Government. As discussed above the reduction in real Federal purchases was a result of the effort to reduce the Federal budget deficit Exports and Imports The shortage of national saving relative to investment has been a fundamental source of the large trade deficit of the United States in recent years. ( This topic is discussed in Chapter of this Report. ) The difference between U.S. imports and exports in real terms the measure of the trade gap most relevant for explaining growth of real output declined substantially in the first quarter of and remained roughly flat thereafter. In part these improvements reflected the continued lagged effects of the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar between and This dollar depreciation tended to reduce the price of U.S. exports on world markets and to increase the domestic price of imports. It thus boosted demand for exports and restrained demand for imports. In addition U.S. firms had responded to difficult business conditions during the mid-1980s when the dollar was quite strong by taking steps to boost productivity and control costs. The cumulative effect of these measures by the end of the decade was to strengthen the competitive position of U.S. firms in world markets. Strong growth in production and incomes in foreign industrial countries also contributed to the demand for U.S. exports and the reduced trade deficit. ( See Box for a discussion of recent economic performance in other industrial economies. ) In addition slower growth of domestic demand in the United States probably restrained imports Real U.S. exports of merchandise and services reached an alltime high during and the United States regained its position as the world 's leading exporter. The deficit on net exports in dollars totaled $ billion for the year less than one-half the level of $ billion reached in In the second half of though there were signs that the pace of improvement of the U.S external balance was not continuing Box International Comparisons of Economic Performance UJSL economic performance compares favorably with that of other industrial countries. The table below presents an economic smnniary for the United States and six other industrialized countries ( collectively known as the Group of Seven * or G< ~ ) Hie United States has had relatively low consumer inflation rates ( as measured by the CPI ) and excellent growth of industrial production gross domestic product ( GDP ) and employment Indeed during the current expansion the United States has generated more new employment than Canada Japan and Western Europe combined Recently US. unemployment and inflation rates were again low by international standards and real GDP per capita remained the highest in the G-7 * Economic Performance in the United States &nd other G-7 Nations H Industrial production m ? fiapfoymerit Average annual percent change Canada Fraust, West fiSiaany * Italy,,,. * } m& * < ~ ~ ~ ~ ^ United Kfncrfon } * Suited Stales ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ^ <. 1J5 ' SJ ts 4J 4J IJ 2J " j U ZA i $ Nsniptoyment rate1 inflation rate * real GOP per capita3 Percent 7J ^ 5J i,3 * 2J 7J to.i as ^ IIS55 i& ! IW3 Civilian unemployment rate fourth quarter ^ Percent change in CPI December to December * TWrd partrdata * PercenTchangeinCPI November to November Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and International Trade Administration ) Department of tabor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic fefclssrs The nominal net export deficit fell to $ billion in down from deficits of $ billion in and $ billion in Another broad measure of external imbalances known as the current account deficit averaged $ billion at an annual rate over the first three quarters of compared with totals of $ billion in and $ billion in BUSINESS CONDITIONS Production and employment increased at a good pace in and capacity utilization remained high. In addition the farm sector recovered from the effects of the drought in Nevertheless profitability softened somewhat and productivity growth slowed Profits Before-tax profits of nonfinancial corporations declined from $ billion in to $ billion at an annual rate over the first three quarters of The decline in profitability reflected a smaller rise in prices per unit of output than in costs per unit of output. Price increases may have been restrained in part by the strength in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and costs were boosted as labor productivity rose somewhat less rapidly than in The manufacturing sector accounted for much of the weakness in nonfinancial corporate profitability. Profitability of auto manufacturers was particularly low with losses in the second and third quarters. In the financial sector profits in were hurt by the effects of natural disasters on insurance company balance sheets Productivity Productivity in the nonfarm private business sector continued to increase in likely reflecting continued capital investments by firms. The 0.8-percent annual rate of increase over the first three quarters however was somewhat lower than over the previous several years. To some extent this reflects the more moderate pace of output growth in compared with the previous years. Many firms take a long-run view and are reluctant to release skilled workers as economic growth slows. This labor " hoarding " produces smaller increases in output per hour. Productivity increases in the manufacturing sector at an average annual rate of percent over the first three quarters were stronger than in the overall nonfarm sector but also were somewhat weaker than in previous years Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization The industrial sector is a bellwether of the economy and accounts for roughly one-fifth of civilian employment. In and overall production of manufacturing mining and utility firms expanded at an average annual rate of percent. Expansion of industrial production slowed to percent in partly owing to the less rapid expansion of the overall economy. Another major factor influencing industrial production in the second half of the year was the slower rate of improvement of the U.S. external balance since many U.S.-manufactured goods are sold on international markets The slower pace of industrial production combined with expansion of productive capacity to reduce rates of capacity utilization in Overall the Federal Reserve 's measure of capacity utilization declined from its peak of percent in January to percent by December. Some industries showed larger reductions. For example operating rates for iron and steel mills which reached a peak of percent in October had fallen percentage points by November probably influenced in part by the slowdown in auto manufacturing. Production in many industries such as paper chemicals rubber and nonelectrical machinery ( which includes computers ) held steady or increased. But in a number of these industries firms added capacity even more rapidly leading to reduced operating rates The Farm Economy While employing a relatively small fraction of the labor force the agricultural sector plays a vital role in the economy. Early in the 1980s the U.S. farm economy faced serious economic problems but the resurgence of the farm sector since the mid-1980s is providing a sound foundation for the next decade The crop year was generally good even though inadequate rainfall in some areas held crop yields somewhat below trend Overall production of major commodities was up substantially from the low levels of the previous year and net farm income reached a record $ billion up percent from Land values the major component of the farm balance sheet increased for the third consecutive year up percent from Farm prices for major crops declined from the peak levels reached after the drought but remained high relative to the previous several years. Livestock prices stayed firm during the year. Higher crop prices reduce government payments to farmers These payments boosted by drought-relief payments remained high by historical standards but fell by percent from Direct payments to farmers were about $ billion or about percent of gross farm income Farm trade also improved. Agricultural exports in fiscal totaled about million tons were valued at $ billion and contributed to an agricultural trade surplus of $ billion. In fiscal exports were only million tons with a value of $ billion. U.S. market shares of world agricultural trade in fiscal are projected at percent for wheat and percent for coarse grains down slightly for wheat from the previous year and about the same for coarse grains. In both cases shares are substantially higher than in the mid-1980s Employment Expanding production was accompanied by rising employment levels and a low unemployment rate. Between December and December nearly million employees were added to nonagricultural payrolls. Most of this increase million workers was on private payrolls As mentioned above output of services grew strongly in and employment increases totaling about million mirrored this growth. Employment also rose in wholesale trade retail trade and construction. But manufacturing employment was stagnant reflecting the weak growth of production As noted above the civilian unemployment rate averaged percent its lowest since Unemployment rates improved for most major demographic groups including blacks women and teenagers. The rate for blacks ( percent ) was the lowest since while that of Hispanics ( percent ) was the lowest since the series began in During the 1980s the gap between adult male and adult female unemployment rates essentially vanished. In addition the unemployment rate for teenagers was the lowest since For those who became unemployed the median duration of unemployment was weeks compared to weeks in when the demand for labor was relatively weak in the wake of the recession. The proportion of unemployed persons who lost their jobs rather than left voluntarily was percent compared with percent in WAGES AND PRICES Relatively low unemployment rates implied firm labor market conditions in Wage increases were quite low in and partly because of the temporarily low level of inflation. Increases in labor compensation in and were above the lows of and Boosted by an increase in Social Security tax rates the employment cost index of labor compensation rose percent over and a slightly lower percent over Labor compensation costs consist of wages and salaries and benefits. Benefits include items such as employers ' health disability and life insurance contributions ; contributions to Social Security and retirement plans ; and compensation paid during vacations. The increase in the wages and salaries component of the employment cost index rose moderately from percent in to percent in The increase in benefit costs rose more sharply from percent in to percent in and declined slightly to percent for Nearly all of the acceleration in benefit costs can be traced to rising health insurance premiums Inflation remained moderate in The " core " CPI a measure that excludes volatile food and energy prices rose percent compared with percent in ( The CPI is a broad measure of the cost of a market basket of goods and services purchased by a typical urban consumer. ) Within the CPI costs of medical care increased sharply. Prices for shelter a major part of household budgets rose more moderately as did apparel prices Consumer food and energy prices rose sharply over the early part of the year owing to the drought and to higher oil prices Over the first months of consumer prices for gasoline rose at an annual rate of about percent. Later in the year the situation in agricultural and energy markets improved considerably From July to December consumer gasoline prices fell percent Including food and energy prices the CPI increased percent essentially the same as the pace in Movements in the finished goods producer price index a measure of the costs of domestic goods used as inputs by businesses were also dominated by developments in food and energy markets During the first quarter prices of finished foods jumped percent at an annual rate following a 5.7-percent rise during These striking increases stemmed mainly from even larger 14.2percent increases in food prices at the crude materials level during and 16.9-percent increases during the first quarter of as the severe drought during curtailed food supplies. Over the following two quarters however prices of crude food materials declined steeply as a rebound in farm production began to show through in market prices and finished consumer food prices declined in response Producer prices for finished energy products rose percent at an annual rate over the first half of This increase stemmed in part from a reduction in production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ; from disruptions of production and distribution caused by the oil spill in Alaska a refinery fire in California and an accident on a North Sea oil rig ; and from rising world demand. These events led crude oil prices to rise at an annual rate of percent between January and June. Between June and December however producers ' finished energy prices declined percent at an annual rate reflecting a 13.9-percent fall in crude prices SUMMARY OF The economy 's continued expansion in set the stage for sound economic performance in the 1990s Real GNP grew for the seventh straight year in and inflation remained under control Nearly million jobs were created and the unemployment rate was at its lowest level since Fiscal policy during reflected efforts to reduce the Federal budget deficit. The trend toward slower growth of real Federal spending continued and was bolstered by the sequester during the fourth quarter After tightening early in monetary policy eased over the second half of the year in response to signs of sluggish growth and lower inflation The composition of GNP growth was favorable with less rapid increases in consumption and government spending maintained growth of investment spending and continued improvement in external balances Economic conditions varied somewhat by sector. While the manufacturing sector experienced a slowdown the farm economy maintained steady improvement and services continued to boom THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK The U.S. economy is expected to grow at a sustainable pace through and over the long run the potential for solid growth remains excellent. Assessments of the future inevitably rely heavily on historical experience and a casual reading of the postwar experience may suggest that the very length of the current expansion implies that it must come to a close. A closer look at the historical record however shows that an economic expansion does not come with an expiration date WHY THE EXPANSION IS EXPECTED TO CONTINUE Studies show that as an expansion continues a recession does not automatically become more likely. Put differently the probability of a recession starting during any given month does not rise as the period of expansion lengthens In the postwar period rapidly accelerating inflation has often preceded economic downturns. When inflation becomes intolerable politically or economically there is little choice but to tighten monetary policy which typically brings on a recession. Inflation accelerated in the years before the longest expansion in U.S. history ended in the recession. Inflation also accelerated before the recession. In the late 1970s inflation rose to percent over the months immediately prior to the back-to-back recessions in the early 1980s. High inflation is not only bad per se but can be very costly to reduce. Avoiding an acceleration of inflation such as that which led to the recessions of and is an essential element of sound economic policy In marked contrast to all other expansions in postwar U.S. history inflation in the current expansion has remained moderate and has not accelerated. The costs of relatively steady inflation around percent are far below those imposed by the inflation of a decade ago which averaged percent fluctuated widely and reached a monthly peak of percent. Nonetheless the lower the inflation rate the smaller is the risk of inflation rising to unacceptable levels. Hence over the long run further progress toward price sta bility is desirable. The containment of inflation is a key factor in the Administration forecast for continued expansion in the 1990s The economy is inevitably subjected to a variety of unanticipated events such as changes in foreign demand rapid swings in financial markets or abrupt movements in oil prices. However these events may have less effect on economic activity today than in the past. The service industry is typically less susceptible to such shocks and services have grown in importance in the U.S. economy. In addition U.S. industry has moved to a lower inventory-sales ratio a move that lessens the likelihood that a large inventory overhang will transform shocks into a sustained downturn. Finally deregulation in areas such as energy markets has raised the potential to produce but may also reduce the impact of shocks on the U.S. economy by permitting markets to reallocate economic activity more swiftly A final factor in ending expansions has been errors in economic policy. Because policy operates with a lag and the economy is hard to forecast some misjudgments are unavoidable. The Administration 's principle of systematic and credible fiscal and monetary policies is designed to minimize these policy mistakes by not changing policy frequently on the basis of the economic conditions of the moment or any short-run forecast. To do so would invite and perhaps guarantee costly errors. Instead the goal of policy is to provide a stable environment that will foster strong economic performance over the long haul THE OUTLOOK FOR FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICIES The Administration 's primary economic policy goal is to promote further growth. Containing and eventually reducing inflation is key to achieving this goal. It is not sufficient merely to avoid a recession. Administration policies seek to remove impediments to more rapid growth. Faster growth carries with it expanded employment opportunities an improved atmosphere for the creation of new business and the means for society both to meet its obligations in the present and to provide for future generations Fiscal Policy The projections presented below are contingent upon the successful implementation of the President 's proposed policies. Economic growth will continue to raise Federal receipts and lower the budget deficit However it is essential that continued restraint on the growth of Federal spending permit the deficit to decline leading to a balanced budget in fiscal and to a reduction in the national debt thereafter. In the near term the Administration expects real Federal purchases of goods and services to fall by percent in calendar ( Table ) Purchases of both defense and nondefense goods and services are expected to drop by roughly the same percentage amount nomic growth will continue to raise Federal receipts and narrow the budget deficit TABLE Economic Outlook for Forecast * Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real gross national product GNP implicit price deflator Consumer price index2 Compensation per hour3 Output per hour3 Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases of goods and services State and local purchases of goods and services Fourth quarter level Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Preliminary For urban wage earners and clerical workers Nonfarm business all persons Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Note. Based on seasonally adjusted data Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Recent developments in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have led some to conclude that it will be possible to spend far less on national defense. It is difficult to ascertain the potential size of such a " peace dividend " at this time. Real spending for national defense has already fallen percent over the past years. The Administration 's fiscal budget projects that real defense spending will decline by percent between fiscal and fiscal The President has already proposed reductions of $ billion in budget authority and $ billion in outlays over the next years relative to previously approved levels. Any further reduction can come only after a careful evaluation of the impact of current political events on our national security. If world events negotiations for troop reductions and progress in limiting strategic weapons permit the size of the peace dividend could become substantially larger over time. Regardless of its size any such peace dividend should be used wisely and with careful consideration of the Nation 's domestic and foreign policy priorities. It should not be used to fuel large increases in entitlement programs as occurred after the war in Vietnam. The President has made clear that the first priority use of any peace dividend is to reduce the Federal budget deficit In the longer term it is desirable to do more than just reduce deficits. The Administration 's proposed Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund is designed to guarantee that future consolidated annual Federal budget surpluses will not be used to in- crease government spending but instead will be dedicated to reducing the national debt. Moving away from deficits toward Federal saving will raise the low rate of national saving lower interest rates and increase capital formation. A credible commitment to reduced Federal borrowing will hasten the reduction in interest rates and the increase in investment Monetary Policy The outlook for the economy depends in part on recent and projected monetary policy. Over the second half of the Federal Reserve eased the stance of monetary policy in view of signs of slower economic growth and reduced inflationary pressures. The lower interest rates that resulted from this easing should help to cushion the slowing in spending that became evident in In July the Federal Reserve announced provisional target ranges for growth during of to percent for M2 3V2 to 7l/2 percent for M3 and 6V2 to'10 % percent for domestic nonfmancial sector debt. These provisional ranges are identical to the ranges for The Federal Reserve noted that in view of various economic and financial uncertainties it was unsure whether the velocities of M2 and M3 the ratios of GNP to these aggregates were more likely to rise or fall in The Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) will review these provisional ranges and is expected to announce its decisions on the ranges in February The FOMC will need to consider several factors. First the Federal Reserve regards reasonably stable prices as a prerequisite to achieving its goal of maximum sustainable economic growth. Longrun price stability will require that the targets for money growth be gradually reduced in future years Second short-run velocity developments are likely to differ considerably from the longer run trends. Given the substantial declines in market interest rates over and the associated fall in the opportunity cost of holding money balances M2 velocity is likely to decline substantially into If as the Administration is forecasting interest rates drop further this year the decline in velocity may be accentuated thereby requiring higher M2 growth to achieve the expected growth in nominal GNP. For M3 velocity these interest rate effects could be offset somewhat by a reduction in managed liabilities in the thrift sector as insolvent institutions are closed by regulators and if other thrifts continue to expand their balance sheets slowly in order to comply with new capital requirements The forecast of expected nominal GNP growth of about percent expected lower interest rates and any such decline in M2 velocity implies that M2 could exceed its provisional target range in If developments since July suggest that a significant decline in M2 velocity is likely in the FOMC could choose to raise its target range. It may be reluctant to do this however because it may lead to misperceptions of the Federal Reserve 's long-run intentions with regard to money growth and price stability. If the FOMC leaves the range unchanged but economic and financial conditions develop according to the Administration 's forecast the higher demand for money could lead the FOMC to allow M2 to exceed its target range during ; if so growth in the money stock should be slower in succeeding years as velocity returns to its long-run average. The Federal Reserve Act does not require the Federal Reserve to keep money growth within a year 's target ranges if changing circumstances lead it to conclude that doing so is undesirable In such a case the Federal Reserve would be required to explain the reasons for its determination In any event the Administration anticipates that monetary policy will continue to support economic growth with progress toward reduced inflation. The Administration 's program to reduce deficits and raise government saving will complement the Federal Reserve 's efforts by fostering lower real interest rates which will help maintain economic growth while progress is made toward price stability THE PROSPECTS FOR GROWTH The Administration 's projections call for continued healthy economic growth and high levels of resource utilization with inflation low and declining in later years. Economic policies and developments during particularly the containment of inflation have set the stage for continued strong growth The Outlook for The Administration anticipates a 2.6-percent increase in real GNP from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of somewhat faster than the drought-adjusted 1.9-percent increase in ( Table ) The transition from to has been affected by a number of disruptive events. During September Hurricane Hugo battered South Carolina and in October the Loma Prieta earthquake struck northern California. In addition the second longest strike in the history of The Boeing Company halted work from October to November Exceptionally cold weather in December may also have reduced economic activity On balance these events temporarily slowed growth with estimates indicating that the Boeing strike alone subtracted nearly one-half percentage point from fourth-quarter growth in real GNP The return of production to normal levels will temporarily raise GNP growth in the first quarter of In addition the rebuilding of both government and private structures in the aftermath of the disasters may spill over into and increase the level of GNP These effects notwithstanding growth is expected to be relatively slow early in and then is expected to gain momentum later in the year. In the past there have been several times when the economy slowed then picked up and continued to grow for a substantial time ; examples include and The lagged effects of tight monetary policy early in are expected to spill over into the first half of But interest rates have been declining since the spring of and are anticipated to decline further. This decline is expected to contribute to the pickup in economic growth in As a result the consumer durables and residential construction sectors are projected to rebound from weak patterns at the end of Fiscal restraint in response to the need for deficit reduction and a slowing in the increase of real net exports will tend to moderate growth in The projected rate of increase of real consumer purchases from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of is percent ( Table ) Inflation for consumer purchases was lower in the second half of and increases in personal income have been strong. These factors are expected to support growth in consumer demand in The projection calls for a 5.1-percent increase in residential investment in following a 6.1-percent decline in The decline of mortgage interest rates in the second half of has increased housing affordability. Further declines in interest rates and a rebound from slow housing production in are expected to stimulate housing construction in Housing starts are projected to average million units at an annual rate by the fourth quarter of The growth of nonresidential fixed investment spending in is expected to be about the same as the pace of Capacity utilization rates are anticipated to remain relatively high and the need for further capacity will continue to stimulate growth in investment particularly for equipment. While still high however utilization rates fell during This fall coupled with weak corporate profits in is expected to have a damping effect on the demand for capital goods. As Table shows real nonresidential fixed investment is expected to grow percent in compared with percent in Inventory investment after contributing to real GNP growth in is not expected to add to growth in The contribution in was driven mainly by a replenishment of farm stocks following the drought and partly by accumulation of inventories in the fourth quarter particularly for motor vehicles. Farm inventory investment is expected to be much more modest in Furthermore slower production aimed at reducing a fourth-quarter nonfarm inventory buildup is expected to contribute to modest growth in early By year end nonfarm inventory accumulation may still be below levels at the end of State and local government purchases of goods and services are projected to increase percent in somewhat slower than the pace of As discussed above real Federal purchases of goods and services are projected to decline in reflecting a continued commitment to deficit reduction As in improvements in real net exports are expected to be smaller and more gradual over the near term relative to the strong gains in and After falling for several years the foreign exchange value of the dollar has increased slightly over the last year and the growth rate of economies abroad is expected to decline modestly over the near term. Nevertheless as the result of improved U.S. competitiveness in world markets since net exports are expected to continue to contribute to real GNP growth The CPI is projected to increase percent between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of while the GNP deflator is projected to increase percent. These rates are similar to rates of inflation in recent years excluding food and energy. In line with moderate real growth little change is expected in the rate of capacity utilization and the rate of unemployment. This will reduce upward pressure on prices caused by sectoral capacity bottlenecks and tightening labor markets. Sharply rising and then falling prices for energy and food helped explain much of the acceleration and deceleration in inflation in Increases in these prices are expected to be modest over the near term Economic projections are of course characterized by uncertainty. The Administration was fortunate that its first official forecast ( that accompanying the Mid-Session Review of the Budget ) was quite accurate for Nevertheless it must be emphasized that forecasting is an imprecise science. Unanticipated events with economic consequences such as the hurricane and earthquake in occur from time to time. In addition the reactions of businesses and households to changes in economic conditions or policies may shift over time. Thus the current forecast inevitably involves uncertainties. For example business investment housing demand and the improvement in international trade may be weaker than is currently projected. On the other hand consumption growth could be stronger in Such uncertainties are illustrated in the alternative projections presented in Table The alternatives show somewhat stronger and somewhat weaker real growth each with plausible associated paths for unemployment inflation and interest rates. Real growth in the lower path in is similar to the slowdown in The higher path shows real growth improving from the slow rate of to the faster pace of and TABLE Effects of Alternative Projections on the Budget Calendar Year Calendar Year Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real gross national product : Higher growth Administration Lower growth GNP deflator : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Percent Total unemployment rate : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Billions of dollars Budget deficit : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Deficit is for fiscal year Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget The evolution of the budget deficit is significantly affected by economic conditions. Hence uncertainty in the economic forecast leads to uncertainty in the budget projections. The impact of each alternative path for economic conditions on the budget deficit is also shown in the table. The cumulative effect by fiscal ranges from a $ billion increase in the deficit for the lower growth alternative to an $ billion reduction under the higher growth alternative The Outlook Through Table summarizes the Administration 's medium-term economic projections through As the table shows GNP growth between and is projected to be above percent as the economy moves toward full utilization of its resources. Thereafter the growth rate is expected to stabilize at around percent roughly equal to the economy 's projected growth potential. Real compensation per hour is projected to rise in line with productivity growth at a rate of percent per year. Inflation ( as measured by the CPI ) and interest rates on 91-day Treasury bills are projected to decline gradually from current levels with real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rates returning to levels closer to their historical averages These sustained declines in inflation and interest rates depend upon the Administration 's systematic and credible macroeconomic policies particularly those to eliminate the Federal budget deficit and then to reduce the national debt ( Box ) TABLE Administration Economic Assumptions Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real GNP Real compensation per hour2 Output per hour2 Consumer price index3 Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Annual level Employment ( millions ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons For urban wage earners and clerical workers Average rate on new issues within period on a bank discount basis Includes resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget The U.S. economy begins the decade of the 1990s at relatively high levels of resource utilization. Thus unlike earlier years in the expansion growth can not rely heavily on fuller utilization of existing resources. Instead future growth in the economy depends upon growth of resources and improvements in the economy 's ability to produce Growth in output is the result of growth in the work force and improvements in labor productivity. Productivity growth in turn follows from increases in the quality of the work force advances in the quality and quantity of the capital stock and technological progress Growth in the labor force is the result of growth in the population and increases in the rate of labor force participation. Following the passage of the baby-boom generation into adulthood growth of the population aged and over is projected to slow in the 1990s. Population growth from to is projected to average percent per year down from slightly over percent in the 1980s and nearly percent in the 1970s ( Table ) The changing demographic composition of the population affects participation rates. Overall participation rates in the 1970s were raised by the strong upward trend in the involvement of women and teenagers in the labor force. Continued strong participation increases by women furthered the rise in overall participation in the 1980s. Growth in the participation rate for women is projected to Box Policy Credibility and the Economic Projections Credible macroeconomic policies are a key to the Administration 's projection of solid growth in the 1990s with gradually declining inflation. The success in containing inflation through years of economic expansion has helped to build this credibility. The interest rate projections are influenced by the Administration 's commitment to reducing the Federal budget deficit to zero in and dedicating projected future surpluses thereafter to reducing the national debt * Hie Federal Government 's commitment to reduced borrowing in the future is expected to ease pressure on interest rates Similarly the Federal Reserve 's continued commitment to move toward price stability is expected to help keep wage increases in line with productivity gains by reducing the expected inflation component of wage decisions There is no inconsistency in projecting continued low unemployment and declining rates of inflation. The idea that there is a simple stable and permanent tradeoff between inflation and unemployment does not accord with modern maeroeconomic theory which emphasizes the importance of expectations or with historical experience. In the 1970s inflation and unemployment were high while in the 1980s the opposite occurred inflation and unemployment were relatively low. The United States and other economies are capable of sustaining growth achieving low unemployment and controlling and re * ducing inflation simultaneously * The notion that the only way to keep inflation in check is to run a slack economy with relatively high unemployment and excess capacity is incorrect The potential gains from credible policies are discussed more fully in Chapter slow somewhat in the 1990s but this is expected to be offset by slower declines in the participation rates of older workers. As a result growth of the overall participation rate is projected to average percent per year through just below the average growth rate experienced since The net effect of slower population growth and roughly unchanged growth in the rate of participation is slower expected growth of the labor force. Between and the projections show a 1.3-percent annual rate down from in the 1980s and percent in the 1970s. With little anticipated change in the unemployment rate through employment is expected to grow at roughly the same rate as the labor force TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GNP [ Average annual percent change ] IV to III IV to III III to III III to IV GROWTH IN : ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUS : Civilian labor force participation rate ) EQUALS : Civilian labor force ) PLUSCivilian employment rate _ ) EQUALS : Civilian employment ) PLUS : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment ) EQUALS * Nonfarm business employment ) PLUS * Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business sector ) o ) EQUALS- Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) PLUSOutput per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business output ) LESSNonfarm business output as a share of real GNP _1 ) EQUALS- Real GNP Note. Time periods for the first two columns are from business cycle peak to business cycle peak to avoid cyclical effects Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget The productivity of each worker depends upon the skills generated by his or her training and experience the technical sophistication of production and the capital resources available to each worker. Following slow growth for most of the 1970s and early 1980s productivity for the nonfarm business sector of the economy which makes up four-fifths of GNP is projected to increase at a 1.8-percent average annual rate through This rate is identical to growth during the years represents a rebound toward the 1.9-percent average for the period from through the third quarter of and contrasts with growth of only percent for the 1970s and early 1980s Real investment spending has been strong from through contributing to an increase in the ratio of capital to labor which will aid labor productivity. A stable growing low-inflation economy provides a climate conducive to capital formation. Maintaining a low rate of inflation and low tax rates keeps the cost of capital low and the return to capital investments high. The accumulation of capital will also be aided by expected stable energy prices which will allow firms to continue to focus on productivityenhancing rather than energy-conserving capital equipment Slower growth of the labor force and employment will also contribute to a higher capital-to-labor ratio Real GNP growth is expected to average percent between and Despite expected slower growth of the labor force continuing strong productivity growth is projected to contribute to output growth averaging percent a year in the nonfarm business sector of the economy. Because growth is projected to be slower in the government and other sectors than in the nonfarm business sector total real GNP is expected to grow at a slightly slower rate SUMMARY OF THE OUTLOOK Administration policies and events are setting the stage for economic growth continuing in and later years. The containment of inflation in is a key factor in the Administration 's forecast of continued expansion in and beyond. Periods of rapidly accelerating inflation are often followed by economic downturns The goal for fiscal policy will be to continue to reduce government borrowing. Reduced deficits through and reduction of the national debt thereafter would contribute to lower interest rates increased capital formation and stronger growth Monetary policy eased over the second half of lowering interest rates. Given the lags in the effects of monetary policy this is likely to help some interest-sensitive sectors to rebound in Over the longer term monetary growth is expected to be consistent with the Federal Reserve 's goal of strong noninflationary growth The Administration anticipates a 2.6-percent increase in real GNP in on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis and lower inflation Over the longer term the Administration anticipates real growth in GNP at a rate of percent per year with continued progress in reducing inflation CONCLUDING COMMENTS As the U.S. economy moves into the eighth year of growth there is a strong basis for continued expansion in the 1990s. The Administration 's goal is not simply to avoid recessions and extend the expansion. The goal is to sustain growth at a sufficiently strong pace to provide rising real incomes expanding employment opportunities and additional resources to address the needs and wants of the American people As described in detail in the next chapter systematic and credible monetary and fiscal policies are essential for strong future growth and reduced inflation. The conduct of these policies should be governed by the goal of enhancing long-run performance not by an exclusive focus on short-term outcomes which would raise the likelihood of policy errors CHAPTER Design of Fiscal Monetary and Financial Policies MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES have powerful effects on the economy. It is essential that they be well-designed. These macroeconomic policies are powerful in part because they affect interest rates and exchange rates and thereby influence the willingness of households and businesses both foreign and domestic to purchase goods and services produced in America. These purchases translate into production jobs and income for Americans. Tax rates are among the most important determinants of incentives for saving investment and work effort. The government 's policies toward financial markets significantly affect the stability of the economy and its ability to allocate capital efficiently The Administration 's goals for macroeconomic policy are maximum sustained economic growth economic stability and low stable inflation. Historical experience both in the United States and abroad has demonstrated that well-designed monetary and fiscal policies can help achieve these goals. But misguided policies can wreak havoc with the economy by reducing its productivity creating uncertainties that make planning for the future difficult or impossible driving up inflation and reducing standards of living THE DESIGN OF MACROECONOMIC POLICY The power of monetary and fiscal policies to affect the economy has led some to advocate discretionary policymaking with frequent changes in policy instruments such as tax rates or expenditure programs to influence near-term economic conditions. Indeed a strong endorsement of discretionary policy was eloquently put forth in the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers as a way to achieve the goals of the Employment Act of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " That Report argued that " discretionary policy is essential " and recommendations constituting a " far-reaching innovation in discretionary fiscal policy " were made In contrast recent economic research and practical experience while supporting the view that macroeconomic policy has powerful effects lead to the conclusion that discretionary macroeconomic policies can be detrimental to good economic performance. Instead policies should be designed to work well with a minimum of discretion with a clear focus on the longer term and with allowance for future contingencies. Government should credibly commit to follow such policies consistently. As argued below this approach to policy design can best achieve the Nation 's economic goals ADVANTAGES OF SYSTEMATIC POLICIES In its extreme form discretionary policy involves frequently reacting to short-term developments with little attempt to consider and communicate intentions for future actions. Such a shortsighted policy approach gives little weight to the benefits of outlining a contingency plan and committing to that plan. For this reason discretionary macroeconomic policies can actually be counterproductive. Most businesses and many households are forward-looking ; expectations of future tax rates inflation rates and government spending programs affect their decisions. Frequent unanticipated government actions cause uncertainty for the private sector and interfere with long-term business and household planning Without commitment to a clear plan strong incentives exist to change policies in an attempt to achieve short-term gain. Economists refer to this incentive as " time inconsistency " because policymakers have a natural incentive to alter previously adopted policies or to follow " inconsistent " policies. Such policy changes can have detrimental long-term effects. For example programs of fiscal stimulus can lead over time to long-run government spending that exceeds the level implied by an assessment of the costs and benefits of the programs themselves. Analogous problems exist for monetary policy. For example an incentive exists to employ short-term monetary policy to boost output above sustainable levels. Such actions can lead to increased inflation over a longer term. Because inflation takes more time to develop than the rise in economic activity it may not be adequately taken into account in the public policy process The drawbacks to discretionary policy go beyond these disadvantages. Experience has shown that the ability of discretionary macroeconomic policies to move the economy in the right direction at the right time is quite limited. First assessing the current state of the economy is difficult because economic data are subject to appreciable errors and are generally available only after a considerable lag. Second economic forecasting is difficult and quite imprecise limiting the ability of policymakers to anticipate swings in the economy. Third even if economic fluctuations are forecast correctly determining the appropriate policy measures is difficult because the economy responds somewhat unpredictably to changes in fiscal and monetary policy. Finally lags between a policy action and its ultimate effect on the economy imply that timely implementation of a discretionary change in policy frequently may not be possible To be sure discretionary policy changes might partly offset unusually large and sustained economic fluctuations. But in general the ability of discretionary macroeconomic policies to contribute to economic stability is quite limited The alternative to discretionary policies might be called systematic policies. A systematic policy specifies as clearly as possible a plan for the instruments of policy be they the Federal budget the growth rate of the monetary aggregates or tax rates. For a systematic policy to improve economic performance it must of course be well designed. In some cases a systematic policy might be very simple and specific such as a promise not to raise marginal tax rates or a law that sets a target for the budget deficit for several years into the future. In the 1960s and 1970s a rule that specified a fixed growth rate of the money supply was proposed and might have been appropriate ; changes in the financial sector in the 1980s however have rendered such a simple rule unworkable. In other cases it is appropriate and possible to specify contingencies for future policy actions such as indexing tax brackets for inflation according to a numerical formula or stating the conditions under which a budget target could be suspended However the concept of a systematic policy is much broader than a simple or even complex numerical formula for policy. In some cases it may not be possible to be so precise about a policy plan or its contingencies and some judgment in interpreting or implementing the plan is necessary. Even in such cases a systematic policy has significant advantages over a discretionary policy if it places some discipline or general guidelines on future changes in the policy instruments and if policymakers commit to this discipline. Moreover even the most carefully designed systematic policies may need to be revised occasionally in view of significant changes in economic structure IMPORTANCE OF CREDIBILITY Economic research and policy experience have led to a growing awareness of the importance of the credibility of policymakers to carry out a stated policy. Various definitions of policy credibility have been offered but the following seems most useful : an announced policy is credible if the public believes that it will be implemented and acts on those beliefs even in the face of occasional contradictory evidence. Policy credibility is not an all-or-nothing concept and in many situations credibility can only be achieved gradually Policy credibility will often lead to economic performance that is superior to that in which policy is not credible. The more credible the policy the more likely it is to improve performance. A credible disinflation plan initiated by the monetary authorities will bring down inflation more quickly and with less chance of recession than a plan with little credibility. For example a billion-dollar stabilization fund for Poland recently established by a group of industrial economies is designed to lend credibility to the Polish disinflation plan by providing financial backing to help the Polish government stabilize the exchange rate. This will reinforce other policies to reduce inflation and promote external trade In addition credibility can help resolve problems arising from unpredictable shifts in the structural relationships between the policy instruments and the state of the economy. Such changes can make it quite difficult for the public to assess the appropriateness of macroeconomic policies when the policy rules are complicated. If the public is confident that appropriate policies are being followed households and businesses can plan for the future which promotes saving investment and economic growth A NEW RULE FOR FISCAL POLICY Since the mid-1980s fiscal policy in the United States has been guided by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law which has served as a fairly systematic rule for budget policy. As part of the fiscal policy agenda for the Administration is proposing an innovative new rule for fiscal policy one that would be an unprecedented step in U.S. fiscal policy. The proposed new Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund would ensure that projected future surpluses in Social Security are not spent for other purposes but rather are used to build reserves needed to help provide Social Security benefits in the future. As discussed in detail below payments into the fund would be used to reduce government debt and decrease the legacy of deficit spending passed on to future generations. This policy rule would also increase the supply of savings lower interest rates and increase resources in the future. Committing such a strong rule to law will increase the credibility of the policy which will speed up the reduction in interest rates and more quickly enhance investment and economic growth FISCAL POLICY The spending and revenue activities of the government comprise its fiscal policy. In fiscal ( October to September ) total outlays of the Federal Government for purchases of goods and services transfer payments grants and interest payments amounted to percent of gross national product ( GNP ) Tax and other receipts were percent of GNP with a resulting budget deficit of percent of GNP. Receipts were the same fraction of GNP in as they were years before but outlays were up by percent of GNP over the same period. The sheer size of the Federal sector suggests that fiscal policy can shape aggregate economic activity for the better or worse. Focusing only on the impact of fiscal policy on the level of GNP however understates the importance of fiscal policy THE IMPACT OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF FISCAL POLICY Fiscal policy affects the economy in several ways. Government purchases of goods and services are a direct use of the productive resources of the economy and change prices profits and the allocation of capital and labor. Taxes transfer payments borrowing and interest payments shift funds among individuals and over time and thereby alter incentives for work saving and investment. For example income-support programs affect both the distribution of purchasing power and incentives to work. In some circumstances for example by reducing barriers to saving this power of fiscal policy can improve economic performance. But poorly designed policies such as a tax system with high marginal rates reduce incentives for productive activity and lower the growth of national income In the short run changes in government spending and revenues can significantly affect total output in the economy. For instance increases in Federal consumption of goods and services directly boost the demand for firms ' output. In the short run firms meet this demand by producing more. But because government purchases do not increase the total productive resources in the economy the increase will eventually diminish. After a period of time prices begin to increase or increase more rapidly. Higher interest rates reduce domestic demand and purchases by the private sector fall. The reduction in private purchases will occur primarily in interest-sensitive areas such as investment and some types of investment may suffer more than others. As interest rates rise exchange rates also rise reducing demand for exports and raising demand for imports. The effects of the increase in government purchases are offset by the decline in investment and net exports. Over the longer term the decline in investment in turn reduces the productive potential of the economy Conversely decreases in government spending can slow growth of total demand in the short run. For example a reduction in government spending lowers the demand for goods and services. But again this decline is short-lived. Soon investment and net exports will increase offsetting the reduction in government purchases and in the long term the higher level of investment will increase potential GNP Short-run changes in taxes paid by households have effects similar to changes in government purchases. To the extent that households do not save the extra funds available after a tax cut their increased spending boosts the demand for goods and services. These increases in demand will raise production by firms and increase overall employment. Again in the absence of an increase in the productive capacity of the economy these increases will be shortlived Permanent reductions in tax rates are far more likely to expand long-run productive capacity than is a one-time tax rebate or credit. Reducing the tax-induced distortion of decisions to work save innovate and invest will raise the resources devoted to production in the economy permanently expanding total output THE DESIGN OF FISCAL POLICY It is tempting to use fiscal policy in a reactive fashion employing frequent discretionary changes in taxes and spending to alter economic activity temporarily and to counteract each aggregate fluctuation. This approach is fraught with so many difficulties that discretionary fiscal policy becomes inconsistent with ambitious goals for long-run growth. Fiscal responses to economic fluctuations should be credible and predictable. These characteristics reduce the distortionary effects of policy by aiding private-sector plans for saving and investment Automatic Stabilizers During recessions income tax receipts fall even though tax rates are unchanged. In addition income assistance payments ( such as unemployment benefits and traditional welfare programs ) rise These kinds of systematic adjustments are called " automatic stabilizers. " They are an important example of systematic policy and contribute to the predictability of short-run fiscal policy. They are clearly not discretionary as they are embodied in legislation. Automatic stabilizers help to maintain individuals ' purchasing power and mitigate the decline in aggregate demand. Studies show that on average disposable income falls by percent of a fall in GNP Historically modifications to the features of automatic stabilizers undertaken for other reasons have also changed their responsiveness to economic conditions Systematic fiscal policies such as automatic stabilizers have distinct advantages over discretionary policies. For example discretionary increases in spending provide a ready rationale for politically motivated increases in government programs. Also because investors can not undo the past it may appear that discretionary tax increases levied on existing investments have no detrimental effect. Over time however continuous application of such policies would teach investors to expect tax increases reducing the incentive to invest and harming economic efficiency Budgeting Rules and Targets for Government Saving Sustained economic growth requires continued increases in the Nation 's productive capital. Government policies such as fiscal monetary regulatory and legal policies affect national saving and are thus an important determinant of both the funds available to finance investment and their cost By definition when the Federal Government budget deficit increases government saving falls. Only if other savers households or businesses increase their saving dollar for dollar is there no detrimental effect on national saving the sum of household business and government saving. Empirical studies find that when government reduces tax collections increased private saving does not fully offset the decline in government saving. When government consumption increases private investment and net exports decline ; private consumption may fall but not sufficiently to offset the rise in government consumption. Thus chronic budget deficits reduce national saving leading to lower domestic capital formation and reduced net exports The actual deficit is influenced by current economic conditions For example the budget deficit increased during the early 1980s in part as a result of the economic downturn. Accurately gauging the long-run impact of the deficit requires adjusting the deficit for changes caused by economic fluctuations. ( This adjustment is made by calculating the difference between receipts and expenditures that would occur under current law if economic activity were equal to some estimate of the economy 's high-employment potential. ) At the trough of the most recent recession the cyclical component was about two-thirds of the actual budget deficit. In the last few years however the economy has been closer to its potential output making the cyclical correction less important. Nonetheless the deficit as a fraction of GNP has fallen from percent in fiscal to percent in fiscal ( Chart ) In the Federal Government adopted and in amended the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act more commonly known as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings ( GRH ) GRH was a visible response to the record of deficit spending. At its heart are targets for the maximum allowable budget deficit with the ultimate goal as amended of balancing the budget by GRH includes a mechanical procedure known as sequester for cutting Federal spending whenever deficits are expected to exceed the allowable target by more than $ billion except in fiscal ( See Box for an explanation of the sequester in fiscal ) GRH provides a predictable means to reduce Federal deficits thus serv Chart FEDERAL BUDGET DEFICIT AS PERCENT OF GNP. The budget deficit as a percent of GNP has declined substantially since as a result of deficit control measures Percent Note : Data are for fiscal years Source : Department of Commerce and Office of Management and Budget ing as a valuable rule for fiscal policy that reduces Federal borrowing In each year since the inception of GRH the Federal deficit has exceeded the GRH target ( Table ) How can this happen ? The most important reason is that a sequester can be implemented if necessary only in the first weeks of a fiscal year. Thus the GRH deficit can initially fall below the target but rise later in the year through appropriations for new spending. For example the fiscal budget deficit reflected the addition of large costs attributable to the rescue plan for savings and loan institutions. In addition some programs have been excluded from the deficit calculation so that the spending they entail does not count under GRH. Finally the inherent difficulties of economic forecasting and technical budget projections can cause the actual deficit to differ from the GRH target although there is no systematic direction to this effect When viewed from a broad perspective GRH has provided valuable control over Federal spending. To some the failure to match the targets exactly is an indictment of GRH. But this is a narrow view A focus simply on the difference between GRH targets and annual budget deficits ignores important progress in controlling deficits Box Hie GRH Process : How It Worked in Fiscal Under GRH the Administration reviews the budget and estimates the deficit GRH allows for a $ billion cushion or " margin of error " ( except in when there is no margin of error ) but if the projected deficit exceeds the target by more than this amount the Administration calculates automatic spending cuts ( or sequester ) needed in each program to meet the GRH deficit target If legislation does not achieve this reduction by the end of the second week of the fiscal year the President orders a sequester For fiscal the GRH deficit target was $ billion. In October the Administration estimated a deficit of $ billion $ billion above the target plus " cushion/ ' Hence a sequester designed to reduce outlays by $ billion was brought into operation and the President stated that he would continue with a sequester until a satisfactory budget reconciliation bill was passed To meet the target total outlays had to be reduced by percent. GRH splits these reductions evenly between defense and nondefense spending thus requiring an $ billion reduction in each. However percent of defense outlays and percent of nondefense outlays ( largely entitlements and interest payments ) are exempt by law from a sequester. To achieve the $ billion reduction nonexempt nondefense programs had to be cut by percent and nonexempt defense programs by percent Under the Reconciliation Act the President issued a revised order that required & sequester of percent for defense programs and percent for nondefense programs. The revised sequester was designed to achieve outlay reductions equivalent to keeping the original sequester in effect until early February Hence the Administration established the important precedent of not restoring previously sequestered amounts after the sequester period Since the adoption of GRH the deficit has fallen steadily as a percentage of GNP. Moreover deficits are far below the path projected prior to the adoption of GRH. One prominent study during projected that the unified deficit would reach $ billion during fiscal more than $ billion above the actual deficit. Further the rate of Federal debt accumulation has stabilized Federal debt held by the public rose from percent of GNP in to percent in but has remained at about this level since TABLE GRH and Budget Deficits : The Record [ Billions of dollars ] Target Fiscal Year Actual as Percent of GNP Actual Deficit Target NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA o o Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget These improvements partly reflect better control over outlays GRH has limited the ability to consider new spending programs or expand existing ones. Since GRH the annual growth rate of real Federal outlays has fallen from an average of percent for and to an average of percent for through Controlling growth in Federal outlays is one part of sustained deficit reduction and GRH has contributed to this process Although GRH has provided valuable control over deficits it can still be improved. Currently deficit targets may be circumvented too easily late in the fiscal year. The Administration has enunciated a principle that any increased spending after the sequester period has passed must be fully offset elsewhere in the budget. This principle serves to buttress GRH and improve the credibility of efforts to reduce Federal deficits. Reforms to the GRH law itself could further increase control over deficits initiated in this way For example introducing a second sequester period later in the fiscal year would maintain the discipline of automatic reductions for a longer time period. Alternatively it may be useful to require 60-percent majorities of the House and Senate to pass any legislation that increases the deficit after the sequester period is over. A related measure is the Administration 's proposal to give the President enhanced rescission authority the power to cancel unnecessary appropriations. These cancellations would be subject to a vote by the Congress to override the rescission GRH could also be modified to eliminate the practice of using surpluses in the Social Security trust funds to offset the operating budget deficit. In fiscal there was a unified budget deficit of $ billion. Social Security however had a surplus of $ billion indicating that the non-Social Security activities of the government had a deficit of $ billion. As discussed below the Administration proposes amending GRH as part of a program to protect the Social Security surpluses and reverse chronic Federal defi- cit spending. Balancing the non-Social Security budget will require additional control over Federal outlays. In exercising that control care must be taken to ensure adequate funding for programs that contribute to economic growth and meet essential national needs such as research and development education and reductions of drug abuse The Importance of Eliminating Chronic Government Borrowing The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law has served as an important rule for reducing Federal borrowing. An improved rule for long-run fiscal policy would not only reduce deficits but would commit the Federal Government to annual budget surpluses after Raising the rate of government saving will lower interest rates and increase capital formation and growth leading to higher incomes. A credible policy of increased government saving would accelerate the reduction in interest rates and the increase in investment. By expanding U.S. economic resources greater government saving will make it easier for society to meet the full range of private and government obligations. Increasing government saving will also reduce net interest payments which constituted percent of Federal outlays in fiscal thus freeing these resources to address other budgetary needs Fiscal policy should anticipate the effects of the large postwar baby-boom cohort. Total Social Security payments are projected to rise from percent of GNP in to percent of GNP in At the same time the ratio of retirees to working members of the labor force is expected to increase dramatically. In the absence of a policy of government saving financing these payments would require either extremely sharp increases in payroll taxes or large deficits with negative consequences for economic welfare in the future Reforms to Social Security adopted in provide for higher future outlays by levying payroll taxes in excess of current benefit payments. At its peak in the resulting annual Social Security surplus ( including interest ) is anticipated to reach percent of GNP potentially contributing toward higher national saving which will expand the pool of funds to finance capital formation and more rapid economic growth. It is important to establish a commitment now that this potential increase in government saving will in fact take place The Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund The Administration 's proposed Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund ( SSIDRF ) is designed to ensure that the expected surpluses are not spent for other purposes but are used to build reserves necessary to help provide Social Security benefits when the baby-boom generation retires. These reserves will be provided to the Nation 's capital markets thereby expanding investment and transforming the Federal Government from a drain on national saving to a source of enhanced growth The SSIDRF should not be confused with either the current Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund or the Federal disability insurance trust fund. This new fund would protect the trust fund surpluses by restricting their use to reducing the national debt. At the same time the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law would be amended to preclude deficits on the government 's non-Social Security activities. In this way the proposed law would provide more stringent fiscal discipline than the current GRH law which permits Social Security surpluses to offset the deficit in the rest of the budget The Administration 's proposal to establish the SSIDRF marks a sharp departure from a history of Federal deficit financing. Each year the Federal Government would pay from the general operating budget into the SSIDRF an amount equal to the projected surplus on the Social Security trust funds during that year. The payments into the fund could be used only to reduce outstanding Federal debt held by the public the national debt. Outlays to the fund would be counted as any other outlay in the budget. Using Federal borrowing to finance these contributions would directly contradict the intent of establishing the fund. To preclude this possibility the current GRH law would be amended to require a balanced budget in and thereafter. To ensure further that full payments are made each year payments into the SSIDRF would be exempt from the sequester procedures in the GRH law. When viewed as a whole Federal Government receipts would have to exceed non-SSIDRF outlays in order to both balance the budget and reduce the national debt Operation of the fund would be phased in over the fiscal years through The payments into the fund would be $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in These amounts are percent percent and percent respectively of the Social Security trust fund surpluses projected for these years From fiscal through fiscal the required payment would equal the surplus as projected in Thereafter the projections would be updated at 5-year intervals The new proposal would not take Social Security off the budget Receipts and outlays for Social Security would remain in the budget used to calculate the GRH deficit. Thus any changes in Social Security benefits or contributions would be subject to the same overall constraints as other government programs. While Social Security is of vital importance the government faces many pressing issues and no single program should be exempted from the normal budget process Legislating a specific rule to reverse the established practice of Federal borrowing is a radical change in the conduct of U.S. fiscal policy. The SSIDRF would shift the government from chronic deficits to contributing to national saving. In the near term saving allocated to the SSIDRF would rise quickly from only percent of GNP in to percent in At the peak in Federal saving would be $ billion or percent of GNP at that time By moving the government toward supplying funds to capital markets the SSIDRF would raise capital formation and the economy 's potential to produce. Reducing the national debt would release to the private sector funds to finance purchases of corporate stock corporate bonds or other financial instruments. These funds would in turn be used for increased capital expenditures Over the next half century the additional investment would lead to greater U.S. capital accumulation than would otherwise occur This additional capital would provide substantial additional GNP to be used for a wide variety of private and government purposes Among other uses the additional national output would ease the burden of meeting the retirement costs of the baby-boom generation The Social Security trust funds are currently anticipated to begin to run annual deficits in In the absence of offsetting changes in other parts of the Federal budget borrowing could act as a drain on national saving and capital formation. Nonetheless implementation of the SSIDRF would endow the United States with sufficient resources to meet these demands. In effect the more rapid growth of the capital stock generated by the SSIDRF would be used to finance retirement payments in essentially the same way that individuals use accumulated saving to meet large anticipated expenditures such as a college education Would the move toward increased Federal saving cause a drag on the economy in the short run ? Economic theory and empirical evidence suggest that economic adjustment to this change in fiscal policy can be made easier by a credible commitment to the SSIDRF. A credible rule could bring a substantial reduction in interest rates prior to Economic models that take expectations of such credible policies into account indicate that a reduction in expected future short-term interest rates is likely to quickly lower long-term real interest rates by as much as a full percentage point Lower interest rates would reduce the cost of capital stimulating investment and economic growth. In addition a credible rule and lower interest rates could permit more rapid noninflationary monetary expansion Anticipating Potential Federal Liabilities Broadly speaking Federal liabilities are any obligations to pay out resources in the future. The most familiar liability is Federal debt. Here the legal obligation is concrete and visible embodied in the contractual terms of government bonds. However there are many other obligations such as government insurance loan guarantees or costs of Federal programs in the future. Recognition of the full range of obligations underscores the importance of increasing government saving as a responsible fiscal approach to reducing the burden imposed on future generations The costs of many government programs will escalate in the future without matching increases in receipts. Social Security is the most prominent example but the government will very likely also face increased outlays in the future for medicare Federal civil pensions and Federal military pension programs. Unlike Federal debt these obligations are not fixed as the exact costs of these programs may change in response to economic conditions or legislative initiatives. The government must maintain a constant vigil against escalating costs in entitlement programs. For example improved cost control in the health care system would help to provide the increasing number of older Americans with high quality care without imposing an ever-larger burden on taxpayers. Even with improved efficiency in entitlement programs additional resources may be necessary. Greater government and national saving will lead to the growth needed to expand economic resources to reduce the burden of meeting these demands as well as to enhance private living standards The Federal Government must monitor the need for outlays to cover Federal loan guarantees. Direct guarantees back loans for housing through for example the Federal Housing Administration and the Government National Mortgage Association for agriculture via the Farmers Home Administration and for college education via the Guaranteed Student Loan Program. In the face value of outstanding Federal Government loan guarantees was $ billion Government-sponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) are chartered by the Federal Government but are generally privately financed. GSEs provide credit services in a variety of areas. For example the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation operate in home mortgage markets. The agriculture sector receives additional credit through the activities of the Farm Credit System and the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation The liabilities of GSEs are not backed by the Federal Government. In the past however the Congress has chosen to assist financially troubled GSEs such as in the case of the Farm Credit System. The Administration is currently studying the risks undertaken by GSEs and the appropriate level of GSE capital consistent with soundness stability and minimal potential exposure of taxpayers Lastly the government must evaluate the need for increased Federal saving to meet government insurance obligations. The Federal Government meets a myriad of insurance needs : veterans ' life insurance Federal crop insurance flood insurance informal insurance against natural disasters and others. In insured assets totaled $ trillion with the largest amounts in deposit insurance ( $ trillion ) and pension fund insurance ( $ billion ) The Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of addressed weaknesses in the insurance of thrift institutions. In other areas of Federal insurance implementing reforms such as those discussed later in this chapter is one way to improve the soundness of Federal insurance programs. Nonetheless resources may be needed to meet Federal outlays for insurance over the next decade SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES FOR FISCAL POLICY Fiscal policy should move toward credible systematic policies that would promote strong noninflationary growth The major long-run effect of fiscal policy is on national saving capital formation and growth. The Federal Government should continue to reduce deficits in accordance with the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings targets The GRH process has provided a valuable contribution to deficit reduction. Nonetheless it may be desirable to modify GRH to provide additional control over Federal deficits Credible policies to enhance fiscal discipline by reducing the national debt after the budget has been balanced such as the proposed Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund will raise national saving lower interest rates and the cost of capital increase investment and augment long-run growth MONETARY POLICY Like fiscal policy monetary policy is important in promoting strong economic growth and limiting the size and frequency of economic fluctuations. Over the long run monetary policy is the most important determinant of the rate of inflation. Keeping inflation low is essential to promoting maximum sustainable economic growth and helping avoid recessions THE EFFECT OF MONETARY POLICY ON THE ECONOMY When the economy is operating near its long-term potential an expansionary monetary policy raises real GNP and lowers unem- ployment temporarily. Wages and prices do not adjust immediately in response to a monetary expansion but eventually they do adjust and inflation begins to increase. If inflation increases to a level that instigates a subsequent sharp monetary tightening a recession could be the ultimate result In the 1960s many believed that the unemployment rate could be reduced permanently if only a higher rate of inflation was accepted. This belief was based largely on a negative relationship in historical data between the rate of inflation and the unemployment rate. Such historical data in the United States and other countries seemed to indicate that when inflation was higher unemployment was lower and vice versa. But the experience of the 1970s with simultaneously rising inflation and unemployment ( stagflation ) and that of the 1980s with inflation and unemployment both falling cast grave doubt on any such simple relationship Since the late 1960s economists have become increasingly convinced that a correct explanation of the relationship between inflation and unemployment depends critically on expectations of inflation. If expectations of inflation are low workers will not demand large wage increases to compensate for the expected erosion of their real earnings caused by inflation. Businesses ' costs of production will not rise rapidly and increases in their product prices can be relatively low. Under these circumstances a moderate increase in inflation may lead temporarily to lower unemployment Consequently monetary policy under certain circumstances is able to reduce unemployment in the short run. An unexpected monetary expansion will produce a money-induced pickup in demand that will stimulate firms to expand employment produce more and raise prices Soon however people will notice the pickup of inflation. Firms will have incorporated it into their price increases ; workers will add it to wage demands eliminating the fall in real wages and leading to a return of the unemployment rate to its initial level Because it is not possible for people to be " fooled " indefinitely about the rate of inflation higher inflation can not permanently lower the unemployment rate Moreover under certain circumstances higher inflation may not reduce unemployment at all. Suppose the central bank showed a persistent tendency to try to lower short-term unemployment below the level associated with realization of peoples ' expectations of inflation that is below the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment or NAIRU. ( The concept of the NAIRU is explained in Chapter ) This tendency would be noticed and would foster higher inflation expectations. To the extent people correctly anticipate this behavior even the temporary boom that a monetary expansion would otherwise produce would be thwarted THE COSTS OF INFLATION AND RECESSION Low predictable rates of inflation have little adverse effect on the economy. But for several reasons high and fluctuating inflation can reduce economic performance First excessive inflation leads to recessions. Monetary policy that is too expansionary will eventually bring on a rise in the rate of inflation. If left unchecked inflation will reach a rate that is no longer tolerable. At that point the Federal Reserve must reduce the rate of inflation by tightening monetary policy. Such a tightening may well lead to a recession as it did in the early 1980s and in other postwar downturns Second excessive inflation hinders economic growth and productivity. Inflation can depress investment by increasing the effective tax rate on capital. For example inflation reduces the real value of depreciation allowances. In addition excessive or fluctuating inflation tends to prevent an economy from reaching peak efficiency because inflation is associated with increased uncertainty about the future. The increased uncertainty adds a risk premium to interest rates which raises the cost of capital and lowers investment. Also because nominal returns on liquid deposits tend not to fluctuate point-for-point with market interest rates depositors devote more resources to economizing on money holdings when inflation rises Although this activity is productive from the point of view of the individual from society 's point of view it represents a waste because the resources are not being used to produce real goods and services. Moreover because higher inflation tends to be associated with greater dispersion of prices households and businesses will devote more resources to searching for the lowest price when inflation is high. For the same reason resources will not be allocated efficiently Third inflation raises issues of fairness. When inflation rises unexpectedly lenders and recipients of fixed-income payments tend to lose because the real value of their receipts falls with the rise in prices. Conversely borrowers and others making fixed payments tend to gain. This transfer of income and wealth through unexpected inflation is arbitrary and capricious Containing and Reducing Inflation High and variable inflation such as the United States experienced in the 1970s does great harm to the economy and must be prevented. Relatively steady inflation in the 4V2-percent range such as the United States has experienced over much of the 1980s also has costs although these costs are far lower than those of the late 1970s inflation. Thus an important priority of policy must be to prevent inflation from drifting up to the 7-percent 9-percent and finally double-digit rates that were experienced in that decade Policy must also work to reduce inflation rates below the 4V2-percent range over time while sustaining economic growth Preventing Recessions and Fostering Strong Economic Growth Just as inappropriate monetary policies can damage economic performance by allowing excessive inflation they also can lead directly to recessions. For example excessively tight policies when demand is already weak and rising inflation is not a threat may contribute to a recession with its attendant human and economic costs. Moreover recessions can damage long-run economic growth by reducing confidence and thus aggregate saving and investment crucial contributors to economic growth. But the Nation should not be satisfied merely with avoiding recessions. The U.S economy can and should do better than that. It should sustain growth sufficient to provide rising employment and incomes to Americans as well as continued low unemployment. The President supports macroeconomic policies that promote strong sustainable economic growth NEW CHALLENGES FOR MONETARY POLICY Recent years have seen increased consensus on the appropriate goals for monetary policy. But monetary policymakers have been confronted with new technical problems in trying to achieve these goals. These problems make policy more difficult to carry out by obscuring the relationship between the tools that monetary policy has at its disposal and the objective of noninflationary growth. In addition they make it more difficult for businesses households the Congress and the Administration to monitor the conduct of monetary policy Changing Behavior of the Monetary Aggregates Historically certain measures of the money stock moved fairly closely with nominal spending and thus represented useful measures of the stance of monetary policy. In the United States transactions balances currency and deposits that can be used as means of exchange were especially noteworthy in this regard. The association appeared to be so close that the Federal Reserve took steps in and the early 1980s to increase its control over the growth of the monetary aggregate Ml. ( Box provides definitions of the monetary aggregates. ) However beginning in the early 1980s Mi 's velocity ( the ratio of GNP to Ml ) became much less predictable. Velocity no longer tended to increase steadily ( Chart ) At first it was not clear whether the change in the relationship was temporary or permanent. Eventually though evidence accumulated that the breakdown was permanent and primarily reflected a regulatory change the nationwide introduction of NOW accounts which are Box Definitions of the Monetary Aggregates Ml includes currency travelers checks demand deposits and other fully checkable deposits such as interest-earning negotiable order of withdrawal ( NOW ) accounts. It was designed to measure the quantity of transactions instruments but the inclusion of NOW accounts implies that Ml in fact includes a substantial portion of savings balances. Moreover certain other accounts that are not included in Ml such as money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) and money market mutual funds ( MMMFs ) can be used within limits for transactions M2 is defined as Ml plus a number of savings instruments including savings deposits MMDAs certain MMMPs and small time deposits. It also includes certain liabilities repurchase agreements and Eurodollar deposits held by U.S. residents issued by banking institutions on an overnight basis M2 is designed as a broad measure of monetary assets M3 comprises M2 shares in money market mutual funds that are available only to institutions time deposits with balances of at least f and repurchase agreements and Eurodollar deposits with terms longer than day interest-bearing checkable deposits. Because these accounts pay interest households shifted into NOW accounts ( and therefore into Ml ) not only a large volume of transactions balances from demand deposits but also savings balances that were in the non-Mi part of M2. This latter shift meant that Ml no longer so dominantly represented transactions balances. For related reasons Ml and its velocity became much more sensitive to swings in market interest rates In that light it was not surprising that the relationship of Ml to GNP changed M2 and M3 are substantially broader than Ml and encompass many more types of financial assets. Probably because these aggregates represent broader measures of wealth than Ml and are not restricted to transactions vehicles they have not historically related as closely to GNP as did Ml before the 1980s. Nevertheless some stable patterns in their velocities can be detected. For example the velocity of M2 has tended to fluctuate around a fixed level over the past years ( Chart ) This pattern probably reflects the breadth of this aggregate and the resulting tendency for shifts from one liquid savings asset to another to be captured within it The pattern also reflects the long-run tendency for interest rates on deposits to follow market interest rates. Because this tendency is incomplete the velocity of M2 like that of Ml tends to rise and fall with short-term market interest rates reflecting shifts between Chart VELOCITIES OF M1 AND M2. The velocity of M1 deviated in the 1980s from earlier patterns while the velocity of M2 remained relatively stable Index 1959QI = Velocity of M1 Velocity of M2 rS Note : Data are quarterly Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System liquid balances and market instruments as their relative returns vary. But this tendency is less pronounced for M2 than for Ml making it more suitable as a monetary target Despite their relative stability the relationship of these broader aggregates to nominal income over shorter periods has at times been erratic and instances of these temporary shifts appear to have become more frequent in the 1980s. Some examples of such behavior have reflected regulatory influences. For example M3 was noticeably affected in by changing regulations in the thrift industry. A provision of the Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of mandated increased capital standards for thrift institutions. In order to comply with these standards some thrifts sharply reduced assets and funding sources A portion of these funding sources were managed liabilities included in M3 ( but not in M2 ) such as large certificates of deposit and securities sold under repurchase agreements. In addition a number of insolvent thrift institutions substituted borrowings from the Resolution Trust Corporation for liabilities included in the monetary aggregates. As discussed in Chapter this drop in M3-type instruments meant that M3 growth unlike that of M2 did not increase significantly in the second half of The sensitivity of the monetary aggregates to such developments is one reason that monetary policymakers should not focus exclusively on the aggregates in formulating policy Changing Economic Relationships Rapid changes in the structure of the economy and financial markets in recent years have also posed challenges for monetary policymakers. Such changes alter the relationships between monetary policy instruments and economic outcomes. Identifying these relationships is difficult to begin with ; rapid shifts make identification all the more difficult and thus complicate the conduct of monetary policy. They also make it harder for the public to assess the stance of monetary policy One such change is that the volume of imports and exports relative to GNP has risen considerably. Both imports and exports are sensitive to exchange rates. Thus the larger international sector of the U.S. economy may have caused overall production to become more sensitive to exchange rates. Because exchange rates are importantly influenced by interest rates this change in structure may constitute one channel by which the effect of monetary policy on the economy has changed Financial innovation and deregulation have also been important in the 1980s and may lead to an altered responsiveness of spending to interest rates. For example the elimination of deposit interest rate ceilings the development of highly liquid secondary markets for mortgage loans and the wide availability of adjustable-rate mortgages ( which usually offer relatively low initial interest rates ) mean that mortgage credit is no longer as constrained during a period of monetary tightening as it was before the 1980s reducing the interest-sensitivity of residential construction activity Another example of possible changes in interest sensitivity relates to household consumption spending. The increasing use of adjustable-rate mortgage and consumer loans in recent years has tended to increase the sensitivity of household expenses to changes in market interest rates. Consequently the sensitivity of household spending to changes in interest rates may have increased. However a greater proportion of households ' financial assets now bears interest returns that vary with market interest rates than was the case before the 1980s. This fact would tend to offset any increased sensitivity of consumption Empirical studies that attempt to determine whether the responsiveness of spending to interest rates has changed obtain mixed results. Most studies confirm a lower interest sensitivity of residential housing expenditures ; a few find a reduced sensitivity in other sectors as well. On the whole there is some evidence for the proposition that the interest sensitivity of aggregate spending has fallen in the 1980s implying that larger changes in interest rates are needed to offset economic fluctuations THE DESIGN OF MONETARY POLICY IN THE 1980s AND 1990s Substantial movements in the velocities of the monetary aggregates in recent years have made rigid monetary targeting inappropriate. Given this situation but recognizing the disadvantages of shortsighted discretionary policy discussed earlier in this chapter the Federal Reserve has not regressed to an undisciplined ad hoc approach to policy. Rather it has attempted to develop a more systematic longer run approach. By attempting to pursue such a forward-looking policy consistently over time the Federal Reserve appears to have achieved a high degree of policy credibility The Framework for Monetary Policy The Federal Reserve Act establishes a broad framework for the conduct of monetary policy. It calls for two policymaking bodies within the Federal Reserve : the 7-member Board of Governors located in Washington ; and the 12-member Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) which includes the members of the Board and on a rotating basis presidents of of the regional Federal Reserve Banks The Federal Reserve Act sets goals for policy requiring that the Federal Reserve shall " maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy 's long run potential to increase production so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment stable prices and moderate longterm interest rates. " The law also requires the Fed to report to the Congress annual target ranges for growth of the monetary and credit aggregates Thus the law establishes broad principles for the conduct of monetary policy. Within this framework the Federal Reserve must design a policy to meet its goals. In the regular meetings of the FOMC ( currently eight times per year ) FOMC members decide what adjustments in the policy instruments if any are appropriate and issue a directive for implementing these adjustments to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York which acts as the FOMC 's agent. The directive calls for adjustments in the supply of reserves ; it is presented in the context of a public statement ( released with a lag ) that explains the FOMC 's reasons for the change Changes in the supply of reserves lead to changes in short-term interest rates. For example an increase in the availability of reserves means that banks will have to bid less aggressively for funds in the open market. Consequently interest rates will decline at least temporarily. An increase in reserve availability also means that fewer banks will need to borrow from the Fed 's discount window to obtain funds. Consequently lower interest rates tend to be associated with reduced borrowing at the Fed 's discount window and higher interest rates with increased borrowing Since the Fed has relied on this association using an operating target for the quantity of borrowed reserves as an index of the desired availability of bank reserves. Over the past years or so however the relationship of borrowing to reserve market conditions has shifted somewhat unpredictably. Consequently the Federal Reserve has gradually reduced its reliance on borrowed reserves and has focused more directly on interest rates especially the Federal funds rate the interest rate on overnight interbank loans in implementing monetary policy Operating Strategies for Reserves and Interest Rates The Federal Reserve generally increases interest rates when inflationary pressures appear to be rising and lowers interest rates when inflationary pressures are abating and recession appears to be more of a threat. In general Federal Reserve policymakers base their assessment of inflation pressures and the state of economic activity on several key economic and financial indicators as well as on economic forecasts ; some of these forecasts are constructed judgmentally by the Fed 's staff some are econometric and some are produced by private forecasters. Financial markets can also provide valuable information. For example long-term interest rates incorporate market participants ' assessment of the future rate of inflation Assessing just how much the policy instrument needs to be changed as circumstances evolve requires judgment. Thus a policy approach that relies on the expertise of the FOMC members is appropriate and should be preserved. If the operating stance of policy is gauged in terms of monetary aggregates appropriate settings change with shifts in the behavior of velocity ; if measured by interest rates appropriate settings vary with the interest sensitivity of aggregate demand ; and if measured in terms of borrowed or nonborrowed reserves appropriate settings change as the relationship between reserve measures and interest rates changes. Experience has indicated that predicting such changes accurately is often impossible. The Federal Reserve 's ability to react flexibly to unforeseen adverse shifts in financial market conditions is especially useful. For example the Federal Reserve 's provision of additional liquidity in the wake of the stock market break of October was appropriate and contributed to a return of market confidence Role of Monetary Targets As discussed above the law requires the Federal Reserve to set annual target ranges for the monetary aggregates. Throughout the 1980s the Federal Reserve set annual target ranges for the mone tary aggregates M2 and M3 and through it set ranges for Ml In view of the generally looser relationships of the monetary aggregates with GNP over recent years however the Federal Reserve has relied less on all of the aggregates. In and the FOMC set target ranges for M2 and M3 that were percentage points wide percentage point more than had been specified earlier. In widening the ranges the Federal Reserve noted the sensitivity of velocity to market interest rates as well as a more erratic relationship between velocity and interest rates. For much the same reasons the Federal Reserve in conducting monetary policy has monitored a variety of economic and financial indicators in addition to the monetary and credit aggregates Despite problems with the monetary aggregates the Federal Reserve has not adopted a purely discretionary approach to policy Rather the Fed has made clear that its long-run goal is to do its part to promote economic growth by reducing inflation and ultimately achieving price stability. Within this long-run policy orientation the monetary aggregates can play a useful role. In particular research at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere shows that the velocity of M2 has been essentially stable over the long run. M2 could serve therefore as an anchor for price stability and as a basis for a credible systematic long-run monetary policy. That is as long as there are no signs of permanent shifts of M2 velocity the Federal Reserve would do well to commit to eventually maintaining long-run growth of M2 consistent with expansion of the economy 's potential to produce while allowing higher or lower growth rates over shorter periods of time to offset shifts in velocity. Such an approach would be consistent with the Federal Reserve Act 's requirements for monetary policy By consistently following a forward-looking policy directed at this goal the Federal Reserve appears to have achieved a high degree of credibility. This credibility is suggested by the lack of increase in measures of inflation expectations in the late 1980s as the economy drew closer to full utilization of its productive resources a situation that in the past typically was characterized by rising inflation expectations IMPORTANCE OF A CREDIBLE MONETARY POLICY A high degree of monetary policy credibility will often lead to superior economic performance compared with the situation where a policy is not perceived to be very credible Credibility and Disinflation Suppose monetary policymakers announced their intention to lower the rate of inflation over a specific time interval and to achieve this goal slowed the growth of the money supply and allowed interest rates to rise. If the policy was not viewed as credi ble for example if the public thought that the policy would not be maintained households and firms would continue to set wages and prices as they had previously at least for a time. Meanwhile the increasingly restrictive monetary policy would restrain demand and production. Thus the lack of policy credibility would result in a worsening of the economic situation as inflation remained high and unemployment rose. This outcome would persist until the public 's expectations of the rate of inflation fell Suppose on the other hand that the public believed that the policy of reduced inflation would be achieved. In these circumstances the more restrained monetary policy would be accompanied by a drop of inflationary expectations. The policy restraint would have a smaller effect on unemployment and production relative to the situation of low policy credibility. Full employment would be maintained or at least the period of limited slack would be shorter and output would again achieve its potential but with less inflation than before Policy credibility is also valuable during a period of falling inflation because a temporarily higher rate of monetary growth may appear to contradict the stated policy of lower inflation. As the rate of inflation falls the public will likely wish to hold a larger quantity of money because the opportunity cost of doing so will be smaller that is money holders will be giving up less income by holding money as opposed to investing in financial assets or appreciating durables such as housing. The Federal Reserve could accommodate this increased demand by allowing the money stock to grow more rapidly for a time. Ideally the public will recognize that the increased rate of money growth is temporary and a natural consequence of the disinflationary policy. Even if the public does not understand this process but finds the policy of disinflation to be credible inflation expectations will not rise in response to the pickup in money growth. If the policy does not have much credibility on the other hand the public might become concerned that the higher money growth is permanent signaling an inflationary monetary policy. Any consequent heightening of inflationary expectations would hinder achievement of the Nation 's economic goals Credibility and Economic Uncertainty Credibility can help resolve problems that can result from unpredictably shifting economic relationships. For example the looser relationship of the monetary aggregates to economic activity not only makes it more difficult for the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy but it also causes problems for the public in monitoring the stance of monetary policy. The increased uncertainties about possible changes in structural economic relationships have a similar effect by making it more difficult for the public to determine whether a given policy change will have the desired effect on the economy and on inflation. If monetary policy is credible shortrun difficulties of monitoring the stance of monetary policy will not adversely affect the public 's expectations Achieving Policy Credibility Policy credibility is clearly useful to have but achieving it may not be easy. Simply announcing a change in policy does not make it believable. Credibility depends in part on the plausibility and consistency of the announced policy in the context of the overall economic environment and other policies. Credibility probably depends most importantly on a track record of following the stated principles of policy SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES FOR MONETARY POLICY Monetary policy and macroeconomic policies more generally should adopt ambitious but realistic goals for economic performance. The Nation should not be satisfied merely to avoid recessions and contain inflation. The U.S. economy can and should do better than that. It should sustain growth sufficient to provide rising employment and incomes and continued low unemployment Monetary policy can contribute to the achievement of these goals by systematically controlling and reducing inflation Monetary policy needs to maintain credibility because credibility helps ensure that the goals of policy will be attained during a period of dynamic economic and financial developments Policy credibility is enhanced by building a record of achievement of the stated goals of policy and by consistently following stated policy principles Over long periods of time the monetary aggregates are useful guides to monetary policy. In view of the difficulties of predicting velocity however monetary policymakers also need to monitor other economic and financial measures within a credible systematic approach to policy INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICY As discussed above the internationalization of the U.S. economy has implications for monetary and fiscal policy. For example there is a tendency for government deficits to crowd out net exports and for larger more sensitive international capital flows to influence the effects of domestic policies on interest rates. This section analyzes the international dimension of economic policy considerations in more detail Linkages between the United States and the rest of the world led to some of the most visible and significant features of U.S. economic performance in the 1980s. There were wide swings in the value of the U.S. dollar. For example it rose from Deutsche marks per dollar ( DM/ $ ) in to more than DM/ $ in early before falling back to DM/ $ on average in The U.S. current account which includes trade in both goods and services plummeted from a surplus of $ billion in to a record deficit of $ billion in a deficit equivalent to percent of U.S GNP. This deficit reflected a $ billion excess of merchandise imports over exports. Since this peak the merchandise trade deficit has been cut more than percent to an annualized level of $ billion The fact that the United States has important connections to the rest of the global economy must be considered in the design of fiscal and monetary policy. These policies influence economic performance in part through their effects on exchange rates on international capital flows and on the trade balance. The United States accounts for more than one-quarter of total world production of goods and services. Not surprisingly U.S. policy actions have implications for other industrialized economies and for developing economies. Policy actions taken by other countries especially the larger ones also influence U.S. economic performance. Growing recognition of mutual concerns and international economic linkages has heightened awareness of the potential benefits from enhanced international coordination of economic policies. A challenge for the 1990s is to use and improve the process for policy coordination developed in the 1980s to achieve sustained noninflationary growth for the global economy INCREASED OPENNESS OF THE U.S. ECONOMY The growing economic interdependence of the United States and other countries is reflected in expanding international trade and capital flows. U.S. imports of goods and services increased from less than percent of total demand on average in the 1960s to more than percent on average in the 1980s and percent in This increased presence of foreign products has generated concern over the competitiveness of U.S. industries. What is not as frequently recognized is that U.S. exports of goods and services to other countries have also grown to record levels. Nearly percent of domestic production was sold abroad during the 1980s compared with just percent on average during the 1960s. Through international trade economic expansion in the rest of the world contributes to the health of the U.S. economy International financial markets have also grown dramatically over the past decade. Capital flows from abroad help to finance in- vestment expenditures in the United States. These flows respond quickly in 24-hour financial markets to differences in short-term interest rates and other developments across countries. Because capital movements are sensitive to differences in policy the globalization of financial markets has increased the interdependence of what were traditionally regarded as domestic policies Implications of Openness for Monetary and Fiscal Policies International considerations do not alter the basic principle that credible systematic monetary and fiscal policies can promote noninflationary growth. The complex interactions among countries however should be taken into account in policy design U.S. policymakers must recognize that international linkages influence the effectiveness of their policy actions. The experience of to early provides an example. In a determined effort to bring inflation under control the Federal Reserve supported by the Administration pursued firm anti-inflationary policies during Fiscal policy turned expansionary during the recession. These policies did contribute to the reduction of inflation and to strong economic growth in and However they also contributed to rapid appreciation of the U.S. dollar ( Chart ) and a decline in net exports. First tight monetary policy and then declines in government and private saving relative to investment put upward pressure on interest rates in the United States. Partly in response to the resulting interest rate differentials the dollar appreciated. Imports became relatively cheap while U.S. exports became more expensive abroad. The resulting trade and current account deficits were the counterparts to the net capital inflows U.S. policy also affected the global economy. In particular the U.S. economic recovery helped spur growth worldwide in the wake of the deep recession. At the same time the increased demand for funds in international markets as the world economy recovered contributed to a rise in world interest rates which added to the difficulties developing countries faced in meeting their external debt obligations EXTERNAL BALANCE AND EXCHANGE-RATE OBJECTIVES To what extent should exchange-rate stability and external balance current account and trade balance be objectives of macroeconomic policy ? The short answer is that both should be of concern to policymakers because in an open economy both are related to the fundamental objectives of economic growth and rising living standards. Like price instability current account imbalances and exchange-rate fluctuations especially large persistent misalignments may jeopardize efficient resource allocation and thus economic growth Chart U.S. REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE. The real value of the U.S. dollar appreciated sharply in the first half of the 1980s before depreciating and then stabilizing at lower levels Index March = I I I l I I I Note : Data are monthly Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System External Imbalance Current account deficits reflect an excess of investment over domestic saving. If that gap resulted from unusually strong investment it would not generally be considered a problem. Inflows of foreign savings can contribute to higher investment spurring economic growth and putting in place productive capacity to service the debt in the future without slowing the growth of domestic living standards. A reason for concern over the rise in the U.S. current account deficit from to was that it primarily reflected a decline in domestic saving. As saving has revived the deficit has been cut by more than percent since the mid-1987 peak An aggregate current account deficit implies that imports exceed exports in some sectors and some of these sectoral trade imbalances are often large. Competitively priced imports may threaten domestic production and fuel pressures for protectionist trade policies such as import tariffs or quotas. Yielding to these pressures impedes the efficient allocation of resources and harms consumers Taken to an extreme increased barriers to trade in one country result in a retaliatory trade war that can lead to worldwide reces- sion. This danger provides a second reason for concern about large and persistent external imbalances Exchange Rates Chart shows the value of the dollar relative to currencies of the main U.S. trading partners since The graph shows both short-term volatility and sharp longer term swings in the value of the dollar. In asking whether policymakers should be concerned about exchange-rate changes it is important to distinguish between the two Short-term volatility of the major currency-exchange rates has been much greater during the floating exchange-rate period since than during the previous two decades of the Bretton Woods System of fixed but adjustable rates. Although this fact is widely recognized the problems associated with short-term volatility may be overstated. Exchange rates are the prices of assets ( U.S. dollars relative to other currencies ) Short-term interest rates and other asset prices such as stock prices are even more volatile than exchange rates. Furthermore short-term volatility should not disrupt production decisions such as where to purchase imported inputs provided that longer term trends are predictable. Forward and futures markets can be used to hedge against short-run uncertainties Also empirical studies have found very little evidence that shortterm exchange-rate volatility has a significant influence on the volume of international trade once the influence of other factors ( including real incomes and the relative prices of traded goods ) is taken into account Concern about pronounced medium-term swings in exchange rates is based on the perception that they reflect misalignments relative to long-term sustainable exchange-rate levels. Although there are disagreements about which exchange-rate level is appropriate to use as a benchmark swings in the 1980s were so large that they were widely believed to represent misalignments. Unlike short-term variance medium-term misalignments can have a profound effect on the allocation of resources. Large changes in the value of the dollar relative to the Japanese yen for example have led to large changes in prices of American goods relative to prices of Japanese goods. These large relative price movements and uncertainty about how quickly they might be reversed may complicate decisionmaking for both producers and consumers An appreciation of more than percent such as the U.S. dollar experienced in the mid-1980s can erode the international competitiveness of domestic exporters and import-competing firms putting firms out of business and generating unemployment. At the same time goods and services produced abroad become bargains to domestic consumers helping foreign firms to capture a larger share of the home market. Even if the appreciation is fully reversed within a few years domestic firms may find it difficult to recapture the market share they held before the exchange-rate cycle. Macroeconomic policies that avoid large exchange-rate swings help to create an environment conducive to long-term growth MACROECONOMIC POLICY TOOLS Monetary and fiscal policies influence external balances and exchange rates. For example monetary policy can be used to maintain fixed exchange rates at least temporarily. Monetary and especially fiscal policy can alter domestic saving and investment and thus the current account balance. External balance and exchange rates are determined by a wide variety of factors however including policy and economic performance in other countries. Exchangerate determination is especially complex. There is some tendency for high interest rates in the United States relative to those abroad to be associated with a stronger dollar. However political events credibility of policies and news about economic performance at home or abroad also influence the value of the dollar. Furthermore objectives of policymakers may come into conflict. A more expansionary monetary policy would tend to bring down the value of the dollar but often with the cost of increased domestic inflation Exchange-Market Intervention Policymakers can intervene directly in foreign exchange markets by buying and selling currencies. Following the dollar 's peak in February policymakers used this tool more actively. However the amounts of dollars sold or purchased by authorities are small relative to the total daily sales and purchases in the foreign exchange market approximately $ billion per day As a hypothetical example of foreign exchange intervention suppose the dollar were overvalued. The Federal Reserve or the Treasury could sell dollars and purchase Deutsche marks in attempting to decrease the value of the dollar. When such actions are not permitted to affect the level of bank reserves they are said to be " sterilized " intervention. The Federal Reserve can always sterilize any change in bank reserves through offsetting transactions in Treasury securities. If the Federal Reserve made no transactions to offset or sterilize the increase in bank reserves from a sale of dollars the intervention would be called unsterilized. Unsterilized interventions in effect constitute monetary policy actions. The general practice of the Federal Reserve has been to sterilize intervention operations There is little disagreement that expansionary monetary policy tends to depreciate exchange rates. Most of the recent intervention by major central banks has been routinely sterilized however and some analysts have raised doubts about the effectiveness of steri lized intervention at least as an instrument that produces lasting changes in exchange rates. Arguments in support of the effectiveness of sterilized intervention hinge largely on the fact that official transactions may signal the future course of domestic policy. If other market participants recognize believe and act in response to the signal then sterilized intervention can be an effective tool for moving exchange rates What has been the actual experience with intervention in foreign exchange markets ? Most studies have concluded that sterilized intervention is unlikely to be an effective tool for moving exchange rates in directions that are inconsistent with underlying fundamentals of policy and performance except perhaps in the very short run. The effects are larger and more lasting if backed by other policy changes such as interest rate adjustments which help to make the signal credible. Also coordinated intervention by monetary authorities in more than one country seems to have a greater and more sustained effect on exchange rates than intervention by a single country alone INTERNATIONAL POLICY COORDINATION Recognition of the increasingly integrated global economy and dissatisfaction with economic performance including exchangerate swings and persistent external imbalances have precipitated calls for more consistent and compatible policies among major industrial countries. Since these countries have strengthened the process for international coordination of policies What Is Policy Coordination ? There is no single definition of international policy coordination To some the term has a rather lofty meaning : jointly determined policy actions in support of mutually agreed-upon objectives. However national objectives will often differ substantially or conflict with one another. A more limited definition of policy coordination would be : a process through which national policies are modified in recognition that economic performance is interdependent Neither definition need imply that countries follow identical policies. Countries have different technologies tastes and political institutions. They may also be subject to different economic shocks For example many economists believe that a coordinated effort to reduce external imbalances while avoiding a slowdown in real growth worldwide would include fiscal contraction in the United States which has a current account deficit and an expansionary fiscal stance in Japan and West Germany which have current account surpluses. Thus even if countries adopt the same policy objective actual policy settings are likely to differ 7s Macroeconomic Policy Coordination a Good Idea ? The arguments in favor of policy coordination stress that the effects of one country 's policies spill over to other countries. This spillover is especially true for the larger industrial economies but even here the linkages are stronger among some countries such as those within Western Europe than for others. However policymakers may not take these spillover effects into account in weighing the costs and benefits of policy options. Coordination can improve domestic policy decisions by helping policymakers to consider the global implications of their actions. Small developing countries are likely to benefit greatly from policy coordination among the developed countries if such coordination is successful in increasing world growth. At the same time the most important aspect of promoting noninflationary growth in any one country is that it pursue sound domestic monetary and fiscal policies. Thus macroeconomic policy coordination can also make a positive contribution by encouraging individual countries to pursue the proper credible and systematic policies at home International cooperation is important in other areas as well. In particular agreement on rules for trade improve the functioning of the international trading system with widespread benefits. The United States places a high priority on its active participation in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and is pursuing further international cooperation to advance mutual concerns about the environment What Is the Policy Coordination Process ? Since the leaders of the seven largest industrial economies ( the United States Japan West Germany France the United Kingdom Italy and Canada ) have met in annual economic summits to discuss economic issues of common concern. Over time recognition of the growing integration of world goods and financial markets and shared concerns have led to the realization that further policy cooperation could be mutually beneficial The divergence of economic policies and performance among the major industrial countries after contributed to the sharp rise in the value of the dollar and to the emergence of large trade imbalances. In responding to shared concerns over these developments finance ministers and central bankers from the United States Japan West Germany the United Kingdom and France ( collectively called the G-5 ) met in New York. They agreed to work to strengthen the process for coordinating macroeconomic policies to bring down the value of the dollar and to reduce trade imbalances while maintaining noninflationary growth. In the G-5 together with Canada and Italy ( the G-7 ) initiated regular meetings of their finance ministers and central bank governors. The purpose of these G-7 meetings is to promote more consistent and compatible economic policies among members so as to work toward sustained global growth with low inflation reduced trade imbalances and greater exchange-rate stability The policy coordination process that evolved during the 1980s has two main elements. First the G-7 has instituted a regular high-level dialogue on economic policy performance and objectives. Second the G-7 has developed economic indicators to provide a framework for multilateral surveillance of their economies and to help monitor the international effects of national policies. This process is supplemented through frequent additional discussions in other forums notably the International Monetary Fund the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Bank for International Settlements To What Extent Has Policy Coordination Been Useful ? To what extent has the G-7 process achieved its goals ? Some observers note the continued fluctuations and last year 's appreciation of the dollar and the persistence of trade deficits in the United States and surpluses in West Germany and Japan and conclude that policy coordination has been a failure. This view is extremely narrow and misleading. The economic policy coordination process has promoted more consistent and compatible policies among the major countries helping to sustain the expansion of output and employment while reducing external imbalances. A regular dialogue on key economic policy issues now exists. The use of indicators has helped to focus their discussions on key linkages between economies. Further the discussions have highlighted the importance of structural measures such as lowering marginal tax rates decreasing regulation and reducing barriers to trade to promote greater efficiency and openness thereby facilitating noninflationary growth and adjustment of external balances Over the past decade a substantial convergence in the longer term orientation of monetary policies among G-7 members has occurred. This convergence reflects increased mutual awareness among central bankers of the desirability of reducing inflation rates and moving toward price stability. As shown in Chart this convergence has resulted in an overall reduction in the average inflation rate and the range of inflation rates among West Germany Japan and the United States. With this awareness there was also a common response to the indications of inflation resurgence in At the same time international discussions have reflected concern that the effects of several countries responding together might result in too great a response. Such discussion is a natural part of the evolving policy coordination process and would have been more difficult just years ago Chart CONSUMER PRICES industrial countries Percent During the 1980s consumer price inflation rates declined and converged among United States Japan Germany Note : Data are 12-month changes Source : Department of Commerce SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES FOR INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC POLICIES The increased internationalization of the U.S. economy has important implications for monetary and fiscal policies and helps shape the principles that should form a basis for such policies The United States is part of a global economy that is becoming increasingly integrated. This development implies both that policymakers must take international linkages into account when they design monetary and fiscal policies and that there are potential gains from working together Credibility highlighted in the previous discussions of monetary and fiscal policy is equally important in this context. Consistently following appropriate policies both in the United States and abroad fosters an environment conducive to saving investment and economic growth The ultimate objectives of monetary and fiscal policy are economic growth and rising living standards not exchange-rate stability or current account balance per se. Nonetheless reasonably stable exchange rates and sustainable external bal- ances are important aspects of a healthy economy. Particularly when these variables get far out of line they should be of concern to policymakers The best means to adjust external imbalances and to avoid dollar misalignments is to alter the fundamentals. In the United States such measures should include reducing the Federal budget deficit and taking steps to raise private saving Sterilized intervention by itself is not an effective means for altering long-run exchange-rate levels International macroeconomic policy coordination has had some important successes over the past years but further progress could be made. The G-7 coordination process has been most effective in coordinating policies to respond to shared concerns FINANCIAL EVOLUTION AND FINANCIAL SOUNDNESS A highly developed financial system is central to a modern economy. Financial institutions perform the vital function of channeling savers ' funds into the hands of those who wish to use the resources for investment. When these institutions do their job well funds flow to their most productive uses stimulating growth and improvements in the standard of living. One of the most important challenges facing policymakers over the next several years is to ensure that the financial system continues to adapt efficiently to both domestic and international competitive challenges. At the same time policymakers must take care to preserve the fundamental soundness of the system and to prevent it from imposing unnecessary costs on taxpayers BANKING-TYPE INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR COMPETITORS Broadly speaking savers ' funds can be allocated to investors in three ways. The first is through banking-type financial intermediaries such as commercial banks and savings and loans. The second is through nonbanking financial intermediaries such as pension and mutual funds. The third way is for funds to move directly from individual lenders to borrowers via securities markets. All three have advantages. Banking-type institutions however have historically received special attention from policymakers because they hold the bulk of the funds used by the public to make payments deposits on which checks can be written. For this reason preserving the integrity and stability of the banking system is essential to the daily functioning of the economy In recent years the banking industry has been buffeted by unanticipated problems with loans to developing countries and to the oil and real estate industries as well as by increased competition from other types of financial institutions such as securities firms. The increased competition comes from both foreign and domestic sources and shows no signs of abating ; the innovation of financial products and the globalization of financial services continues at a rapid pace While these competitive developments enhance efficiency they are worrisome to many observers in view of the government 's enormous stake in the financial sector. As the thrift industry crisis has illustrated the combination of poorly designed policies and sharp changes in the external environment can be extraordinarily costly In the larger commercial banking sector where the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insures almost $ trillion of deposits difficulties have also arisen. For example in the commercial banking industry suffered bad debt losses ( also known as chargeoffs ) on almost $ billion of loans representing percent of loans outstanding. Before peaking in this ratio had climbed steadily over the decade in it stood at only percent. Although the problems in commercial banking are not comparable in scope with those in the thrift industry they do underscore the importance of sound regulatory and supervisory policies to ensure that taxpayers are not asked to bear undue costs Thus policymakers must deal with a difficult tension : many of the banking industry 's troubles can be traced to increased competition from other providers of financial services but policies that would protect banks from competition would impose large costs on their customers and on the economy as a whole. For example restricting competition in financial services could lead to lower returns to savers higher borrowing costs for companies and a concomitant decrease in investment. Furthermore any such restrictions may be unworkable as international competition increases. In planning more sensible policies it is useful first to understand the basic economic functions of banks and of their principal competitors the securities markets The Economic Role of Banks Banks have traditionally performed two distinct economic services one on the asset side of their balance sheets and one on the liability side. On the asset side banks produce and monitor information that is used to evaluate the returns on investment projects When such information production is expensive it is more efficient to have it carried out in a centralized institution ( i.e. a bank ) than to have the work needlessly duplicated by a large number of securities market participants On the liability side banking-type institutions provide a medium of exchange by issuing claims ( checking accounts ) that are immediately payable on demand and that can be used by consumers and firms for transactions purposes. Unlike money market mutual funds banks issue these claims while simultaneously devoting some of their investment portfolios to illiquid assets. Consequently bank instability can pose a serious threat to the financial system and to the functioning of the broader economy. If many of a bank 's depositors demand immediate repayment and a run begins the bank will be unable to satisfy its contractual obligations. Furthermore a sharp drop of bank liabilities if not offset by other factors would result in a decrease in the money supply which could cause a recession. The U.S. experience with bank panics in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was the motivation for the current system of deposit insurance as well as for the Federal Reserve 's role as lender of last resort to banks. This system has worked very well in preventing further panics although it has become apparent that deposit insurance can also encourage excessive risk-taking by institutions that do not have enough of their own capital at stake While banking-type institutions have clear economic advantages allocating credit directly through the securities markets also has benefits. First circumventing the intermediary reduces costs These costs take the form not only of brick-and-mortar overhead for banks but also of reserve requirements capital requirements and deposit insurance premiums which act as a " tax " on intermediated or bank-channeled credit. Second securities markets create assets that unlike many bank loans are easily traded among a wide array of investors seeking to diversify their portfolios CHANGES IN THE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY Many recent developments in the financial system can be understood in the context of a single trend : an increase in the appeal of direct or securities-channeled credit allocation relative to fully intermediated credit allocation Examples of the growing importance of direct credit abound. On the lending side commercial paper uncollateralized borrowings in the open market has made large inroads into commercial banks ' traditional business of short-term lending to industrial corporations. The volume of nonfmancial corporations ' commercial paper outstanding has grown from $ billion in to $ billion today an annual rate of increase of percent. Over the same time bank commercial and industrial loans have grown at only percent per year. Partly as a consequence banks ' market share of short- and intermediate-term credit extended directly to domestic nonfinancial companies has fallen from percent to percent A similar phenomenon has occurred in mortgage finance. Mortgage-backed securities allow home loans to be purchased directly by investors rather than being funded by thrifts or banks. These securities were developed in the mid-1970s and by the end of approximately $ billion in these securities were outstanding More than one-third of the financing for mortgage loans on one- to four-family homes is currently channeled through the mortgagebacked securities market The high yield or " junk " bond market provides another example of the move to direct finance. Before this market 's development in the late 1970s only the relatively small number of companies with investment grade ( top-quality ) debt ratings of BBB and above were able to access the public markets for debt. Lesser known or riskier borrowers had to rely on banks or privately placed debt. By such noninvestment grade companies had issued more than $ billion in new public debt Several structural factors notably the revolution in information and communications technology have produced this shift toward directly allocated credit. With information costs reduced banks have found that one of their principal comparative advantages efficient production of credit information is no longer as valuable for some types of credits as it used to be Impact of Innovation on Bank Profits Whatever their causes the innovations of the past several years have had a profound impact on the business of banking. Overall bank profitability has been falling modestly. The average return on assets for all banks was percent in ; over the period to it averaged percent. This broad trend however does not fully capture the changes in the industry 's economics. Variations between the performance of successful and unsuccessful institutions have become much more pronounced. For example the return on assets for banks in the lowest percent of the industry fell precipitously over the same interval dropping from percent in to an average of percent during to In many cases the largest banks ( known as money center banks ) experienced more pronounced declines in profitability than their smaller counterparts partly as a result of their large exposure to developing country loans. These banks ' traditional customers had included the largest and most well-known corporations for whom the shift to securities market credit was often accomplished with relative ease ADAPTATION TO CHANGE The widening variations in profitability across banks highlight a fundamental economic reality : as competition intensifies some banks will find that the range of activities where they retain a distinct competitive advantage has narrowed. Many banks still maintain an economic advantage in some traditional lines of business such as consumer lending where information costs are still rela lively high and where banks and thrifts in the aggregate have maintained their market share New Lines of Business for Banks Some banks have also successfully redeployed old skills into new lines of business that have been spawned by innovation. The rapid growth of standby letters of credit ( SLCs ) illustrates this trend Bank SLCs are often used to guarantee the creditworthiness of commercial paper issues particularly those of less well-known borrowers. In this way the provision of credit to corporate borrowers is efficiently specialized into two component parts credit analysis and funding. Banks continue to perform a portion of the credit analysis and bear a contingent responsibility should the borrower be unable to repay. At the same time the loan is funded more costeffectively through the public market. Thus unlike a conventional loan an SLC does not appear as an asset on a bank 's balance sheet The volume of bank SLCs grew at a 26-percent annual rate from to SLCs are disproportionately important for moneycenter banks which have been most affected by the loss of traditional lending customers. More generally other activities have been specialized in such a way that banks only participate in an off-balance-sheet fashion. This change is reflected in the increasing relative importance of fees to banks. From to the ratio of noninterest income to assets for all banks rose from percent to percent. The increase was much more dramatic for moneycenter banks which saw the ratio rise from percent to percent. As the above discussion suggests valid economic reasons support the shift by banks to off-balance-sheet activities. Still some have expressed concern about the risks involved particularly in light of the fact that current regulations do not impose capital requirements or deposit insurance premiums on all of these activities. ( As discussed below recently adopted international risk-based capital standards do include letters of credit and thus mitigate this concern. ) Efficiency of Industry Adaptation In an unregulated industry the market mechanism can be relied on to carry out adjustment efficiently. Indeed the widening gaps between strong and weak firms that accompany intensified competition would be seen as a healthy sign of evolution those that found a niche of competitive advantage would prosper while those that failed to adapt would quickly find themselves in trouble. Unfortunately deposit insurance can hamper the ability of the banking industry to adapt efficiently to changes in the competitive environment. Normally firms that stop being profitable are subject to discipline from their capital suppliers they are no longer able to raise money to reinvest in unprofitable lines of business. In this way excess capacity is flushed from an industry. However deposit insurance allows banks to keep raising funds even when these funds are being devoted to activities that are not economically viable According to this line of reasoning the deterioration in bank credit quality seen in recent years ( as measured for example by the increases in loan chargeoffs ) may not simply reflect one-time adverse shocks in particular sectors and geographic regions. It may in part be systemic and attributable to the interaction of intensified competition and lack of capital market discipline. It is interesting to note that the growth in loan chargeoffs has occurred while net interest margins for banks have remained fairly stable. In other words banks have suffered from more bad loan experience but in the aggregate have not received increased compensation from borrowers. One interpretation of this evidence is that some banks have reacted to heightened competition in part by loosening their credit standards and offering better terms to lower quality borrowers From the perspective of a policymaker it is extremely difficult to identify a priori when banks are pursuing activities where they add real economic value as opposed to ones where they do not earn sufficient profits to justify continued investment. A line of business that is wholly appropriate for one institution may be a money-loser for another. Often it can take several years for the costs and benefits to show up in the data in such a way that they are visible to an outsider POLICY ACTIONS AND PROPOSALS The events of the past few years have prompted some important changes in banking policy. In addition other options are receiving increased attention Risk-Based Capital Requirements Risk-based capital requirements are an example of a policy measure that addresses the issues discussed above. In the summer of industrial nations including the United States and its major trading partners agreed to phase in a risk-based capital system by the end of The essence of the system is that banks investing in riskier types of assets would be made to hold more capital against such assets that is assets would be " risk-weighted " for the purposes of calculating capital requirements. Two other noteworthy features are that : ( ) some off-balance-sheet items such as SLCs would also be added to risk-weighted assets and hence would require a capital cushion of their own ; and ( ) banks from the participating countries would for the first time be subject to common minimum capital standards By making required capital a function of risk these rules increase the incentives for self-monitoring among banks choosing the most aggressive strategies. Also the risks associated with off-balance-sheet activities are now explicitly recognized. This diminishes the likelihood that banks will want to engage in such activities simply as a way to do business without increasing their capital base While the self-disciplinary benefits of increased capital are well understood risk-based requirements also allow banks whose comparative advantage lies in safer activities gathering deposits from smaller retail customers for example to focus on such a niche without being unduly penalized for doing so. Were all institutions to face the same high capital requirements relatively safe ones would find it difficult to earn a satisfactory return and might even feel pushed toward riskier activities in an attempt to boost returns Finally the international nature of the accord recognizes that although not all bank product lines should be treated the same all banks offering the same product lines should. Maintaining a level regulatory playing field across different countries is an important goal and will become increasingly crucial as cross-border investment in financial services continues. Indeed the need for an international approach to financial policy extends well beyond banking regulation and includes such key objectives as harmonizing the clearing and settlement procedures for securities transactions The risk-based capital agreement is certainly not a panacea. The risk categories involved are quite broad and do not capture true economic risk precisely. For example there is no consideration of risk caused by movements in the general level of interest rates Nonetheless the accord is a step in the right direction. Improvements in the quality of information available to regulators perhaps through the adoption of market-value accounting techniques could lead to better risk measurement and further benefits from such an approach Risk-Based Deposit Insurance Premiums A similar measure that is often discussed is the use of risk-based deposit insurance premiums. Institutions currently pay a flat fee per dollar of deposits for deposit insurance irrespective of the riskiness of their portfolios. Making the cost of insurance vary in a market-like fashion with the risk assumed by the insurer would further improve the incentives of banks with respect to choice of investments Both risk-based capital requirements and risk-based deposit insurance programs illustrate an important general principle : many of the concerns outlined above can be addressed with a system that allows institutions to opt into a set of rules that best suit their strengths and strategies. In the above examples banks can choose whether to adopt high- or low-risk strategies and are then presented with capital requirements or insurance premiums appropriate for the strategy selected. This opting feature is consistent with the goal of encouraging institutions to focus on the activities that they do best Thrift Industry Legislation The recent thrift legislation the Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of also contains such opting features. The legislation curtails the direct powers of savings and loan institutions ( S&Ls ) requiring them to focus more narrowly on their traditional areas of expertise deposit-taking and home mortgage lending. At the same time the act permits separately capitalized affiliates of thrifts to engage in a broad range of activities so long as these activities are not funded with insured deposits The new law also recognizes that the traditional direct product lines alone may no longer be profitable for all S&Ls and provides for a market-based transfer of S&L assets into the less-restrictive commercial banking regulatory system : S&Ls can either be acquired by existing commercial banks or with some costs can choose themselves to switch to a commercial banking charter The Need to Modernize the Financial Framework The dramatic changes of recent years have exerted pressure on the Nation 's Depression-era financial framework. Financial institution law consists of half-century-old statutes and ad hoc deregulation by courts States and Federal regulators. The result is a complex web of overlapping rules that can potentially create inequities and market inefficiencies One example is the Glass-Steagall Act a law designed to separate investment banking from commercial banking. Although recent rulings by the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller of the Currency have eased certain restrictions banks are still constrained in a number of activities including the underwriting of corporate equity securities. In the current environment these activities may represent a natural way for some banks to redeploy existing assets and skills with concomitant benefits for the economy While some favor abolishing Glass-Steagall constraints others have expressed concerns namely that some institutions might take advantage of broadened powers to diversify in an uneconomic fashion and that the costs of such mistakes may ultimately be borne in part by Federal deposit insurance. These concerns underscore the fact that Glass-Steagall initiatives and those related to deposit insurance can not be considered separately from one another. Rather they must all be seen as coherent parts of a larger effort an attempt to reevaluate and modernize the Nation 's laws to compete in a global context There is no consensus on a single paradigm for modernizing financial regulation although several models have been proposed. A glance at other countries reveals a diversity of approaches to issues such as deposit insurance and the separation between banking and securities activities. Moreover many countries are in the midst of financial reforms themselves reforms that may have important implications for global competition in financial services Clearly any sweeping proposals to revamp the structure of financial regulation would require study and refinement before they could be seriously considered for implementation. The Department of the Treasury is now coordinating a detailed study of Federal deposit insurance as mandated in the thrift legislation. The time may be ripe for further work that provides a fundamental reassessment of financial policy particularly if the analysis is grounded in the sound logic of encouraging efficient focused competition among financial institutions SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES FOR FINANCIAL REGULATION As the above analysis makes clear no easy solutions exist to the difficult problems surrounding financial regulation. Nevertheless important policy principles emerge : Continued competitive pressures on banks from new products and new institutions ( domestic as well as foreign ) are both desirable and inevitable. Predicting exactly the areas in which these pressures will next manifest themselves is difficult. Thus regulation should create an environment that is hospitable to a broad range of adaptive behavior by banks Efficient adaptation entails not only entering profitable new lines of business but also exiting old ones that are no longer attractive and avoiding inappropriate new ones. Regulation must not encourage institutions to do business in areas where they would not otherwise be competitive A great deal of information is needed to assess precisely which activities are profitable for a given institution. Thus rather than relying on an inevitably arbitrary list of prohibited activities to guide decisions it may be preferable to let institutions themselves make the assessments. If this is to be done however it is critical that incentives be properly aligned institutions must be forced to bear the costs of their mistakes Rules should be applied consistently across all types of institutions undertaking the same activities. At the same time it can make sense to have different rules for different activities and to allow institutions to opt for those rules that best fit their competitive strengths SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING COMMENTS Macroeconomic policies can make substantial contributions to achievement of the Nation 's economic goals if these policies are formulated appropriately. Experience and research have indicated that a properly chosen systematic policy program is more likely to perform well than a short-sighted discretionary approach to policy Unpredictable changes in economic and financial relationships imply that appropriate rules for policy in some circumstances are rather general. In such cases when it is inappropriate to specify in advance how the tools of policy will be adjusted in reaction to particular events policy credibility is especially useful. Credibility that policy will achieve its ultimate goals helps to bring about a better economic outcome in the face of unpredictable change by reducing uncertainty about future developments and making it easier for economic decisionmakers to plan for the future Increased credibility in one area of economic policy can reinforce credibility in another area. For example public belief that the deficit will be reduced according to the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings targets would help build credibility that monetary policy will succeed in achieving low inflation The increasingly integrated world economy implies that policymakers must take careful account of international linkages in designing macroeconomic policies. The international macroeconomic coordination process can help policymakers work toward sustained global growth with low inflation reduced trade imbalances and greater exchange-rate stability The pace of innovation in financial markets remains rapid Maintaining a healthy economy and efficient markets for capital allocation will require that policies enhance rather than constrain the ability of financial institutions to adapt to change Macroeconomic policies should emphasize long-run economic performance. Thus these policies should be directed at strong economic growth through increased national saving and investment controlling and gradually reducing inflation and fostering a safe and competitive financial marketplace. Such policies will ensure both continued leadership by the United States in the world economy and rising living standards for American families CHAPTER Investing in America 's Future A MAJOR CHALLENGE of the 1990s will be to increase the rate at which the productive capacity of the U.S. economy grows. Increasing the rates of growth of productive capacity and living standards will require higher rates of saving and investment. Yet longstanding tax spending and regulatory policies impede national saving and investment. Partly if not entirely because of these government policies Americans save and invest a smaller fraction of gross national product ( GNP ) than their counterparts in other industrialized countries The Federal Government can not alone produce dramatic increases in capacity growth. But it can foster an environment conducive to rapid long-term economic growth. The President is committed to maintaining America 's economic leadership and has thus made it a central element of his economic program to remove impediments to saving investment and innovation A higher rate of growth will significantly increase living standards and expand opportunities for both current and future generations. The cumulative effect of even a modest increase in the economic growth rate is enormous. Italy had only percent of the per capita income of the United Kingdom in but with an annual growth rate about one-half percentage point higher overtook the United Kingdom by the 1980s. Growth rate differences of fractions of a percentage point have a substantial effect on how rapidly living standards increase from one generation to the next Economic growth can shape society more broadly as well. Rapid growth creates good jobs thereby increasing economic opportunities for everyone. The poor benefit not only from these new economic opportunities but also from the greater willingness of others to share their gains. Higher economic growth can reduce the potential for conflicts between generations. As the baby-boom generation begins to reach retirement age early in the next century the ratio of retirees to workers will rise dramatically. Improving the productive capacity of the economy will permit the United States to accommodate more easily the needs of the future elderly population The prospects for rapid long-term economic growth in the United States depend on investment in factories equipment knowledge and skills. The rate of investment in the United States is below that of other major industrialized countries in part because the United States saves at a lower rate than other countries A higher rate of investment will increase the competitiveness of the U.S. economy. Reducing the bias toward current consumption will increase saving thereby raising the accumulation of capital assets both domestic and foreign by Americans. This accumulation in turn will expand the resources available for future consumption. Raising the rate of national saving is essential to fostering greater increases in future standards of living Government policies can have a major impact on the environment for economic growth. As stressed in Chapter credible stable monetary and fiscal policies are a key to reducing uncertainty and to promoting long-term growth. Tax and spending policies designed to remove impediments to working saving investing and innovating can have a strong positive influence on economic growth. For example reductions in marginal tax rates and broadening of the tax base especially after the Tax Reform Act of have reduced the impact of tax distortions on economic decisions Reducing the uncertainty in the legal system removing barriers to the free flow of capital across international borders and adopting regulatory policies that maximize market flexibility and encourage innovation can all improve the climate for growth DETERMINANTS OF GROWTH The Nation 's productive capacity depends on the level of technology the supply and quality of capital and the number and skills of workers. Increased utilization of labor and capital translates quickly into growth in the output of goods and services. As in most economic expansions much of the relatively rapid growth since the recovery began in can be attributed to increases in the employment and utilization of existing resources although productivity growth has also played a role and indeed has improved since the 1970s. Because fewer opportunities to increase utilization of available resources remain the economy will need to rely more heavily on other sources of growth in the 1990s TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE Technological advances improve the productivity of inputs and the quality of output thereby increasing the rate of economic growth and raising living standards. Innovations in the form of new products new machines new production techniques and new communication and transportation methods exert an important beneficial effect on growth. Entrepreneurs taking substantial risks ( and sometimes failing ) often translate new ideas into new products or processes. The Administration has advanced policies de signed to spur investment in research and innovation and to provide a more favorable environment for entrepreneurial activity and new business formation INVESTMENT IN PHYSICAL CAPITAL Investment is a second major vehicle for increasing the rate of economic growth. Increases in physical capital such as tools and machinery make the labor force more productive as each worker has more capital to use. Further new investment permits technological improvements to permeate the U.S. economy providing each worker with better capital. Investment is also needed to start the new business ventures that help to give the U.S. economy its vitality. Sustained high investment leads to higher productivity higher wages and higher standards of living The cost and availability of financial capital are critical parts of the investment climate. Increases in the total supply of funds to finance investment decrease the cost and increase the availability of capital. Although domestic saving has provided the bulk of funds for U.S. investment in recent years foreign capital inflows reflecting in part the attractiveness of U.S. investment opportunities have provided about one-sixth of investment financing. Increasing the rate of national saving will provide more funds for investment and as discussed below should help to reduce the U.S trade deficit. For these reasons removing impediments to saving is a high priority of the Administration INVESTMENT IN HUMAN CAPITAL A third major source of growth is raising the number of workers and improving their skills. Efforts by workers to increase their skills through training and education is investment in human capital. A highly skilled work force and a flexible labor market have long been basic economic strengths of the United States. But the increased complexity and competitiveness of the world economy demand new skills greater training and additional flexibility Chapter analyzes the challenges and opportunities for growth in human capital in the next decade TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS AND ECONOMIC GROWTH Technological change has played a central role in economic growth. Many famous innovations in agriculture textile manufacture transportation communications and electronics have played an important role in economic growth and have led to a transformation of society over the past two centuries. The combined effect of a host of less visible minor improvements in product designs and production techniques has been equally important. There is a role for government policy in financing technological progress because the full benefits of research are rarely captured solely by the firm or individual undertaking the research. Rather additional benefits accrue to society as a whole. Because these additional benefits can not be captured as part of the private-sector return there is a natural tendency for private markets to do too little research and development from society 's broader viewpoint. The Federal Government can offset this tendency through policies to raise national spending on research and development FACTORS THAT AFFECT TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS Many people view technological progress as the result of work by solitary scientists or inventors motivated solely by curiosity. Yet ample evidence suggests that economic factors influence innovation. Thomas Edison after unsuccessfully trying to sell his first invention ( an automatic vote counter ) vowed that he would work only on ideas for things that people would buy. The size of the potential market determines the return on invention and therefore influences investment in applied research. Even in universities the availability of funding influences the direction of basic research But invention is only the first step in technological progress. To raise economic growth an idea must be translated into a marketable product or service applied on a production line or built into a new machine. Development which brings the fruits of research to market is expensive : two-thirds of U.S. research and development ( R&D ) expenditures in were devoted to development rather than to basic or applied research. The actual application of an innovation is an important step beyond development. Information about the technological advance must be disseminated and workers must be trained to use it. In many cases it is prohibitively expensive to modify the old capital stock to embody new technology Therefore the rate at which new technology actually augments productivity depends in part on the rate at which new capital goods are created i.e. on the rate of investment. A recent study estimates that percent of the contribution of technological change to growth in the United States between and came from advances that were embodied in capital Raising the rate of investment in the United States may increase the rate of technological progress in other ways although the size of these effects is difficult to determine. Higher rates of investment shorten the lag between innovation and use increasing the return on research efforts and spurring additional advances. Further use of new capital equipment and facilities may trigger discoveries of new ways of doing business new production processes and new potential products TRENDS IN R&D SPENDING The United States spent $ billion on R&D in This level reflects dramatic growth as real R&D spending grew more than fivefold since and doubled as a fraction of GNP. As shown in Table the United States spends more on R&D than four other leading industrialized nations combined. The share of total world R&D performed by the United States has however fallen over the past years as other countries have grown rapidly and have approached or reached the technological frontier TABLE R&D Expenditures for Five Major Industrialized Countries France1 United Kingdom2 United States As a percent of GNP Estimated nondefense R&D expenditures ( billions of dollars ) As a percent of GNP Japan2 R&D expenditures ( billions of dollars ) West Germany Data for France are based on GDP ; consequently percentages may be slightly overstated compared to GNP Data for Japan and the United Kingdom are for Note. Foreign currency conversions to U.S. dollars are calculated based on Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development purchasing power parity exchange rates Source : National Science Foundation To the extent that R&D produces knowledge with the same benefits regardless of the size of the economy the absolute level of R&D spending is the critical measure of R&D investment. An alternative measure of national R&D spending is its intensity the share of GNP devoted to R&D. The United States West Germany and Japan each currently spend about percent of their GNP on R&D with France and the United Kingdom spending only slightly smaller fractions of their GNP ( Table ) But a larger proportion of the R&D in the United States is defense-related. The $ billion that the United States spent on nondefense R&D in was a smaller fraction of GNP than were nondefense R&D expenditures in West Germany and Japan Although investment in R&D is only part of the explanation for the rate of technological change it is clearly important. Average private rates of return on R&D investment are extremely high : estimated rates exceed percent a year. Moreover these returns do not reflect all of the returns to R&D because it is difficult for an innovator to capture all of the benefits of an innovation. Some innovations can not be patented ; some patents are hard to defend ; all patents eventually expire. An innovation may have spinoffs or ramifications that others bring to market. Users of the product as well as the innovator receive benefits. For these and other reasons the returns to society of R&D investment are estimated to average twice those to the firm that makes the investment THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT For basic research the difference between the benefits to society and the returns to those who perform the research is often particularly large. Basic research frequently increases knowledge that has wide application. Because it is usually difficult or inefficient to keep advances in basic research secret the benefits accrue broadly Private firms must weigh the costs and risks of a potential investment in basic research against the modest fraction of the total expected social benefit that they generally receive and thus tend strongly to underinvest in basic research. Moreover basic research contributes to the strength of universities which train scientists and engineers for the private sector as well as to our national defense. The Federal Government has a key role in supporting basic research Although industry performs about three-quarters of all R&D in the United States the Federal Government plays an enormous role in science and technology. It provides percent of the funds for R&D most of which is undertaken by industry and universities The Federal Government carries out R&D at many facilities accounting for percent of national R&D spending. It helps to finance the education of scientists and engineers. It protects the intellectual property rights of innovators through the patent system and laws dealing with copyrights trademarks and trade secrets. It encourages private innovation through a 20-percent income tax credit for research and experimentation ( R&E ) and by allowing most R&D expenses to be deducted for tax purposes immediately rather than spread over several years STRENGTHENING THE U.S. RESEARCH BASE The Administration has proposed a broad program of initiatives that will strengthen the Nation 's basic research base and enhance private-sector incentives to translate this knowledge into productive innovations Improving the Legal Environment The Administration has advanced important proposals to improve the legal environment for innovation. First the Administration is aggressively pursuing improved international protection of intellectual property. The current negotiations in the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) are an important forum for developing better international rules. Negotiations on intellectual property rights are also being conducted in the World Intellectual Property Organization and in trilateral talks with the European Community and Japan Second the Administration has proposed reform of product liability laws. The current product liability system with different State laws generates excessive litigation increases the cost of doing business in the United States and discourages innovation particularly in the form of new products. The Administration supports the adoption of uniform product liability standards based on three principles of fairness : the right of an innocent person to fair compensation for actual damages ; liability based on responsibility for harm and not ability to pay ; and encouragement of alternatives to costly litigation. The proposed changes to product liability laws would maintain incentives to produce safe products but would restore balance to the tort system and reduce uncertainty particularly for new products Third the Administration supports continued elimination of unwarranted regulation. Deregulation can spur innovation as well as lower prices. New telephone equipment was rapidly introduced after deregulation of the market. Airlines created more efficient route structures after deregulation. Lives are extended and research is accelerated by the expedited approval of drugs for acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) Deregulation also requires a continuous reexamination of existing regulatory policies in light of new technologies. Antitrust regulation in particular must be sensitive to changes in technology and in international competition. Unnecessary and burdensome regulations must not be allowed to stifle new products and processes Restoring the Capital Gains Tax Differential Although applied research and development have high average rates of return they are also quite risky. The high cost of capital such risk produces is a particularly onerous burden for new ventures and small businesses which have only limited access to traditional sources of finance. Much of the return to entrepreneurs and their backers who bring new products to market particularly through startup ventures comes through increasing the value of the business. Reducing the tax rate on capital gains will reward those who bring successful ideas to market and will help provide a climate that encourages businesses to invest In new technologies and products Because capital gains are taxed only when assets are sold the current high tax rate discourages the sales of assets and locks in investors. Reducing the tax rate on capital gains will free these investors to search for more productive new investments The Administration has proposed restoring a capital gains tax differential such as existed before the Tax Reform Act of Most major foreign competitors tax long-term capital gains less heavily than ordinary income if they tax them at all. A lower tax rate on capital gains will encourage entrepreneurs to take risks to advance themselves by creating wealth for others : new firms hiring new workers producing new products for new markets here and abroad. Reducing the capital gains tax rate will encourage innovation and by increasing investment hasten the adoption of these innovations Making Permanent the R&E Tax Credit Under current law the R&E credit is scheduled to expire on December Before the credit was designed so that higher R&E expenditures reduced future credits which diminished the incentives to undertake further research. In the incentives in the R&E credit were improved without substantially affecting revenue. The Administration proposal to make the credit permanent would be an even more significant reform. It would permit businesses to establish and expand research facilities without fearing that the tax laws will suddenly change Increasing Basic Research Funding America 's leadership in science and technology depends on excellence in basic research. Support for basic research especially at the Nation 's universities makes a critical investment in the 21st century both by creating knowledge and by training a new generation of scientists and engineers The Administration believes that Federal investment in research should focus on fundamental advances in science and technology that have broad relevance and that no individual firm or industry would have the incentive to produce on its own. Accordingly the Administration supported substantial increases in Federal investment in basic and applied research in the budget. For the Administration has a number of new initiatives designed to expand the human frontier. These initiatives include major increases in funding for the National Science Foundation 's research programs ( continuing the progress begun in fiscal toward doubling the Foundation 's budget by ) for space science and exploration to maintain America 's leadership into the next century and for the Superconducting Super Collider to provide new insight into the fundamental structure of matter. Increased funding will be more effective if it is accompanied by improved management of Federal research programs. One way to increase the effectiveness of Federal research spending is to encourage the timely transfer of scientific advances to private-sector applications Relying on the Market Some have argued for a broad new Federal role : choosing specific civilian technologies and financing their development or commercialization by special tax treatment or direct subsidy a so-called industrial policy. Such an expansion of the current Federal role is strongly opposed by this Administration The private sector has inherent advantages over government in identifying potentially useful new technologies. Private decisions are disciplined by careful market evaluations of their prospects Government decisions in contrast are often influenced by noneconomic objectives and based on information supplied by self-interested parties without regard to taxpayers ' cost Governments in the United States and elsewhere have shown themselves to be less able than private businesses to pick specific technologies that will be commercially successful. They have often supported fashionable technologies with powerful advocates rather than those that are economically productive. The billions of dollars in development costs and operating losses that have been invested in the Concorde by the British and French governments illustrate this phenomenon well. Moreover in many cases governments have continued to support technologies in which they have invested even if those technologies have been long since demonstrated to be economically unsound by market and technological developments For example the synthetic fuels program in the United States lived on for years after its economic futility was evident to most observers Over the past years the world has learned that excessive government involvement in the economy leads to unsound decisions chokes off productive innovation and in the final analysis slows growth and costs jobs. The best way to support development of civilian technology is through improving private incentives for applied research and development not by attempting the impossible job of second-guessing private-sector investments. It is appropriate however for the government to support the development of technologies clearly related to national defense that a careful analysis indicates would not be generated by the private market. In such cases the government has always relied primarily on the private sector to undertake the R&D required in the development process The Administration 's proposals will improve incentives for innovation by : Protecting intellectual property through international negotiations Reforming product liability laws to restore balance to the tort system Removing regulatory barriers to research innovation and development Reducing the tax rate on capital gains to spur entrepeneurial activity Making the R&E tax credit permanent to reduce uncertainty and Substantially increasing funding for the basic research essential to America 's future CAPITAL INVESTMENT The United States has devoted substantial resources to investment but the U.S. investment rate is low by international standards. Gross domestic investment as a percent of GNP in the United States is the lowest of the six major industrialized countries shown in Chart Between and while the other countries devoted an annual average of percent of their GNP to national investment the United States invested only percent. Even in Canada a North American country with a similar economic structure investment as a share of GNP was percentage points higher than in the United States Chart GROSS FIXED INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF GNP and was low by international standards Investment in the United States between Percent Canada France Germany Japan U.K U.S Annual Average HI National Investment E ^ Private Investment Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development One reason that the United States has a lower investment rate than other countries is that government policies are biased against investment. Moreover several past attempts to address this policy imbalance have been abandoned after a short period leading to increased uncertainty in the investment environment. The Administration is committed to removing impediments to investment and to creating a stable environment conducive to long-run growth CAPITAL ACCUMULATION IN THE UNITED STATES The comparatively low rate of investment in the United States is not a recent phenomenon. As shown in Chart real capital purchases have fluctuated around percent of real GNP for the entire postwar period. During the long expansion since however U.S. real gross investment performance has been quite strong. Similarly the rate of investment in nonresidential fixed capital compares favorably with the historical record Using an alternative measure of investment however the recent U.S. investment record appears less impressive even by historical standards. Chart shows investment rates excluding depreciation real net investment as a fraction of real net national product ( NNP ) ( NNP is GNP less depreciation. ) Using this measure net investment has remained below the postwar average for the decade of the 1980s The difference between the gross and net investment rates during the 1980s reflects a change in the composition of the capital stock. Over time equipment has risen as a share of the total capital stock. Because equipment wears out more quickly than other capital this shift has raised the fraction of the capital stock that depreciates each year. Because measuring depreciation is difficult true economic depreciation may differ from the estimates in the national income and product accounts. Nonetheless the movement toward a greater share of equipment in the capital stock implies that the difference between gross and net investment has grown over time The significance of this trend goes beyond accounting. The gross rate of investment is particularly important when new capital is necessary to incorporate technical advances into production. Both replacement investment and capacity expansion will offer the opportunity to install improved equipment and newer technologies In these circumstances increasing the gross rate of investment permits faster adoption of innovations raising the quality of the capital stock On the other hand investment also contributes to economic growth by increasing the total amount of capital available for production. Only investment above the amount lost to depreciation or net investment serves to increase the available capital stock Neither investment measure alone is sufficient to judge the U.S investment performance. The gross investment rate is a better indicator of opportunities to improve the quality of the capital stock but may substantially overstate total capital accumulation. The rate of net investment may understate improvements in capital but will better measure increases in the stock of available capital On balance the investment rate in the United States is healthy by Chart REAL GROSS INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF GNP Gross investment was high in the 1980s Percent All Fixed l I l l l l I I l l l l l l l l l I I Source : Department of Commerce Chart REAL NET INVESTMENT AS PERCENT OF NNP Net investment was below average in the 1980s Percent Fixed Nonresidential I l l l l l i l l l Source : Department of Commerce l l l I l l l l historical standards but remains below the investment rates of other nations HOW A HIGHER INVESTMENT RATE BENEFITS THE ECONOMY At first glance small changes in the investment rate may not seem to have important consequences for economic growth. A simple example shows that this impression is misleading. Consider the effect of raising the net private investment rate by percentage point of NNP. Using levels this higher rate of investment would raise the annual growth rate of the net private capital stock by percentage point. After years this higher growth rate would generate percent more capital. A conservative estimate of capital 's contribution to economic growth is its share of national income roughly percent. Using this estimate the increased capital accumulation would imply that the level of GNP would rise by an additional percent which is equivalent to an increase in the annual growth rate of GNP of percentage point Small Improvements Matter in the Long Run Such seemingly small improvements have important implications over time. A percentage point increase in the annual growth of output would substantially speed improvements in the standard of living for future generations. Raising the annual growth rate of real GNP from percent to percent for example would ultimately yield percent more national income after years than otherwise would have been available. This effect is sizable : percent of GNP was $ billion much larger than total residential and nonresidential construction spending or than spending for defense and medicare combined Thus even though the consequences of changes in the national investment rate are substantial they emerge only gradually. Because even substantial increases in the rate of capital accumulation have only a small immediate effect on GNP policymakers may underestimate the importance of a favorable investment climate Moreover the benefits of good policies that are not pursued can not be observed directly. The costs of inappropriate policies are accordingly difficult to identify ALLOWING CAPITAL TO FIND ITS MOST PRODUCTIVE USE Capital should be allowed to move freely to its most productive use. Private capital markets driven by the search for the highest return weed out investments expected to be inefficient or unsuccessful. Thus markets are the best judges of investment opportunities and success and failure are best determined in the competitive marketplace The sharp reductions in marginal tax rates in and have significantly reduced Federal Government interference with the allocation of funds among types of investment. The Federal Government has a smaller impact on private choices. Nevertheless Federal Government policies still distort the allocation of funds across different industries because some industries are protected and others subsidized. While Federal policies sometimes provide investment funds directly more often they alter investment incentives. For example the double taxation of corporate income reduces incentives for corporate compared with noncorporate investment Similarly the mix of investment between purchases of equipment and additional business construction has been affected by recent swings in tax policy. Government tax regulatory and spending policies should interfere as little as possible with the efficient allocation of investment funds provided by capital markets. The Administration believes that preserving the efficient functioning of these markets is an important foundation for healthy growth INVESTING IN INFRASTRUCTURE CAPITAL Roughly one-quarter of the capital stock in the United States is owned by Federal State and local governments. It is typical for discussions of investment behavior to focus on business investment but government capital accumulation can also affect growth Because the value of its product is not revealed through market transactions the role of government capital in supporting the economy is sometimes underappreciated. For the same reason however government investment is not automatically subject to the same comparison of expected costs and returns that markets impose on private investment. Government investment plans should accordingly be carefully scrutinized using rigorous benefit-cost analysis The bulk of nonmilitary government capital is owned by State and local governments although the original investment may have been in part federally financed. State and local government capital consists largely of schools and public infrastructure such as highways streets bridges and sewers. Over the past two decades a slowdown has occurred in State and local capital accumulation ; the growth of the capital stock fell from an average rate of percent a year in the 1950s and 1960s to percent in the 1970s and to percent in the 1980s. Part of this decline simply reflects a reduction in the size of the school-age population and the completion of road networks. But part of this decline is a real slowdown and inadequate government infrastructure can impede improvements in productivity growth A growing share of travel is carried by aviation but many parts of the current aviation infrastructure need to be modernized and expanded. The Administration proposes substantial funding in creases for aviation programs in These programs include modernization of aviation facilities and equipment expansion of airport capacity and increased funding for operations and R&D State and local governments along with the private sector must also fulfill their responsibilities to maintain and expand the Nation 's infrastructure. Taking advantage of productive opportunities to maintain and improve the infrastructure is an important part of Federal State and local government policies to raise economic growth FINANCING NATIONAL INVESTMENT For most of the postwar period U.S. domestic saving was sufficient to finance domestic investment. As Table shows from to gross national saving the sum of household business and government saving exceeded gross private domestic investment in the United States leaving an average of percent of GNP available for net U.S. investment abroad. In those years international capital flows were often ignored by policymakers and analysts a practice that would be mistaken in today 's economic environment TABLE The Changing Finance of Investment [ Percent of GNP ] to to Gross priv3te domestic investment EQUALS : National saving Private Household Business s'o _ Government Federal State and local PLUS : _3 Net foreign capital inflows Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis FOREIGN SOURCES OF FINANCING FOR NATIONAL INVESTMENT The total flow of foreign saving into the United States has been about one-sixth of domestic investment in recent years. Between and the share of GNP devoted to gross investment was essentially the same as the average from to but the share of national saving fell more than percentage points of GNP. As a matter of arithmetic the difference between domestic investment and domestic saving was provided by increased net inflows of foreign saving into the United States Foreign individuals and institutions invest their saving in the U.S. capital market to take advantage of available productive high-yield investments. In these flows of foreign saving into the United States totaled $ billion. Similarly some U.S. domestic saving is directed toward investment opportunities in other countries ; in this saving amounted to $ billion. The difference $ billion in is the net capital inflow Foreign saving in the United States takes two forms. Some is foreign direct investment ( FDD defined as development of a new business or acquisition of at least a 10-percent interest in a domestic company or tangible asset such as an office building. The remainder is portfolio investment purchases of financial instruments such as stocks or bonds. Of total foreign investment in the United States in $ billion or percent was FDI. FBI in the United States has grown rapidly in recent years. According to balance of payments measures the book value of all foreign direct holdings reached $ billion at the end of having increased at an annual rate of percent from its value of $ billion Some commentators view the growth in FDI with concern arguing that direct foreign ownership of assets is somehow different from and more threatening than " passive " portfolio investments such as Treasury bills or corporate stocks and bonds. In general such concerns are misguided. FDI benefits both foreign investors and the host economy. Like domestic investment it can create jobs produce valuable technological spillovers and generate long-run increases in productivity. Interfering with the free flow of foreign direct investment into the United States would harm the U.S. economy The Magnitude of FDI in Perspective The magnitude of FDI is widely misperceived. Although FDI in the United States has increased a great deal in the past several years cumulative foreign holdings in the United States remain modest by international standards. In many other industrialized countries total foreign holdings are a substantially larger proportion of gross domestic product ( GDP ) than in the United States Moreover with the exception of Japan cumulative investment by the United States in other countries ( again as a proportion of hostcountry GDP ) far exceeds these countries ' respective cumulative investment in the United States ( Table ) Indeed because investments are measured at book value or acquisition cost the figures in Table understate the point. While the bulk of foreign holdings in the United States was recently acquired many U.S. investments abroad were made in the 1950s and 1960s. The historical ac quisition cost greatly understates the current market value of these older U.S.-owned assets TABLE Foreign Direct Investment [ Direct investment holdings as percent of host-country GDP ] Foreign holdings in the United States United Kingdom Japan U.S. holdings in foreign country Netherlands Canada West Germany Switzerland France Data for Sources : Department of Commerce and International Monetary Fund Thus the recent increase in FDI is properly viewed not as an event unique to the United States but as part of a process of global economic integration. It is instructive to recall that the growth of U.S. direct investment abroad in the 1950s and 1960s was greeted with widespread mistrust in Canada Europe and many developing countries. One prominent commentator warned that U.S. investment would destroy established European companies. Hindsight shows that such alarmist sentiment was inappropriate and that U.S. investment significantly benefited European economies In fact foreign firms play a relatively small role in the American economy. Companies with percent or more foreign ownership employ less than percent of the U.S. labor force. Even in manufacturing where the FDI presence is the largest such companies account for under percent of assets and employ only percent of all workers. Thus in absolute terms as well as in comparison with other countries the magnitude of foreign direct investment in the United States is relatively modest DOMESTIC SAVING AND NET CAPITAL INFLOWS International capital flows break the link between domestic saving and investment rates in the short run. Net foreign capital inflows in the 1980s have helped to sustain U.S. investment and thus have contributed to economic growth despite the low U.S. national saving rate. Nonetheless for several reasons increases in the national saving rate would further enhance growth in U.S living standards First over longer periods the investment rate in advanced economies is ultimately constrained by the supply of domestic saving. Therefore raising domestic saving is essential to sustaining the high levels of investment on which economic growth depends over the long run. It is uncertain to what extent the United States could rely on sustained large capital inflows even if it chose to do so Second net capital inflows have in recent years allowed U.S spending to exceed U.S. income. However this pattern can not persist indefinitely. Ultimately although no one can be sure when the United States will have to move to both a current account surplus and a net capital outflow as foreigners receive the returns on their investments in the United States. Some have inaccurately claimed that this transition will mean a reduction in U.S. living standards. In fact the transition will require only that U.S. income grow faster than U.S. spending. The more rapidly U.S.-owned capital accumulates the more rapidly U.S. income will grow. More rapid accumulation of U.S.-owned capital requires a higher rate of U.S. national saving. A higher saving rate will thus permit continued healthy growth of U.S. living standards during the transition to a current account surplus Third increased net foreign capital inflows are accompanied by reduced net exports of goods and services ( Box ) This can lead to calls for protectionist trade policies which interfere with international trade of goods and services and can lower living standards in the United States and abroad The goal of Administration policy is to remove impediments to national saving. Increased national saving will allow a higher level of domestic investment that is sustainable over the long run a level that can be achieved regardless of the future of net foreign capital flows DOMESTIC SAVING TO FINANCE NATIONAL INVESTMENT If U.S. investment performance is poor by international standards recent U.S. saving performance is abysmal. Chart indicates that the national saving rate has been much lower in the United States than in other industrial economies. Although substantial difficulties arise in measuring " the " rate of saving by any measure the national saving rate in the United States is the lowest of these countries. Moreover the lower rate of saving does not appear to be concentrated in one sector of the U.S. economy. Businesses governments and households all save at lower rates than their counterparts in other advanced economies The gross national saving rate ( national saving as a percent of GNP ) varied around percent during the postwar period until the early 1980s when it fell as shown in Chart Although the gross saving rate has partially rebounded over the past years during the 1980s it averaged more than percentage points less than in the previous three decades ( Table ) Box The Link Between Lower National Saving and Net Export Performance As a matter of accounting changes in net capital inflows and changes in trade flows are linked. Changes in trade flows do not however solely determine changes in net capital inflows. Neither are changes in net capital inflows totally responsible for movements in the balance of trade * Instead * economic factors affect both trade and capital flows simultaneously. It is generally recognized however that the imbalance between the U.S. saving rate and the higher U.S. investment rate is the fundamental source of the U.S. trade deficit When foreign investors enter U.S capital markets they must first exchange foreign currencies for U.S. dollars. In large part these foreign currencies will ultimately be used to pay for goods and services imported from abroad. At the same time U.S. investments abroad create similar transactions involving the U.S. dollar. The excess of foreign investment in the United States over U.S. investment abroad is the net capital inflow or borrowing from abroad * In order to balance the supply of dollars with the demand this excess must be matched by a corresponding excess of imports to the United States over exports to other countries Adjustments in foreign exchange rates and differences in rates of return serve to coordinate this process by altering the incentives for investment and the attractiveness of imports and exports. For example as capital flows into the United States purchases of dollars raise the exchange value of the dollar making imports cheaper and raising the purchase price of U.S exports The sectoral gross saving rates shown in Table help to identify the sources of this decline. The private saving rate has declined only slightly but the composition of saving has shifted. During the period to the household saving rate fell by more than percentage point relative to the period but this decline was almost fully offset by a rise in business saving One possible reason for the decline in household saving in the 1980s is the large rise in household wealth attributable to increases in the value of household assets. For example the stock market boom caused a doubling of the value of corporate stock owned by households between and Increases in wealth that are not spent are conceptually equivalent to new saving but are not included in the national income and product accounts Chart GROSS NATIONAL SAVING AS PERCENT OF GNP was low by international standards Saving in the United States over the period Percent Canada France Germany Japan U.K U.S Annual Average Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Chart GROSS SAVING AS PERCENT OF GNP in the 1980s National saving was below its historical average Percent I Source : Department of Commerce The government borrowing ( or dissaving ) rate has risen by more than percentage points between the period and the 1980s although State and local governments ran surpluses. In the 1980s Federal Government deficit spending increased by more than percentage points of GNP from its average over the period to Federal Government deficits were the principal reason for lower gross national saving in the United States during the 1980s For some purposes it is useful to take account of the wearing out of the capital stock by considering the net saving rate : gross national saving minus depreciation as a percentage of GNP. The decline in the net saving rate ( percentage points ) is even larger than the fall in the gross rate in the 1980s. While the increase in depreciation can be traced to shifts in the composition of assets as discussed above its measurement is imprecise. Using net saving rates the decline in national saving reflects lower saving by all three sectors. Between and the business saving rate net of depreciation was percent while between and the net business saving rate was only percent POLICY TOWARD INVESTMENT Increased capital investment is a necessary part of more rapid U.S. economic growth. Policies should be designed to enhance the opportunities to make productive investments. To do so requires an understanding of the factors that influence firms ' demands for capital investment. Moreover in an increasingly integrated global economy policies should not discriminate among investments by inhibiting foreign direct investment FACTORS THAT AFFECT DOMESTIC INVESTMENT Investment is largely determined by four factors : expected growth in future demand for business output and the cost of capital ( particularly real interest rates ) affect expected profitability business confidence influences the risk associated with investment and business cash flow alters liquidity. When businesses expect demand to grow in the future they must anticipate the pressure on productive capacity. Unless current capacity utilization is low the need to increase the stock of plant and equipment raises investment. Studies find that growth in current output serves as a good proxy for expected growth in future demand and of the four factors has the strongest effect on investment Firms will invest as long as the expected profitability of investment exceeds the user cost of capital ( Box ) A higher cost of capital reduces investment by requiring investment projects to meet a higher standard. The magnitude of this reduction depends on business expectations investment responds most strongly to lasting changes in the cost of capital Box The User Cost of Capital The user cost of capital for any specific investment such as a new machine is the minimum expected pre-tax rate of return it must yield in order to be profitable. The user cost includes all costs associated with financing and operating the machine. Two components of the user cost are strongly affected by government policy The first of these is the cost of the money tied up in the investment ( sometimes called the cost of capital or the cost of capital funds ) This cost varies directly with market interest rates and is thus affected by monetary and fiscal policies and the relation between domestic investment and domestic saving The second component is the taxes associated with operation of the investment. Thus higher tax rates raise the user cost of capital while more rapid depreciation allowances lower it by postponing tax payments The double taxation of corporate profits increases the cost of equity-financed investments In addition to its cost the availability of capital is a significant factor. Greater business cash flow potentially aids capital formation by allowing firms to finance investment internally. Cash flow is particularly critical when adverse financial market conditions raise the difficulty of external finance. Empirical studies support this argument finding that higher levels of cash flow are related to greater investment Finally although difficult to measure increased confidence about the economic future reduces the perceived risk of investment decisions thereby promoting investment. Policies should reflect the determinants of investment and be designed to minimize interference with investment decisions. Investment responds most strongly to sustained increases in output and to maintained reductions in the cost of capital IMPLICATIONS FOR DOMESTIC INVESTMENT POLICY The analysis of key investment factors output the cost of capital cash flow and the uncertainty of the investment environment offers insight into policies that can increase investment Policy Stability Monetary and fiscal policies affect both the level and volatility of the cost of capital and sales growth. Erratic monetary and fiscal policies make the path of inflation and output more uncertain inducing lenders and investors to demand a higher rate of return as insurance against the risks of inflation and economic downturns Policies that keep the economy close to its potential will improve expectations about sales growth and thus encourage investment When people expect stable growth the risk component of interest rates is lowered and the cost of capital falls Stable tax and regulatory policies also encourage investment When the rules change sporadically in ways that penalize previous investment firms quickly learn that they can not rely on current taxes and regulations in the future. These firms are less likely to invest or to respond to the new incentives. Governments like individuals benefit from reputations for credibility Unstable policy can also influence the timing and type of investment. Because firms do not know exactly what will happen in the future they must consider the risk associated with their choices. If the environment is highly uncertain investors may be less willing to commit their money today preferring to wait for the cost or likelihood of mistakes to decline tomorrow. Those who do invest will likely shift toward short-term ventures at the expense of longterm undertakings Maintaining consistent policy toward investment although difficult is crucial. Investment spending each year involves a mix of new projects and completions of those started in the past. Hence it takes time for investors to respond to changes in policies. Moreover as discussed earlier even substantial changes in the rate of investment require time to alter the rate of economic growth visibly. Thus policymakers may be tempted to abandon well-designed long-run policies in the interests of short-run expediency Given the desirability of stable policies it is important to avoid sharp swings in investment incentives. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of for example contained sharply accelerated depreciation allowances that were scaled back or eliminated the following year. Temporary incentives may produce a temporary investment boom but will increase uncertainty about the long-run course of policy and ultimately discourage long-term growth Tax Policy Toward Investment Tax policy significantly affects the cost of capital. The corporate and individual income taxes alter the cost of capital as do depreciation allowances and in some past years investment tax credits Tax-induced increases in the cost of capital can lower overall investment. In addition unequal tax treatment of different types of capital distorts incentives alters the allocation of investment funds and reduces investment efficiency The taxation of capital income at both the corporate and individual shareholder levels increases the cost of capital for corporations Corporations pay taxes on earnings from new investment. Shareholders pay additional taxes on these earnings when they receive dividends or when their sale of shares results in a capital gain This double taxation of the returns on equity has existed for over years and increases the cost of capital for investments financed in whole or part by corporate shareholders. Because corporations may deduct interest payments but not dividends the double taxation of returns on corporate equity also induces corporations to rely more heavily on debt finance. The induced increase in debt in turn raises the risk of corporate bankruptcies with the attendant disruption and job loss It has been argued that double taxation is illusory because taxexempt entities such as pension funds are large suppliers of capital funds and they are not affected by Tax Code provisions applying to individuals. Similarly a large fraction of current investment in the United States is financed from foreign sources. For these investment funds the incentives depend upon the tax treatment of U.S earnings in the home country These observations notwithstanding the evidence favors a view that firms behave as if their new investment funds come at least in part from new equity. As a result the cost of capital depends on the combined effect of corporate and individual taxes. The double taxation of equity earnings raises the cost of capital to U.S. corporations. Reducing combined taxes on equity earnings such as dividends and capital gains will therefore reduce this restraint on investment Tax policy also affects investment by unincorporated businesses In nearly percent of real nonresidential fixed investment was undertaken by noncorporate businesses. For these businesses one of the most important features of the income tax is the tax rate on capital gains. Much of the return on noncorporate investment takes the form of increases in the value of the business itself Increasing the tax rate on the capital gains on ownership equity raises the cost of capital and reduces noncorporate investment. A lower capital gains tax rate provides not only an incentive for increased investment by corporations but also an incentive to raise noncorporate business investment Further cuts in corporate tax rates would generate only limited investment incentives. As tax rates fall taxes have a smaller impact on the after-tax return to investment. The Tax Reform Act of reduced marginal tax rates for corporations and for individuals limiting the additional investment incentive that can be expected from further rate reduction. The Tax Reform Act also moved toward equalizing effective tax rates for different assets The equalization provided an important benefit by reducing the significance of tax considerations in choosing among investment opportunities In the past investment tax credits ( ITCs ) and changes in depreciation schedules were used to provide investment stimulus. ITCs reduced firms ' tax liabilities by a fraction of the cost of equipment purchased and hence reduced the user cost of capital for equipment. The ITC was introduced in Over the next two decades the ITC was repealed modified or reinstated times sometimes in response to business cycle conditions. These frequent alterations in investment policy increased the uncertainty of the investment environment Depreciation allowances have also been used as an investment incentive. Depreciation allowances are intended to adjust profits for the costs of using capital assets during production. Accelerated depreciation was instituted in the 1950s and modified repeatedly thereafter. The acceleration was designed to lower the user cost of capital to adjust imperfectly for inflation distortions and to provide an incentive for greater investment While ITCs and accelerated depreciation stimulated investment numerous studies indicated that they had an unfavorable effect on the allocation of investment among competing investment opportunities. For ITCs the value of the investment credit was higher for shorter lived assets. With accelerated depreciation the stimulus was also uneven varying between structures and equipment and within asset classes. The uneven treatment led to underinvestment in assets that had less generous allowances and in some cases fostered unproductive investments. The Tax Reform Act of eliminated ITCs and attempted to match tax depreciation schedules and real economic depreciation more closely The most important investment incentives the Federal Government can provide are stable macroeconomic policies that keep output near its potential and inflation low as well as an institutional framework that permits the free flow of investment to its most valuable use and encourages new business formation. The United States should also work toward removing longstanding tax impediments to investment by : Restoring the capital gains tax differential and Reducing the double taxation of corporate equity earnings FACTORS THAT AFFECT FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT Many observers see the recent increases in FDI as closely related to macroeconomic factors such as the trade deficit or the decline in the value of the dollar since But no automatic mechanism links FDI and the current account deficit. Although as a matter of accounting a higher current account deficit does imply higher net capital inflows this change in flows can be effected by receiving increased gross inflows of either direct or portfolio investment from abroad or by a reduced rate of U.S. gross direct or portfolio investment in other countries. For example FBI in the United States can increase without a change in the current account if at the same time the United States is increasing its investment abroad. Indeed U.S. companies have continued to increase their direct holdings abroad in recent years in spite of large current account deficits a recent example being the Ford Motor Company 's acquisition of the United Kingdom 's Jaguar PLC The data confirm that FBI is driven by much more than just current account balances. As Chart shows FBI inflows climbed in the late 1970s before a large current account deficit developed and continue to increase even as the current account improves. The experience of other countries is even more striking. For example West Germany has run a current account surplus for decades but has seen foreign ownership of its manufacturing sector climb to percent Chart FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT. Movements in foreign direct investment are not closely related to movements in the current account deficit Billions of dollars I Billions of dollars Current Account Deficit ( right scale ) Foreign Direct Investment ( left scale ) i i Note : Consumer price index used as deflator. Data are quarterly Source : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor The upward trend in FDI over the past several years has coincided with a surge of mergers and acquisitions in the United States In this same period acquisitions of existing assets have played a growing role as a vehicle for FDI. Between and the pro- portion of all new FDI ( i.e. all foreign acquisitions or establishments of new enterprises ) accomplished through mergers and acquisitions rose markedly This change reflects in part the development of a larger and more efficient market for corporate assets a market that facilitates the movement of those assets into the hands of owners who expect to use them most productively. Not only can whole companies be purchased more easily but also because of restructurings and divestitures particularly desirable assets or divisions can often be acquired on a stand-alone basis The United States is one of the most attractive nations in which to invest in part because of the sheer size and scope of its markets : the United States produces percent of the gross world product As the global economy becomes more integrated and both U.S. and foreign firms adopt more sophisticated strategies in response it is hardly surprising that foreign companies are with increasing frequency the highest bidders for U.S. corporate assets. International differences in capital costs for some foreign acquirers may also partially explain the rise of FDI in the United States Foreign-owned firms operating in the United States receive " national " treatment they are subject to the same environmental antitrust and other regulations as domestically owned firms. Although the exact tax treatment may be affected by the tax code in their home country they are liable for U.S. taxes and are subject to international tax treaties. They hire from the same labor pool as U.S. companies. As these facts might lead one to expect foreignowned firms do not differ markedly from their domestic counterparts in such business decisions as employee compensation and R&D expenditures IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY TOWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT U.S. policy toward foreign direct investment has long recognized that a free flow of investment capital across borders benefits both host and investor countries. As noted above the United States generally provides foreign investors nondiscriminatory treatment under U.S. laws and regulations. It is in the interest of U.S. consumers workers and investors to maintain this open policy National security considerations have been a longstanding exception to this open investment policy. Like other developed countries the United States has imposed restrictions on FDI in certain sectors for national security reasons. Various statutes incorporate these restrictions including the Atomic Energy Act the Federal Aviation Act the Shipping Act and the Federal Communications Act Under the Exon-Florio provision of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of the interagency Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States reviews investments with potential national security implications and investigates sensitive transactions. The President can prohibit or suspend investments that threaten to impair U.S. national security. By the end of this committee had reviewed more than transactions undertaken investigations of and referred to the President for a decision. In each case the President decided not to intervene. In line with the Administration 's open investment policy and the provision of law the Exon-Florio authority will be used only when no other measures are adequate to protect the national security Restricting foreign investment in the United States would weaken the economy. The Administration is pursuing the constructive approach of working to remove formal and informal barriers to international investment throughout the world. The initiatives being pursued include : encouraging the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) to strengthen the voluntary accord that grants national treatment to foreign-owned enterprises ; making removal of investment barriers an important part of the negotiations with Japan on structural impediments ; and working during the Uruguay Round of GATT for discipline on governmentsponsored trade measures associated with investment POLICY TOWARD SAVING The saving performance of the United States reflects in part longstanding features of Federal Government policy. Large persistent Federal budget deficits directly reduce national saving. Many types of personal saving are taxed twice once when the income is earned and again when the returns on the saving are received. Inflation increases taxable returns to capital without affecting real returns ; these extra taxes further penalize saving and investment For businesses returns to corporate equity particularly dividends are taxed at both the corporate and individual levels. These and other policies need to be reexamined as part of any effort to increase national saving. Current policies are biased toward consumption whether in the household business or government sectoral against saving National saving reflects the actions of the three principal sectors of the economy. Household saving is the result of the spending decisions by individuals and families ; business saving reflects decisions by firms to retain after-tax profits ; and government saving is the outcome of the political debate over revenue measures and spending priorities Government policy should focus on national saving. National saving determines the amount of domestic funds available for investment affects the cost of capital and influences the balance of trade. Policies toward saving must be analyzed both for each sector of the economy household business government and for the Nation as a whole. Policymakers must be especially careful not to develop incentives to raise private saving at the expense of public borrowing thereby simply transferring a portion of the low national saving rate from the private to the public sector GOVERNMENT SAVING The single most direct way for the government to increase national saving is to continue to reduce the Federal budget deficit. Some economists argue that reducing Federal deficits would not succeed in raising national saving because private savers would recognize the increased government saving and feel a corresponding reduction in their need to save. In this view private saving adjusts to offset changes in government saving. This argument is both flawed and inconsistent with the evidence. For example in the early 1980s household saving fell even as Federal deficits rose. Because there is no offsetting decrease in private saving reduced deficits will increase the pool of domestic funds available for private investment. To raise national saving effectively however deficit reduction should not be attained by increasing disincentives for private saving or by reducing government investment The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act was designed to reduce the deficit each year reaching a balanced budget in The Administration remains firmly committed to deficit reduction. The Federal Government must end its role as a chronic borrower and stop draining the Nation 's scarce savings pool Deficit reduction is not enough in view of the likely future demands that the retirement of the baby-boom generation will place on the Social Security system and indeed on the whole economy The Administration proposes to establish a Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund to safeguard projected surpluses in the Social Security trust funds and to reduce the national debt Reducing the national debt will increase the pool of domestic saving reduce the current account deficit lower the cost of capital spur investment and productivity growth and lead to higher future living standards. This proposal would prevent the use of Social Security receipts to finance other spending reduce the legacy of public debt and leave a more secure fiscal status to future generations HOUSEHOLD SAVING Household saving is the most familiar component of national saving. Because the saving decision reflects so many individual goals however fostering household saving is a difficult policy task Households save as a precaution against accident illness or loss of job. For these purposes savings must be sufficiently liquid to meet unexpected needs. Households also save to purchase homes and bigticket durable goods and to pay future educational expenses. These saving goals are particularly important for young families who have few assets and relatively little financial flexibility. People also save to help finance their retirement and to leave bequests to their heirs. For these long-term goals security or the rate of return to saving may dominate considerations of liquidity The overall household saving rate can change even when all individuals have the same proclivity to save over their lifetimes. One source of change in overall saving is change in the age structure of the population. Because of the baby-boom generation those under have constituted an unusually large fraction of the working population over the past years. Young people typically save relatively little of their income which explains part of the overall decline in saving. As the baby-boom generation ages the household saving rate will rebound somewhat The response of household saving to changes in the rate of return on saving is a critical issue because tax policy directly affects the rate of return. But increases in the rate of return have two opposing effects on saving. Higher rates of return lower the price of future consumption thus increasing the incentive to save Higher rates also reduce the amount of saving required to achieve a given level of future consumption thereby reducing the incentive to save. Although this area is being actively researched and debated empirical studies on balance suggest that saving increases modestly with higher rates of return Several options are available to allow savers to earn the untaxed rate of return for retirement purposes but such options are not typically available for shorter term saving goals. Pensions Keogh and ( k ) plans and for those eligible deductible individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) all permit individuals to deduct their contributions with both contributions and earnings taxed only upon withdrawal Another form of tax-preferred savings account would not allow deductions for contributions. Withdrawals of both contributions and earnings however would be tax free. If a taxpayer is in the same tax bracket at the time of contribution and at withdrawal such accounts would offer the same rate of return as deductible IRAs. As long as households realize this fact their spending would be the same under either type of account Individual Retirement Accounts IRAs represent one means to reduce the double taxation of saving and reduce the bias against saving. The degree to which this incentive is successful depends in part upon the limit for contribu tions to the IRA. Higher contribution limits increase the number of households who receive a saving incentive because the pre-tax rate of return will apply to their last dollar saved. Higher contribution limits therefore raise private saving Deductible IRAs and pensions lower the distortion produced by tax treatment of retirement saving and are a valuable contribution to the climate for saving. Because of penalties for early withdrawal however they are not an attractive vehicle for savers with intermediate saving goals. The inaccessibility of savings in IRAs and pensions prior to retirement restricts their usefulness for these purposes. To address this issue the Administration proposes easing the withdrawal requirements on IRAs to permit savers to use these funds for first-time home purchases Family Savings Accounts To further reduce the bias against saving especially for families with pre-retirement savings objectives the Administration proposes creating a Family Savings Account ( FSA ) Contributions to FSAs would be nondeductible but earnings on contributions would be exempt from income tax. Annual contributions to an FSA could be up to $ for married couples and $ for single people. FSAs would be limited to married couples with incomes below $ singles with incomes below $ and heads of households with incomes below $ If contributions were held for at least years both the original contribution and all earnings could be withdrawn without tax. Withdrawals made in the first years would be subject to both ordinary income tax and a 10-percent excise tax on the earnings alone. Earnings included in withdrawals made after years but before the 7-year period would be subject to ordinary income tax The enhanced liquidity of the FSA provided by the shorter holding period is an important addition to policy toward saving. It is particularly valuable for families who wish to save for such pre-retirement objectives as a child 's education or a down payment on a home. Further the contribution limits are more generous than for existing IRAs. FSAs will increase household saving. Moreover they are best viewed as part of the larger program to reduce the bias against saving in the United States Social Security The most important Federal Government policy toward retirement is the Social Security program. Its effect on personal saving has been the object of intense study and controversy among economists. Individuals can substitute Social Security for retirement saving. In addition Social Security reduces the riskiness of retirement consumption because benefits are indexed for inflation and are paid until the death of both the worker and spouse. As such they are essentially government insurance of a constant base level of consumption. These effects may reduce private saving Until recently Social Security ran on a pay-as-you-go basis with current workers ' payroll taxes paying current retirees ' benefits. As a result no government saving was available to offset any reduction in private saving suggesting that Social Security reduced national saving. After many studies and opinions the weight of the evidence suggests that Social Security modestly reduced saving in the postwar period. However reforms enacted in will produce substantial government saving in the future. As discussed above the expected increase in government saving will be an important contribution to national saving and the Administration has proposed policies to ensure that the integrity of projected future Social Security surpluses is protected BUSINESS SAVING Corporate saving typically accounts for well over one-half of gross private saving yet most debate regarding saving whether among policymakers academics members of the press or the public at large focuses on either household saving or government saving. Businesses save out of earnings by retaining and reinvesting some profits within the business rather than paying them out as dividends or share repurchases. The impact on business saving of a particular policy therefore depends critically on its effects on the level of earnings and on the incentive to pay them out By increasing the incentive to retain earnings a lower capital gains tax rate will increase business saving. For shareholders the return to retained earnings comes in the form of higher stock prices which are taxed at the capital gains rate. Therefore retained earnings are taxed both when the corporate income is earned and again when the gains are received. Lower capital gains tax rates will both reduce the pressure to pay dividends and increase the incentive for equity finance. Both effects increase retained earnings Under current law dividends are also taxed twice once when the income is earned by the corporation and again when it is paid out to shareholders. Eliminating the double taxation of corporation income which can be accomplished in a variety of ways has a theoretically uncertain effect on business saving. It would increase equity finance but corporations would have a reduced incentive to retain their earnings Even if business saving is reduced slightly however total private saving might not fall. Eliminating the double taxation of dividends and lowering the tax rate on capital gains would increase the rate of return to household savers. Personal saving may increase in response by enough to offset any decline in business saving. More- over shareholders may change their saving in direct response to changes in business saving they may see through the so-called corporate veil. If corporations save less for their shareholders the shareholders can compensate by increasing their household saving The available evidence indicates that a reduction in business saving is indeed offset at least in part by an increase in household saving. Shareholders consume only part of the higher payouts Share repurchases takeovers and leveraged buyouts have increased dramatically in recent years ; net equity issues by U.S. nonfinancial corporations have been negative in each year since The effect of these repurchases on the corporate debt-to-equity ratio has been mitigated by the rise in the market value of equity over the same period. Still the increasing trend to debt finance makes it more likely that the net effect of removing the tax bias against equity finance would be to increase private saving REMOVING IMPEDIMENTS TO SAVING The Administration 's proposals are a comprehensive approach to reducing the current policy bias against saving by households businesses and government Reducing the Federal budget deficit is the most reliable policy to increase national saving. The Administration proposes to go further establishing the Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund and using it to safeguard projected surpluses in the Social Security trust funds to reduce the national debt and to help finance increased investment and spur growth Restoring the capital gains tax differential as proposed by the Administration will increase saving by both households and businesses Establishing Family Savings Accounts ( FSAs ) will further reduce the bias against saving. The enhanced liquidity of the FSA is particularly valuable for families who wish to save for such pre-retirement objectives as a child 's education or a down payment on a home SUMMARY Economic growth is the foundation upon which the Nation 's future rests. Ensuring solid growth and enhancing the economy 's growth potential are therefore the primary goals of the Administration 's economic policy. Economic growth will provide rising living standards and employment opportunities for American families as well as the resources to achieve other national goals. In order to spur growth the United States must increase its rate of investment in physical intellectual and human capital. It must also raise the low national saving rate Current Federal Government tax spending and regulatory policies discourage saving and investment. At a minimum these policies should be moved toward neutrality between consumption and investment The Administration has proposed new initiatives to increase saving and investment. The most important is the commitment to a budget policy that will reduce the budget deficit and then the national debt. Restoring the capital gains tax rate differential will increase innovation investment and saving. Making the tax credit for research and experimentation permanent will expand private expenditures for innovation. Increased Federal spending for research will strengthen the Nation 's knowledge base. Instituting Family Savings Accounts will encourage personal saving These initiatives represent a strong commitment to increasing national saving and investment and encouraging entrepreneurship and innovation CHAPTER Human Resources in the 1990s THE SUSTAINED ECONOMIC EXPANSION of the 1980s has produced remarkable growth in employment and increased economic opportunity. As the Nation looks ahead to the 1990s new challenges demand attention. Some have forecast that labor shortages especially among skilled workers will dominate the next decade and may limit the potential for economic growth. Based on the experience of past decades however the remarkably flexible U.S. labor market should if left to itself respond well to these new challenges. But continued growth will require increased labor mobility reduced barriers to employment and ongoing investment in the skills and knowledge of the work force The President has proposed a variety of new initiatives that will improve the productivity of American workers and the well-being of American families. The efforts of this Administration include new initiatives to raise the quality of the Nation 's schools changes in existing programs to ensure effective employment assistance to disadvantaged workers implementation of a newly designed welfare system innovative initiatives to improve housing opportunities for low-income families and support for legislation that will decrease employment barriers for disabled workers. Coupled with sound macroeconomic policies these initiatives will help ensure productive employment opportunities and economic security for American families ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE 1980s Job opportunities for the U.S. population improved markedly in the 1980s. Since the beginning of the current expansion the economy has created more than million new jobs. The civilian unemployment rate has fallen from percent in to percent in its lowest level in years. In States the unemployment rate in late was percent or lower. And for almost every major demographic group jobless rates in were at their lowest levels since the early 1970s. These gains stand in sharp contrast to the 1970s when the rate of unemployment was successively higher at each business cycle peak U.S. employment growth has been especially strong in comparison with other developed nations. Major industrialized countries such as the United Kingdom West Germany France and Japan have all experienced slower employment growth than the United States throughout the 1980s. Indeed the total increase in employment in the United States since is greater than the increases in Western Europe Canada and Japan combined and is nearly as great as the entire work forces of Spain and Portugal combined Over the past three decades the American people have clearly benefited from a remarkably flexible labor market that has successfully created jobs for its workers despite major demographic and industrial changes. This flexibility stems partly from an ongoing commitment to limit government interference that hinders economic adjustments. It also reflects the historic willingness and ability of the U.S. private sector both workers and firms to adapt to economic change For example the baby-boom generation born between and flooded the labor market in the late 1960s and 1970s. Yet the economy successfully absorbed this group. Similarly women 's labor market participation has risen markedly over the past three decades. That increase in supply did not lead as might have been expected to lower wages and higher unemployment among women Instead women have enjoyed substantial economic gains. Female and male unemployment rates converged in the 1980s for the first time since World War II. And women 's wages increased substantially relative to men 's closing almost a quarter of the gap in pay rates between the sexes In addition the labor market has responded to major shifts over the past decade in labor demand across industries and occupations International competition technological change and changing consumer demands have altered the nature and location of many U.S jobs. Job mobility migration and skill retraining have all helped most workers to find new jobs in this rapidly changing labor market Labor markets do not adjust instantaneously. Rather workers and employers respond over time to changes in supply and demand through the workings of the market. The growing economy in recent years has made it even easier for unemployed workers and new labor market entrants to find jobs and for working Americans to increase their living standards CHALLENGES OF THE 1990s Perhaps shaped by experiences during the Great Depression in the 1930s the debate on macroeconomic policy over the past five decades has been heavily influenced by fears that the U.S. economy could not produce enough jobs for its workers. Undoubtedly occasional episodes of declining economic growth and rising unemployment will occur. But analysis of impending labor market develop- ments in the 1990s suggests that other concerns will also demand attention. Many observers now worry about the availability of workers especially skilled workers. Some have even argued that labor shortages will dominate the 1990s and may slow economic growth Indeed changes in the labor force and the economy over the next decade will produce new challenges. The relatively small baby-bust generation is moving into its working years reducing the share of new labor market entrants in the population. At the same time the demand for skilled labor is likely to increase as the relative importance of the service sector grows As in earlier decades the labor market should naturally adapt to these changes over time. Firms will shape compensation packages to attract and train the workers they need and workers will respond to the higher wages that result from expanded skill demands by seeking additional training. Appropriate government policies can help quicken the pace of adjustment. To ensure an environment in which economic growth can be sustained over the next decade private business must work together with all levels of government to provide Americans with the skills and the education necessary to function effectively as workers in a modern economy Chapter of this Report discusses the need to increase investment in physical capital and in research and development. This chapter examines the concurrent need to increase the Nation 's investment in human capital by expanding the skills and knowledge of the Nation 's youth and strengthening job training for the existing work force. Reducing barriers to labor mobility and to the use of additional sources of labor such as immigrants the elderly and the disabled will also be necessary if employers and workers are to adapt quickly to labor market change The years ahead will provide a unique opportunity to integrate the poor and disadvantaged into the work force. A healthy and growing economy will provide additional opportunities for poor families to raise their living standards. Policies that increase employment and earnings of the poor can both reduce poverty and add to the Nation 's productive resources Impending changes in the labor force pose real challenges for the 1990s. But those who argue that labor shortages will stall the economy in the next decade ignore the flexibility and adaptability of U.S. firms workers and governments THE CHANGING U.S. POPULATION Several major demographic trends will influence the U.S. economy and its labor markets in the 1990s. The steady aging of the baby-boom generation will continue to increase the average age of the work force. As Chart shows the percentage of the population between ages and rose from to percent between and and is projected to rise to percent by The percentage of the population age and over will also continue to grow while the percentage age and over will grow even more rapidly. At the same time the lower birth rates that followed the baby boom have resulted in a declining number of teenagers and young adults in the population Chart AGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE U.S. POPULATION. The aging of the population means a more experienced work force a declining share of teenagers and an increasing share of elderly Percent of the resident population Under age Age to Age to ^ Age to Age and over ^ | Source : Department of Commerce In addition the share of the population composed of racial and ethnic minorities particularly blacks Hispanics and Asians continues to increase. Growth in the Hispanic community has been particularly rapid. Since as a result of higher birth and immigration rates the Hispanic population has expanded at a rate five times as fast as the rest of the population. Inflation-adjusted weekly earnings among full-time minority workers have not risen since After several decades of steady growth relative weekly earnings of black men have also remained flat throughout the 1980s at about three-fourths of white men 's weekly earnings. Employment has gone up among minority workers however increasing labor market income for this group as a whole This changing population mix has important implications for the U.S. labor market. The movement of the baby-boom generation into its thirties and forties means a work force that is on average older and therefore somewhat less flexible and mobile. The declining share of teenagers and young adults has meant labor shortages for those industries that traditionally hire young people for part-time jobs. At the same time employment opportunities have increased for those older persons who seek employment The growing population of Hispanic and Asian workers many of whom speak English as a second language will need to adapt fully to the U.S. labor market. This population will also create new challenges for schools and employers to offer training and assistance to enable these workers to be fully integrated into the economy. Historically this challenge is familiar to the U.S. economy ; current immigration rates while above those of recent decades are well below those around the turn of the century. The labor market successfully absorbed these earlier immigrants who worked hard for economic security in their adopted country. The growing share of racial and ethnic minorities in the work force also underscores the importance of ensuring equal economic opportunities for all workers Not only is the composition of the U.S. population changing but so are the ways in which individuals form families and households The proportion of individuals who do not live with any relative continues to increase both because young adults spend more years living on their own and because the number of elderly single individuals has been rising. The share of female-headed households with children is also increasing from percent of all households in to percent in Concurrently the share of marriedcouple households has declined from percent of all households in to percent by The nature of these married-couple households has also changed dramatically ; in most of today 's marriages both husband and wife work. Even among married women with preschool children percent work at least part-time outside the home These trends underscore the increasing importance of women 's earnings. More women are the sole earner in the household either as single individuals or as single parents. Moreover married couples are relying more heavily upon women 's earnings. By women 's earnings provided percent of all income among white households and percent of all income among black households Women 's wages have risen relative to men 's over the past decade and continued improvements in job opportunities and wages for women will help many low-income households improve their standard of living These demographic and household trends set the stage for some of the important labor market challenges of the 1990s : Adjusting to an aging labor force and a smaller number of new labor market entrants Absorbing a larger share of workers from varying ethnic and racial backgrounds and ensuring economic opportunities for all workers Continuing the expansion of women 's labor market opportunities The Department of Labor estimates that more than two-thirds of all new labor market entrants between and will be Hispanic Asian black or female. Strong economic growth depends on finding productive employment opportunities for these workers SKILLS AND EDUCATION : INVESTING IN HUMAN RESOURCES A modern growing economy requires an educated and flexible labor force. The median years of schooling acquired by young adults ( aged to ) rose steadily in this country to an historic high in of years. But there has been no increase since then while the need for a more highly skilled labor force continues to grow. Raising the quality of education in elementary and secondary schools is at least as important as increasing years of schooling Higher achievement among students of every age will better prepare tomorrow 's workers for productive employment. The Federal Government can play an important leadership role in stimulating improvement in the education and training of U.S. workers but it is important to recognize that the primary responsibility for this task resides in State and local governments and in the private sector THE GROWING NEED FOR SKILLED LABOR The demand for more highly educated labor has increased steadily for many decades in the United States. As Chart indicates the share of jobs in occupations requiring greater education has expanded. In percent of the work force were in white-collar jobs ( professional administrative managerial and technical occupations ) By percent of workers held these jobs. Correspondingly the share of blue-collar jobs ( production craft operative labor and agricultural work ) fell from percent to percent. The share of sales clerical and service jobs rose slightly and there was a shift toward more skilled jobs within these categories These occupational changes have been closely related to the declining share of employment in traditional manufacturing industries and the rising share in service-producing industries. In con- Chart TRENDS IN OCCUPATIONS. Projected growth in white collar and service occupations will demand a more highly skilled labor force in the future Percent of civilian labor force OTHER BLUE COLLAR WHITE COLLAR Professional administrative managerial and technical Production craft operative labor farming forestry and fishing Clerical services and sales ^ 2000-Based on projected occupational change Source : Department of Labor trast to the stereotype of service-sector jobs as low-skilled labor the growing service sector in general contains a higher percentage of jobs requiring more education. Fully percent of workers in the service-producing sectors of the economy held a college degree in while only percent had no high school diploma. In contrast only percent of the workers in the goods-producing sectors held college degrees while percent had not completed high school As the economy continues to shift toward services the need for skilled labor will continue to rise. The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that the fastest employment growth between now and the year will occur in white-collar occupations where percent of all workers are college graduates and percent are high school graduates. Blue-collar occupations where only percent are college graduates and percent are high school graduates will continue to shrink EDUCATION AND PRODUCTIVITY Just as a healthy economy requires investment in physical capital to maintain productivity growth so it requires investment in human capital in the education and training of workers. The skills and attitudes that young workers bring to the labor force are shaped by their families and by the public and private school systems of this country Education raises skill levels that increase job performance and productivity. Higher mathematics and verbal achievement scores are associated with higher labor productivity and wages. Years of school are related to increased future earnings and lower risk of unemployment. Moreover studies show that workers who are better at understanding directions asking questions and solving problems are also more productive Increased education also provides greater job flexibility for workers in a changing economic environment. When production technologies change better educated workers learn new procedures more easily. Moreover when economic change leads to job loss better educated workers find new jobs more readily Concern over declining school quality in the United States has led researchers to probe more deeply into the relationship between educational achievement and economic growth. Studies suggest that to percent of economic growth after was attributable to improvements in education. Thus improving the quality of education may have lasting effects on the Nation 's standard of living TRENDS IN BASIC SKILLS A high school diploma is often considered the minimal requirement for a good job. Currently percent of the to 24-year-old population has completed high school. High school graduation rates have been largely stagnant since the mid-1970s ( Chart ) The primary exception occurs among young blacks whose dropout rates have fallen and whose high school completion rates have increased steadily to a current level of percent. Among young Hispanics however high school completion rates remain at a very low percent. The percent of young adults who are high school dropouts face low earnings and high unemployment rates ( Box ) The lack of significant progress over the past decade in raising overall high school completion rates is a serious concern for an economy with a declining need for unskilled workers As important as whether a student has completed high school is the level of achievement a student attains in high school. The National Assessment of Educational Progress ( NAEP ) indicates that high school students ' performance in basic subject areas either improved slightly or remained constant over the past two decades although minority students showed marked improvements. Nonetheless a significant number of high school students still lack adequate basic skills. The NAEP indicates that about percent of Chart HIGH SCHOOL COMPLETION RATES BY RACE. Total high school completion rates have been largely stagnant for the last decade although completion rates of blacks have increased Percent Whites Blacks A Hispanics Xs s v ^ ^ * ^ / y \ * x ^ V \ \ \ j i i i i i i i i i I Note : Data are percent of to year olds with high school diplomas Source : Department of Commerce year-olds can not read above the " intermediate " level attained by nearly three-fifths of all 13-year-olds. Nearly percent of all 17year-olds can not read well enough to " understand summarize and explain relatively complicated information " according to the NAEP. International comparisons of science and mathematical competency show U.S. students performing below students from such countries as Japan South Korea the United Kingdom and Spain. Major improvements in the quality of U.S. schools are badly needed. Policies must be implemented that will reward excellence and increase the skills and achievement of U.S. students at all levels of ability TRENDS IN HIGHER EDUCATION An increasing number of jobs in today 's economy require collegelevel training. Moreover maintaining competitiveness in technological development and innovation requires a pool of well-trained researchers with advanced university degrees Box Widening Earnings Differentials Real median hourly earnings ( earnings adjusted for inflation ) have increased over the past decade but since the mid1970s the hourly earnings of young male high school graduates and dropouts have fallen dramatically relative to the earnings of more educated workers. More educated workers have seen substantial real earnings growth implying that the economic rewards to education are rising. But real earnings among less educated workers have actually declined even during the expansion of the 1980s. These changes have occurred across all age groups These shifts in relative earnings are still only partially understood but they are clearly related to the increased competition in the world market for manufactured goods which has led to a decline in high-wage low-skilled jobs. The widening earnings differences are attributable to more than just sectoral shifts away from manufacturing however for they are also occurring within nonmanufacturing industries. If these changes persist economic opportunities for low-skilled workers in the United States will be seriously limited. The rising rewards to education however will enhance the incentives for workers and students to invest in education and training Undergraduate Degrees The growing demand for skilled workers means a growing need for college graduates. However the share of to 29-year olds who have completed or more years of college has been virtually unchanged at about percent of the young adult population since the early 1980s ( Chart ) Some evidence indicates increasing college enrollment rates among recent high school graduates but this increase has not yet fed through to college completion rates. Only percent of young blacks and percent of young Hispanics complete or more years of college. Not shown in these data is a small increase in college completions among older students who return to school at a later age The rising cost of a college degree may be holding down college completion rates. Since the cost of a bachelor 's degree at 4year colleges and universities grew twice as fast as the consumer price index. The availability of financial aid ( primarily student loans ) has helped to offset these mounting costs but the out-ofpocket expenses paid by students and their families has nonetheless risen Chart COLLEGE COMPLETION RATES BY RACE. After rising through the mid-1970s the percent of young adults completing four or more years of college fell in the late 1970s and leveled off in the 1980s Percent Whites Hispanics I \ I I I I I Note : Data are percent of to year olds who have completed four or more years of college Source : Department of Commerce Rising relative wages for college-educated workers at least partially reflect a rising demand for their services. Over the long run higher earnings of college graduates should induce a greater number of students to attend college even in the face of rising college costs although a lag may occur before high school students respond to this incentive Advanced Degrees In an increasingly competitive international economy the United States needs highly trained specialists and researchers ; Uiis requires a growing pool of workers with advanced university degrees. While information is available only on the total number of advanced degrees awarded assuming that these degrees are given to to 34-year-olds then about percent of young adults currently receive a master 's degree in some field while slightly fewer than percent receive a Ph.D. These percentages have fallen slightly over the past decade although large increases have occurred in the number of business and management masters ' degrees awarded Recipients of advanced degrees are disproportionately white males. Although black and Hispanic students receive more than percent of all bachelors ' degrees awarded they receive only percent of all masters ' degrees awarded and percent of all Ph.D.s. In contrast women receive approximately one-half of all masters ' degrees. But women still receive a disproportionately small share of the doctoral degrees awarded particularly in the natural and computer sciences and in engineering. Attracting a wider range of students into advanced study in all fields will expand the pool of future researchers and broaden the diversity of research perspectives building the Nation 's capacity for creative research and technological advance ON-THE-JOB TRAINING Because many jobs require a significant amount of on-the-job training workers do not stop learning when they leave school Some of this training involves classroom participation or organized on-the-job teaching but much of it involves informally learning procedures and responsibilities. Wages of workers who have received on-the-job training are between and percent higher than those of workers with similar characteristics who do not receive such training a clear indication that on-the-job training results in productivity increases. On-the-job training also often encourages long-term job retention Approximately to percent of the work force claim to have participated in formal on-the-job training programs. ( Estimates vary depending on how training is defined. ) A higher percentage ( around percent ) indicate that they have received informal onthe-job training with their current employer Theoretically on-the-job training could reduce skill differentials that result from differences in formal education. The evidence indicates however that workers with more years of schooling are more likely to receive formal on-the-job training. Training is also more likely among white workers more experienced workers and fulltime workers. Thus there is little evidence that on-the-job training offsets other differentials ; given the group of workers who receive it it may well widen them. As skill demands rise employers in the years ahead may have an incentive to provide on-the-job training to workers who have not traditionally received it IMPROVING THE EDUCATION AND SKILL LEVELS OF U.S. WORKERS The Administration is strongly committed to improved education and training opportunities for all Americans. State and local governments have traditionally accepted primary fiscal responsibility for education with the Federal Government providing small amounts of financial support only percent of the funds spent on education in for example. The Federal Government however still plays a vital role in shaping educational policy as exemplified by last fall 's Education Summit. For only the third time in history a President called together the Nation 's Governors and the Cabinet to discuss a vital national issue. As a result of this summit the Administration is working with the Governors to define national performance goals for the educational system to increase spending for preschool programs to strengthen efforts at school reform and to provide greater flexibility in Federal and State funding for local schools Improving Elementary and Secondary Schools In terms of average per pupil expenditures U.S. spending on elementary and secondary education is greater than that of most other industrialized nations ; only Switzerland spends more resources per child. Despite these expenditures elementary and secondary students do worse on educational proficiency exams than students from many other nations. Thus the challenge is not to spend more but to spend more effectively. Elementary and secondary education in this country must be dramatically improved. For instance the President has challenged the Nation 's schools to make U.S. students first in the world in mathematics and science skills by the year Improving the quality of education and training will require local school flexibility to meet the needs of students with diverse backgrounds choice by students and their families to ensure high-quality schools and accountability of educational institutions to achieving performance goals and standards The Administration 's proposed Educational Excellence Act ( Box ) is designed primarily to provide leadership and support to State and local governments to improve the quality and effectiveness of America 's schools and the achievement of America 's students. Schools are the Nation 's most prominent investment in its human resources ; more than percent of gross national product is spent on elementary and secondary schools alone. It has become clear over the past years however that spending more money does little by itself to guarantee better schools. Once other aspects of the school environment are taken into account differences in school expenditures have little relationship to educational achievement. Parental background and home environment are crucial determinants of achievement but so are effective teaching and certain aspects of school organization as the Educational Excellence Act recognizes Good education requires effective teachers. While teachers ' real salaries are now at all-time highs and have been rising relative to those of other workers many educators still express concern that teaching is not attracting the highest quality applicants. Particularly as a host of new career options have opened up for women many of whom have traditionally trained as teachers good female Box The Proposed Educational Excellence Act Because of its strong commitment to better schools the Administration has proposed the Educational Excellence Act This act will strengthen the quality of education in this country by providing ; Presidential Merit Schools awards to schools making progress in raising educational achievement creating a drug-free environment and reducing dropout rates ; Presidential Awards to excellent teachers ; Short-term assistance to districts establishing magnet schools ; * Assistance to States developing alternative teacher certification programs ; * Emergency Grants to urban school districts with severe drug problems ; A National Science Scholars1 program to fund top high school students who undertake college work in the sciences mathematics or engineering ; and * Matching funds to support historically black college and university endowment fundraising college students have often been encouraged to enter other fields Many States are working to improve teacher quality by attracting better students into teaching and through alternative certification and better preparation and training. Excellence in teaching can be rewarded through merit pay systems and greater public recognition of effective teaching Teachers need an effective school environment in order to do their jobs well. The President has spearheaded an effort together with the Nation 's Governors to establish national educational performance goals including a challenge to raise high school graduation rates to percent and to make all schools drug free by the year A number of States have adopted statewide minimum competency tests to identify students and schools that require special attention and to ensure that schools provide students with an identified set of basic skills. In addition many school districts are trying to involve private employers much more closely in the school system both by encouraging employers to offer students valuable work experience and by soliciting advice from employers on the skills needed by students. Some school districts are also exploring expanded school hours a longer school year and greater parental involvement in school decisions. The key is not only to allow schools flexibility to use the educational methods most effective for their students but also to demand that schools be accountable for the resulting skill levels of their students The Administration particularly supports efforts to improve the quality of schools by offering students and their families a greater choice over which school they can attend thus expanding competition among schools and increasing parental involvement in the education system. Allowing extensive parental choice among schools is a new idea and from this and related reforms are emerging models of how school districts can implement choice most effectively Increasing Participation in Higher Education The U.S. system of higher education vocational programs colleges and universities has long been among the best in the world It is important to maintain the quality of this vital national resource and given the increasing demand for skilled workers to encourage even more students to use it. Improving the Nation 's elementary and secondary schools will increase the number of students who are prepared for higher education. But other changes may be desirable as well including those proposed in the Educational Excellence Act Counseling high school students about the possibilities and advantages of further education and encouraging them to continue their studies could increase college and vocational school enrollments. Greater involvement of private business in schools may also help if students learn about the advantages of college or vocational education through internships or contact with older workers. Extremely low rates of college and university attendance among minority students are a particular public concern especially because these students represent an increasing share of new work force entrants. High schools serving these students should prepare and encourage them to continue their education Higher education costs money. Because a student can not use as collateral the career enhancement that higher education is designed to provide government has come to provide loan assistance as well as grants and fellowships to low-income students who need this help. The Federal Government provides directly or subsidizes a substantial portion of all financial assistance loans and grants received by college students. Continuing support for these college aid programs is important with continuing attention to their ongoing effectiveness and targeting Increased access to graduate degree programs is important to maintain a first-rank group of university-level researchers and teachers. The Federal Government has long encouraged advanced study and research. For instance the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) finances fellowships to students pursuing advanced degrees in particular scientific fields. The NSF also underwrites fellowships that promote advanced research and study by minorities and women in the sciences. Given current concerns about potential shortages of personnel in technical and scientific areas continued Federal funding of these and similar programs should help encourage a diverse group of students to pursue advanced study Adult Literacy Led by the First Lady 's work on behalf of adult literacy this Administration has raised the level of public concern about the million adult Americans who are functionally illiterate. These adults have difficulty performing simple tasks such as filling out a job application or reading a child 's report card. Workers who lack basic skills are less productive on the job and experience higher unemployment. Furthermore adult functional illiteracy can make it harder to improve school achievement ; children of parents with low educational skills are also more likely to do poorly in school and to drop out Improvements in the Nation 's schools will come too late to help these adults. Adult literacy is the focus of a wide range of private sector programs and volunteer organizations. One study estimated that percent of Fortune companies provide remedial basic skills programs to their workers. An estimated volunteers provide individual and small-group tutoring to other adults. A variety of Federal State and local agencies also support or provide adult literacy services This Administration is strongly committed to reducing adult functional illiteracy. By publicly recognizing volunteers and private organizations working in this area the Administration has increased the visibility of these efforts. The Administration is also committed to better coordinating Federal adult literacy programs increasing Federal funding for these programs and expanding research on effective adult literacy teaching techniques Job Training Although improvements in the public and private school system of this country are important classroom schooling is not the only way to provide a quality work force. On-the-job training may be more appropriate. The primary responsibility for training rests with employers and workers. As new skills are needed employers have incentives to provide appropriate training to their workers and workers have incentives to seek such training The Federal Government has a history of limited involvement in job training largely through programs aimed at low-skilled and unemployed workers. The leading public job training program today is the Job Training Partnership Act ( JTPA ) which works with the private sector to educate train and provide employment-related services to targeted groups of workers. JTPA finances programs for displaced workers disadvantaged youth migrant and seasonal workers Native Americans and veterans. The public-private partnership created by JTPA is important to its effectiveness. Additional skills are useful to individuals only if the workplace needs them The Administration has proposed amendments that improve the targeting and effectiveness of JTPA services for workers facing serious barriers to employment. These amendments include enhanced performance standards to increase accountability ; better coordination of services and more attention to individual needs to improve program quality ; and more intensive and comprehensive services for disadvantaged youth and adults to improve targeting. In addition the Administration is implementing the Family Support Act of ( discussed below ) which requires all States to provide education job training and job placement programs for public assistance recipients THE CHALLENGE FOR THE 1990s To ensure high economic growth in the future all American workers must acquire effective skills and education. This effort will require building a three-way network consisting of the public schools and other government training programs the private sector and the households of workers parents and children who are part of both the school system and the work force LABOR SHORTAGES WORKER MOBILITY AND IMMIGRATION As the U.S. economy enters the 1990s concerns are growing about the effects of possible labor shortages on production and wages. Employers in some areas of the country report a shortfall of entry-level workers and are paying wages well above the minimum wage to attract new employees. Other firms report difficulties in hiring suitably trained employees for more skilled positions In many cases limited supplies of workers with particular skills or in particular geographic areas have developed from changes in the labor force forcing employers to intensify their efforts to attract new workers. In other cases uneven patterns of economic growth and technological change have altered the skill requirements or location of jobs resulting in labor shortages for employers in growing areas or industries and job losses among workers whose skills have become obsolete or who find themselves in areas with few job opportunities Most of the time the labor market has readily and naturally resolved such imbalances. Employers perceiving a labor shortage have often raised wages to attract workers encouraging new entry or geographic mobility. Other firms have relocated to areas with a greater supply of available workers coupled lower hiring standards with remedial and on-the-job training or targeted nontraditional sources of labor such as older workers and the handicapped. Immigration has also been an important source of new workers in particular industries and occupations Labor markets typically do not experience long-run imbalances but gradually adjust to changes in supply and demand. Governments can help the market to adjust more promptly and efficiently by avoiding or easing regulations that inhibit labor mobility and restrict the use of alternative sources of labor LABOR MOBILITY In recent years changes in the composition of output and in methods of production have shifted the demand for workers across industries occupations and geographic areas. As some jobs were eliminated new jobs were created that required new skills and abilities. Because job elimination often occurred in geographic areas or in industries different from those of job creation some workers were displaced from their jobs while others found new opportunities Overall the evidence suggests that workers have adapted quickly to these structural changes. Researchers estimate that the gross flows of workers between employment and nonemployment vastly exceed the net changes in employment and unemployment reported in the official data. Even when the economy shows no net job creation some estimates suggest that roughly percent of all jobs each year are new resulting from new business creation or the expansion of existing businesses. This job creation offsets the annual disappearance of about percent of the jobs in the economy as firms close their doors or lay off workers. Compared with such rapid rates of job turnover the annual net increase in jobs has been roughly percent during the current economic expansion. The ability of the United States to combine high job turnover with rapid employment growth and low unemployment reflects the flexibility of U.S. labor markets and the adaptability of the U.S. labor force For some workers of course shifts in labor demand can create problems of adjustment characterized by spells of unemployment or reductions in wages. These problems do not suggest that governments should prevent changes in the labor market. Rather policies should be designed to ease the transitional disruptions associated with labor market change and to reduce barriers to mobility. The experience of workers who make successful job transitions indicates that encouraging geographic and skill mobility will promote more efficient labor market responses to economic change GEOGRAPHIC MOBILITY All regions have shared in the current economic expansion enjoying sizable employment gains and declining unemployment rates. But the pace of economic growth over the past decade has varied across regions. Many areas on the eastern and western seaboards and in the Southeast have experienced strong economic growth aided by industrial diversification and a shift toward services since the mid-1970s. Growth in some areas of the Midwest has been slower reflecting foreign competition in many heavy manufacturing industries and problems in agriculture. Many local economies in the Southwest still suffer the lingering effects of the decline in oil prices between and National Migration Free movement of workers within the United States offers a potential source of labor to employers in prosperous areas and potential opportunities for workers in depressed areas. For example strong employment gains in both the South Atlantic and Pacific Coast regions have stimulated increased migration to those areas In contrast net outmigration has occurred from the Midwest and East South Central regions where economic growth has been less robust Despite the widening regional differences in economic opportunities overall migration rates did not increase in the 1980s. Between and about percent of the population moved to a different county each year and about percent moved to a different State similar to mobility rates in the 1970s In part workers may not have migrated more because in many areas higher living costs offset better labor market opportunities in the 1980s. Regional variation in housing prices widened considerably as prices for both new and existing homes rose rapidly in various markets of the New England mid-Atlantic and Pacific States but posted declines or only small increases in many parts of the South and Midwest. Because the largest increases in housing prices often occurred in areas with the greatest economic gains and employment opportunities some workers who might otherwise have migrated to those areas were likely discouraged by high housing costs Other factors also influence migration. For example differences in climate and local public services are an important consideration for many households and partly explain the steady migration from the snowbelt areas of the North to the sunbelt regions of the South and West over the past two decades. A more important factor in the 1980s however may have been the aging of the U.S. population. Possibly because of stronger family and social ties established workers are less likely than younger workers to uproot their fazni lies and relocate to another part of the country. As a result the aging of the baby-boom cohort may have reduced the geographic mobility of the population in the 1980s. While an older work force in the 1990s will continue to hold down geographic mobility increases in the percentage of young educated workers who often participate in national rather than regional labor markets could partially counteract this trend Firm Location Firms also migrate often relocating to labor markets with larger pools of potential employees. Moreover new firms which contribute significantly to economic growth and job creation base their location decisions in part on wage costs and labor quality. In effect the market often brings the jobs to the people In the 1970s this type of mobility helped to reignite growth in once-depressed areas. As local economies in the industrialized Northeast deteriorated in the wake of the energy shocks of the 1970s for example new ventures in light manufacturing and services took advantage of the relatively experienced work forces remaining in those areas. Similarly much of the improvement in the economies of the sunbelt regions resulted from decisions by employers to locate new plants where labor costs were traditionally low And while employers in some areas located parts of their operations abroad by outsourcing production to low-wage countries some foreign producers set up plants in the United States More recently changing patterns of regional growth have again reduced the regional dispersion in labor markets. Sluggish employment growth has led to an increase in unemployment rates over the past year from their very low levels in New England and in some mid-Atlantic States. At the same time however employment opportunities have improved markedly in many Southern States reducing joblessness in areas experiencing relatively high rates of unemployment Recent advances in telecommunications and computers have enhanced a firm 's ability to link dispersed locations both office to office and home to office. As a result the physical location of workers and jobs may become even less important increasing the speed at which market forces balance geographic variation in economic growth OCCUPATIONAL MOBILITY As might be expected economic growth in the 1980s has also led to shifts in employment across occupations and industries. Productivity gains and international competition have eliminated many traditional blue-collar jobs while the computer revolution and the expansion of the service economy have boosted the demand for technical and service-oriented skills. In response workers have dis played a high degree of occupational mobility either by switching occupations voluntarily as economic opportunities improved or out of necessity after losing a job Voluntary Job Changes About million workers or percent of employed workers switched occupations in the latest year for which data are available. Nearly percent of those workers who switched occupations did so voluntarily following a career plan or seeking better pay or working conditions. Such job changes enable workers to improve their economic status and at the same time allow the labor market to adjust to changing demand conditions The propensity to change occupations is highest for younger workers. Moreover much of the labor market adjustment to changes in the composition of demand occurs through the initial choice of a career usually by relatively young labor force entrants This propensity is not surprising given older workers ' large accumulated investments in training and skill development. But it suggests that the aging of the baby-boom cohort could reduce the occupational mobility of the work force as a whole in the 1990s Education offers a possible solution to the demographic factors reducing occupational mobility. Because of the expanded opportunities available to them more educated workers exhibit higher mobility rates than less educated workers. For tomorrow 's work force greater educational achievement can both broaden workers ' initial career options and improve their potential for advancement Displaced Workers Although most workers who changed occupations in did so voluntarily million persons switched occupations as a result of a job loss typically reflecting a plant closing production cutbacks or elimination of a particular job. Such job displacements are an expected result of economic and technological gains that benefit the population as a whole but can bring hardship to individual workers. Clearly the ability of these displaced workers to transfer their skills to another job is important in maintaining the flexibility of the U.S. work force Many displaced workers find employment fairly soon after their job loss. More than percent of displaced adult workers who switched occupations in found new jobs right away. More than percent of workers displaced between and were employed in ; another percent had retired or otherwise left the labor force Significant numbers of displaced workers were not successful in finding new jobs however. The unemployment rate for displaced workers percent in is well above the national unemployment rate. And more than one-quarter of those who did find new full-time positions experienced a drop in earnings of more than percent In general higher education levels and geographic mobility appear to lessen the costs of a job loss. Reemployment rates for displaced workers were significantly higher among more educated workers ; higher levels of schooling substantially reduced both the time spent unemployed and wage losses. Workers who moved to another area after a job loss were also much more likely to find another job with the percentage of displaced workers who moved typically averaging about percent Retraining is another important component of strategies to increase work force flexibility particularly for workers with low general skills. Title III of the Job Training Partnership Act authorizes funds for retraining displaced workers. This program is projected to serve about workers during the 12-month period beginning July with an average training period estimated at weeks Finally the private sector also plays an important role in assisting workers threatened with a job loss. Many employers attempt to reassign workers within the firm when jobs are eliminated by new technologies. In addition several major union contracts now mandate retraining for workers displaced for this reason IMMIGRATION When labor market mobility is insufficient to eliminate area- or industry-specific labor shortages employers often turn to immigrants. Throughout U.S. history economic growth and job opportunities have drawn millions of foreign-born persons to this country both legally and illegally. Of course factors influencing immigration include family ties and the freedoms offered by the United States. But whatever their motivation for coming to America immigrants traditionally have adapted well to the U.S. labor market and have contributed significantly to long-run U.S. economic growth Between and legal immigration averaged persons per year about one-quarter of percent of the U.S. population. This rate of immigration was above the pace of the 1970s but well below the average immigration rate prior to when numerical restrictions on immigration were first introduced. Efforts to control illegal immigration estimated by the U.S. Census Bureau to have added between and illegal aliens each year in the first half of the 1980s led to the Immigration Reform and Control Act of This act restricted the employment opportunities of illegal aliens by imposing penalties on employers who hired them but offered legal immigrant status to aliens who were in the United States before Do immigrants take jobs that would otherwise go to U.S. workers and depress wages in particular areas and occupations ? The many case studies of this question provide no conclusive answer and disagreement over the existence and magnitude of any effects continues to be widespread. However one recent study of cities between and found that on average an increase in the number of immigrants equal to percent of a city 's population ( more than four times the annual rate of immigration to the United States as a whole ) had a negligible effect on the employment status of less-skilled native workers and reduced their wage rates only about percent over that 10-year period Moreover numerous studies suggest that the long-run benefits of immigration greatly exceed any short-run costs. The unskilled jobs taken by immigrants in years past have often complemented the skilled jobs typically filled by the native-born population increasing employment and income for the population as a whole Currently U.S. immigration policy is based primarily on the humanitarian principles of family reunification and refugee resettlement. Fewer than percent of immigrants in recent years were admitted because of their skills. Less skilled immigrants will clearly continue to be a valuable resource for employers. Yet with projections of a rising demand for skilled workers in coming years the Nation can achieve even greater benefits from immigration by augmenting this traditional emphasis on family reunification with policies designed to increase the number of skilled immigrants. Immigrants with more education or training will likely make the greatest contributions to the U.S. economy suggesting that basic skill levels could be one guide to admitting new immigrants under a skill-based criteria POLICIES TO ADDRESS SKILL SHORTAGES Policies designed to increase the quality and extent of education among today 's youth may be the most important investment society can make to promote greater labor market flexibility in the years ahead. Continuing efforts at all levels of government to remove barriers to geographic and occupational mobility also are warranted For many workers the lack of affordable housing restricts mobility. Linking Federal housing subsidies to tenants and making the subsidy portable is one way to overcome housing affordability barriers to greater geographic mobility. Eliminating State and local laws such as rent control and overly restrictive building codes and zoning regulations that limit the availability of such units and enactment of the Administration 's proposal Homeownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere ( discussed below ) could also increase labor flows to rapidly growing areas Similarly efforts to revitalize economically depressed areas through removal of barriers to growth could transfer job opportunities to areas of high unemployment. The Administration 's commitment to develop public/private partnerships through the creation of urban enterprise zones can encourage private investment and job creation in these areas Immigration policy can also contribute to the smooth operation of the U.S. labor market in the 1990s. While continuing the humanitarian principles that have shaped immigration policies in the past the Federal Government can encourage the immigration of workers with skills important to the economy both by increasing the number of visas for workers with a job in hand and by increasing quota levels for potential immigrants with higher levels of basic and specific skills. This approach will strengthen the prospects for successful assimilation of immigrants into U.S. society and increase the economic gains from immigration for the population as a whole Efforts to expand domestic sources of labor will also help prevent potential shortages. The increasing share of healthy active elderly persons in the population could be a particularly useful labor market resource. In the years ahead it may be increasingly common for employers to provide incentives for older workers to postpone retirement or to accept part-time work after retirement giving firms continued access to the expertise of the Nation 's most experienced workers IMPROVING THE OPPORTUNITIES OF LOWINCOME HOUSEHOLDS This Administration is committed to an antipoverty agenda calling on the Federal Government in partnership with State and local governments to : Maintain a strong economy to ensure economic opportunities for unemployed and underemployed Americans Work with the private sector to provide the training assistance and incentives that will help those with the ability to support themselves to achieve independence and self-sufficiency Supplement family resources when necessary to provide ongoing and adequate support for those in need and unable to work particularly the elderly and severely disabled Integration of more low-income households into the economic mainstream will not only help these families gain economic independence but will also increase the productive resources of the Nation and help maintain economic growth through the 1990s POVERTY IN THE UNITED STATES The primary measure of economic need in the United States is the poverty rate the percentage of individuals who live in families with income below the poverty line. ( The poverty line which varies with family size is an approximate measure of the minimal amount of income necessary to purchase food shelter and other necessities. ) As Chart indicates the poverty rate fell steadily through the 1960s reaching a low of percent in but rose again to a peak of percent during the recession of the early 1980s. By the poverty rate was down to percent with million individuals below the poverty line. While the poverty rate has fallen steadily for the past years too many families still confront daily problems of economic need Chart POVERTY RATE. The poverty rate rose sharply in the early 1980s but has since declined Percent of population I I I Source : Department of Commerce The aggregate poverty rate obscures significant differences among different types of households. The elderly have experienced the most dramatic decline in poverty rates ; by the poverty rate among elderly persons was at an historic low of percent While poverty has fallen among the elderly however the poverty rate among children has risen as Chart shows. In one child in five lived in a family with income below the poverty line High poverty among children is closely related to the growth of female-headed households in the population who have disproportionately high poverty rates. In more than one-half of all poor children lived in female-headed families. In addition poverty rates are much higher among minorities than among whites as Chart indicates. While percent of white individuals were poor in percent of black individuals were poor and percent of Hispanic persons were poor. In female-headed black and Hispanic families with children poverty rates approached percent DISTINGUISHING AMONG THE POOR Individuals who can work may lack training available jobs or access to adequate and affordable child care. In the long run these individuals may be able to support their families but need shortterm assistance to reach self-sufficiency such as temporary income support child care assistance in household management job training and assisted job search. Government programs to help these individuals must balance the need for adequate short-term assistance with the goal of long-term independence Not all poor people need this type of assistance. Some are temporarily poor but have the resources to escape poverty quickly without any government assistance. The percent of the poor who are full-time students are in this category. Other poor individuals can not be expected to earn the income necessary for their support This group includes both children and elderly persons who together constitute almost one-half of the poor and those with serious mental or physical disabilities. If these individuals do not have family support society must provide the safety net of resources necessary for their support It is sometimes quite difficult to determine whether a particular individual can work. For instance single mothers with very young children may be unable to work because of household demands rather than because of any inherent lack of earning ability. Arguments over the generosity and scope of public programs often revolve around these difficult judgments. The remainder of this section will focus on those low-income households who are generally considered able to benefit from employment-based strategies THE VALUE OF A HEALTHY ECONOMY For the employable poor the most important government responsibility is to maintain a stable and healthy economic environment that offers positive incentives and opportunities for all workers The burden of unemployment is disproportionately borne by lowwage and less skilled workers. Indeed the high poverty rates of the early 1980s reflected the high unemployment rates experienced at that time Chart POVERTY RATES BY AGE. In the 1980s poverty rates of the elderly reached a record low while children 's rates remained high Percent of population ^ ^ Source : Department of Commerce Chart POVERTY RATES BY RACE Poverty rates for blacks and Hispanics exceed those for whites while rates for female-headed households are high regardless of race Percent All persons Female-headed households with children White m Black Source : Department of Commerce Hispanic In contrast when unemployment falls and the demand for workers increases unemployed workers can find jobs and underemployed workers can increase work hours. Younger low-income households particularly male-headed households typically show strong income growth in an expanding economy predominantly because of increased hours of work. The recent declines in poverty have occurred largely because of the sustained economic expansion TARGETED ANTIPOVERTY PROGRAMS While a healthy economy is important in any government strategy to fight poverty by itself it is not enough. Not all low-income households benefit from economic expansion. Elderly households who are largely unable to expand their work hours tend to show few gains. Female-headed households have not experienced substantial income gains during economic expansion. One reason why poverty rates have not fallen further during the economic expansion of the 1980s is the increase in female-headed families whose incomes have been less responsive to economic growth. Thus general policies that foster economic growth must be buttressed by strategies aimed at assisting particular groups Women and Children Recent Federal initiatives currently being implemented by this Administration are designed primarily to provide new economic opportunities for poor women and their children. A disproportionately large share of poor families are headed by women percent in and percent of these families contain children under age The steady increase in the share of poor families accounted for by female-headed families has been referred to as the feminization of poverty. Concern over this trend coupled with concern over high children 's poverty rates has resulted in a new approach to assistance for this population The primary income assistance program designed to aid lowincome single-parent families has long been aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) which provides income supplements to eligible low-income families with children. Responsibility for AFDC 's funding and program structure is shared among the Federal and State governments. The median State in January paid AFDC benefits of $ per month to a woman with two children ( the average AFDC family ) and no other income. When combined with food stamps worth $ per month this support provided the family with benefits equivalent to $ per month percent of the poverty level. AFDC benefits are set by the States however so that a family receiving AFDC and food stamps will have benefits equivalent to less than percent of the national poverty line in some States and close to percent in others. Although income from AFDC plus food stamps is the base level of economic support available to a family most poor families receive additional public assistance from other programs ( such as fuel assistance ) or they have other income sources thereby raising their total resources relative to the poverty line. In addition all AFDC recipients are eligible for health care assistance through medicaid AFDC was initiated in the 1930s to aid needy children without fathers. One of its primary purposes was to prevent widows from being forced into the labor market allowing them to remain at home with their children. The changing nature of the program and the rising participation of women in the labor force however have resulted in significant recent changes in AFDC. Concern over longterm reliance on AFDC has led to an emerging consensus that AFDC participants need more than cash assistance ; if they can work they should also be expected to participate in education training and job placement programs to enable them to become economically self-sufficient. The " workfare " experiments run by a variety of States in the 1980s indicate that targeted work experience job search and job placement programs can be cost-effective techniques that assist AFDC recipients to work more and rely less on AFDC income. Furthermore the individuals who benefit most from these programs are those women with little or no recent work history The success of these State experiments led to passage of the Family Support Act of which requires all States to establish a Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training ( JOBS ) program for eligible AFDC recipients. The Administration is strongly committed to working with States to ensure that the JOBS program is effectively implemented to expand employment opportunities for poor women as well as for the small number of two-parent families currently receiving AFDC. AFDC recipients who are able to work are expected to recognize their mutual obligation to their community : in exchange for AFDC support they are required to participate in JOBS. States are given flexibility to design the education job training and employment programs most suitable for their population and economy. The JOBS programs must provide child care assistance as well as transitional child care assistance and medicaid coverage for up to months after an individual leaves AFDC because of increased earnings The Administration is also committed to enforcing child support payments. Child support payments ensure that both parents share the economic burden of raising children. In only percent of poor female-headed families with children had child support awards and only percent of these families ( percent of all poor female-headed families ) received child support payments many of which were less than the award. In recent years States and the Federal Government have sought to levy and enforce child support orders on absent fathers. The Family Support Act strengthened the ability of States to establish mandatory payment guidelines and to locate fathers and directly withhold their wages This policy alone will not have substantial effects on the poverty rate among women and children both because absent fathers of many poor children are unemployed or employed at very low wages and because child support collected on behalf of AFDC families is primarily used to offset AFDC expenditures and thus does not produce much of an increase in overall family income. But for women who increase their earnings and move off AFDC child support payments can be an important additional source of income Moreover child support enforcement has the added social benefit of emphasizing that both parents have ongoing responsibility for their children The Working Poor Providing incentives and opportunities for employment and better jobs among low-income families increases their economic independence decreases government spending and increases the productive work force of this country. About percent of all poor families contain an employed worker while percent contain a full-time year-round worker. Increased economic opportunities that allow these working poor families especially those working full-time and year-round to escape poverty will also provide incentives for other low-income persons to increase their employment For these reasons the Administration has proposed a new and refundable income tax credit the child credit for families with an employed parent and young children. This credit would increase income by lowering taxes among low-income families or by providing cash supplements to families with no tax liability. In addition the Administration proposes making the existing dependent care tax credit refundable to increase its usefulness to poor families with child care expenses. This approach rather than the alternative of subsidizing child care centers allows families to choose the type of child care they need and involves less government regulation The Administration has also proposed a dramatic expansion in the Head Start program for preschoolers. This program significantly improves children 's subsequent school performance and would also help low-income parents meet their child care needs. The budget requests a $ million increase in budget authority for Head Start a 36-percent increase over spending The President has signed an increase in the minimum wage to $ per hour by and he sought and obtained a lower training wage for newly employed teenagers. This innovative provision will encourage employers to hire and train young workers and will offset the loss of employment opportunities that teenagers have historically experienced when the minimum wage is increased Providing incentives for labor market activity among low-income households is particularly important because it offers role models for children and teenagers in poor households. Teenagers and young adults in low-income families need to be convinced that those who play by the rules finish high school stay off drugs do not get pregnant as a teenager and find full-time work can escape poverty and make a better life Lack of medical insurance can also cause problems for the working poor. Controlling for other differences the uninsured are less healthy and receive less medical care than the insured ; they also pay a higher share of medical expenses out-of-pocket. In percent of all poor individuals were uninsured. In fact the rate of uninsurance is higher among the working poor than among the nonworking poor because persons who receive AFDC ( or supplemental security income a program for poor elderly and disabled individuals ) also have access to publicly provided insurance through medicaid. Many low-wage jobs especially jobs in small businesses that can not obtain low-cost group insurance coverage do not offer health insurance Recent expansions in medicaid eligibility mandate that States must provide medicaid coverage to pregnant women and children under age in families below percent of the poverty line by April At their option States may expand coverage to pregnant women and infants in families up to percent of the poverty line. These medicaid expansions may be particularly useful in reducing infant mortality in low-income families Implementing the President 's National Drug Control Strategy will help decrease the health problems experienced by drug abusers and their families. Medical care for women and children has become particularly costly in certain inner-city locations where cocaine addiction of mothers is linked to serious infant and maternal health problems. Although the number of poor mothers who are drug abusers is very small the visibility and cost of the problems they create underscore the need to wage an effective war on drugs The Unemployed The Administration 's efforts to improve the quality of schools its war on drugs and its education and training programs for disadvantaged persons are all designed to bring more individuals into productive employment. After years of economic growth the share of the poor who are unemployed or seeking more work than they can find has fallen. But some individuals who may be able to work remain unemployed often because they lack the necessary labor market experience work skills or training. This condition may be particularly costly to younger persons who have never held a steady job The Job Training and Partnership Act of established a structure of job training programs directed by private firms through local private industry councils. JTPA is projected to provide job training and placement services for million economically disadvantaged individuals in the months beginning July Indeed the expanded work programs for AFDC participants are expected to rely heavily upon local JTPA programs for job placement. The Administration 's proposed amendments to JTPA ( discussed above ) include the creation of two special programs targeted on disadvantaged youth and adults. The Administration has also proposed a challenge grant program Youth Opportunities Unlimited for youth in high-poverty inner-city or rural areas The need to increase employment is particularly acute among minority populations in high-poverty urban areas a group that is sometimes referred to as the underclass. Overall unemployment rates among minority youth have fallen. In areas of concentrated poverty and deprivation however there is evidence of high rates of drug use low educational achievement high rates of teenage pregnancy and alienation from legitimate employment No single policy can solve the multiple problems experienced by individuals in these areas ; a multidimensional strategy is needed Administration initiatives to improve inner-city public schools combined with anti-drug efforts job training and job placement should help some individuals. Targeted programs to geographically defined high-poverty areas such as urban enterprise zones may also help focus resources on concentrated poverty and its related effects on a community Several effective programs have brought young persons from highly disadvantaged backgrounds into the labor market. The Job Corps has years of experience in providing such teenagers with education job training and placement. Research evaluations suggest that Job Corps participants are employed more earn more and are less likely to become involved in criminal activity than persons of similar background who were not in the Job Corps Promising model programs include JOBSTART which focuses on high school dropouts with low literacy skills and STEP which provides summer job training and educational services to teenagers Homelessness and Housing This Administration has proposed expanded funding and new programs to address the problem of homelessness and housing affordability among low-income families. One of the more visible problems in urban areas in the 1980s has been homelessness. Not only is homelessness a social problem but it is also a barrier to effective participation in the labor market. Reliable estimates of the homeless population are difficult to obtain and few national estimates have been made. An extensive recent study estimated that to persons were homeless in the United States over a given week in while approximately double that number experienced homelessness at some point during that year. As the study acknowledges however no one knows exactly how many homeless people there are in the United States The homeless population is generally composed of at least three distinguishable groups. First there are those who have a history of serious mental illness. Although estimates vary most studies indicate that around one-third of the homeless population are mentally disabled. This group is often the most difficult to reach and the least likely to use temporary shelters and care facilities. Second homeless families primarily low-income women and children constitute about one-quarter of the homeless and tend to be actually on the streets for the shortest period of time before they enter the public assistance system. The remainder of the homeless are predominantly single men between the ages of and Many of these men work intermittently ; some receive food stamps or small payments from State assistance programs ; many have ongoing problems with alcohol or other drugs Changes in urban housing markets are often cited as an important cause of homelessness along with the deinstitutionalization of the mentally disabled drug abuse spouse abuse and other problems. Rising rents and land prices and the rejuvenation of downtown areas have displaced low-income populations. The availability of boarding houses and rooms for rent typically used by poor single adults has diminished in most cities. In some areas rent control restrictive building codes and zoning regulations also may have decreased the stock of low-income housing The President has proposed programs that will provide housing assistance and supportive services to the most troubled homeless individuals as part of his HOPE initiative ( discussed below ) The Administration also supports full funding of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act. Passed in the McKinney Act was the first legislation to authorize major direct Federal expenditures for emergency food shelter counseling and other services for the homeless. For the past fiscal years the Congress has appropriated less money than it authorized a situation the Administration seeks to rectify in its proposed budget Homelessness is a serious issue but housing affordability is the dominant housing problem confronting most poor. It is estimated that more than percent of the poor paid more than one-half of their income for housing in The Administration continues to emphasize housing vouchers or other tenant subsidies as the most efficient way to address low-income housing needs The Administration has also proposed a major new program Homeownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere ( HOPE ) to expand housing opportunities for the poor. This proposed legislation includes tax incentives to encourage greater construction and rehabilitation of low-income housing and to encourage savings for downpayments ; opportunities for residents of federally subsidized housing projects to have more voice over their housing through tenant management and potential tenant-purchase plans ; and Housing Opportunity Zones that would establish Federal-local partnerships in metropolitan jurisdictions to remove barriers to affordable housing Disabled and Employable The Administration supports a major new initiative to increase the economic opportunity for disabled persons. Surveys estimate that between million and million Americans are disabled This large range reflects very different definitions of disability ; while every study counts the persons in wheelchairs not all of them include the more than million with hypertension. Of course many disabled persons are fully employed especially if a broad definition of disability is used. Many others are elderly or do not seek employment. But because some disabilities limit the range of work options available and because some of the disabled have suffered discrimination in the workplace disabled individuals suffer a disproportionate incidence of poverty. In percent of poor household heads reported that they were not working because they were ill or disabled. Conversely among those household heads who report that they do not work because they are ill or disabled fully percent are poor The primary program explicitly designed to assist disabled lowincome households is supplemental security income a Federal program available to individuals with low incomes who are certified as unable to work. In addition those whose disability occurred on the job are typically able to receive workers ' compensation while those who have worked in the past are often eligible for social security disability payments. Several Federal programs also provide funds for work rehabilitation for the disabled The Administration supports the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) designed to lower barriers to employment public services and public facilities for the disabled population. Inaccessible workplaces and discrimination against disabled individuals have prevented many disabled persons who are able and willing to work from realizing their full economic potential. Major progress occurred with the passage of the Rehabilitation Act of which required institutions receiving Federal funding to make their facilities and services accessible to disabled individuals. Survey results still indicate that several million disabled individuals who want to work are unable to find employment however and the ADA is designed to open new employment opportunities for these persons FUTURE DIRECTIONS Experience has shown that designing policies to alleviate poverty is a difficult task. Among the issues that will continue to be debated in the years ahead are the following : How can low-income households be integrated into the economic mainstream ! A delicate balance must be maintained between providing adequate short-term assistance and preventing long-term dependence. Government programs should move people toward employment and self-sufficiency. A growing job base and a healthy economy are crucial ingredients of this strategy How can social policy goals be balanced against budget realities ! In a period of budget stringency program expenditures must be effectively targeted to those who will benefit the most from them One of the major challenges of the 1990s will be to develop effective antipoverty programs that further reduce economic need in this country by increasing the opportunities for productive employment among those who are currently poor MAINTAINING LOW UNEMPLOYMENT AND LOW INFLATION The civilian unemployment rate in averaged percent its lowest level since And the percentage of the civilian population employed reached percent its highest level ever. Recent concerns about labor shortages however have led some to ask v/hether further efforts to reduce unemployment might lead to a significant pickup in wage and price inflation. So far in the current expansion inflation has remained relatively moderate. The GNP fixed-weight price index the broadest economy-wide measure of inflation rose percent in well below its 9.8-percent rate in and down from percent in Underlying the concern that unemployment and inflation are linked is the widely accepted view that when inflationary expectations are stable the economy has a minimal rate of unemployment consistent with nonaccelerating inflation. The nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment often referred to as the NAIRU or natural rate of unemployment is an important guide for policymakers. It reflects unemployment associated with job changes ( frictional unemployment ) and with the mismatches between workers and jobs that occur in a changing economy ( structural unemployment ) Moreover when the unemployment rate falls below the NAIRU labor markets tighten and employers face greater pressures to raise wages in order to maintain a qualified work force ( Box ) Some have argued that at current levels of joblessness further large increases in output could drive the unemployment rate below the NAIRU thus triggering accelerating wage increases that in turn would threaten the progress in reducing price inflation made in the 1980s. Although some concern is justified the evidence suggests that the United States can achieve sustained growth without accelerating inflation. The Administration projections in Chapter for instance show 3.0-percent average growth through and a modest decline in inflation THE SECULAR DECLINE IN UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE 1980s Because alternative policies to reduce unemployment may have sharply different implications for the behavior of inflation it is important to distinguish among the different causes of unemployment Demand-related or cyclical unemployment by far the most visible cause of variation in joblessness refers to unemployment that occurs when the overall demand for workers falls. The sharp increases in the unemployment rate that occur during recessions clearly represent cyclical unemployment. Much of the decline in joblessness in the 1980s reflected the strong recovery from the recession and the long expansion that followed Frictional unemployment refers to the transitional unemployment that occurs when workers enter the labor market or change jobs. Structural unemployment is joblessness associated with a general lack of skills or with labor market mismatches between workers and jobs. The decline in unemployment over the past decade also reflects a drop in frictional and structural unemployment breaking an upward trend evident since In particular although unemployment rates were successively higher at each business cycle peak in and the unemployment rate in stood percentage points below its level ( Chart ) Moreover the decline in the unemployment rate in the current expansion has not led to a significant acceleration in wage inflation. These two facts together suggest that frictional and structural unemployment and hence the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation fell during the 1980s THE EFFECTS OF DEMOGRAPHIC AND LABOR FORCE TRENDS To a significant extent the decline in the NAIRU in the 1980s reflected changes in the composition of the labor force especially the aging of the baby-boom generation. As shown in Chart unemployment rates are higher for young workers ( aged to ) than for adults reflecting both the relative inexperience of new Box The Determinants of Nominal Wage Growth Although the process of wage-setting is often quite complex key determinants of nominal wage growth are current labor market conditions past and projected rates of inflation and labor productivity growth. Employer costs for fringe benefits are often influenced by events outside the labor market ~ such as the acceleration in health care inflation in the past few years. Because employers are ultimately concerned with total labor costs however the key determinants of wage growth also determine growth in total labor compensation beyond the short run The availability of labor influences both employers9 willingness to pay higher wages and workers ' efforts to seek larger pay increases. Relatively low unemployment rates increase upward pressure on wages as firms raise pay to attract new workers and retain their current employees. Similarly high unemployment rates tend to hold down wage increases Recent rates of wage and price inflation and expectations about future inflation also affect wages. If wages are expected to be higher in other parts of the economy because of recent wage increases at other firms or expectations of future wage increases then workers and employers will probably settle on a higher wage Past rates of price inflation may influence wages if workers and employers agree to " catch-up " adjustments to preserve real wage levels while employees who expect high inflation will demand larger wage increases to maintain their future standards of living. Moreover employers will be more willing to grant wage increases if they expect to be able to raise prices to offset their higher labor costs Over time real wage increases have roughly matched the long-run rate of productivity growth in the economy. Pay hikes associated with productivity gains do not increase the relative cost of labor to an employer and so do not contribute to an acceleration of price inflation. In this sense productivity gains are important to workers ; wage increases that are not matched by higher prices generate an improvement in living standards labor market entrants and higher rates of job turnover as young workers move in and out of various jobs during their search for a career The relative importance of young workers increased in the 1960s and 1970s and this shift toward groups with relatively high rates of unemployment caused the overall unemployment rate to rise. In addition overcrowding in lower skilled labor markets associated Chart F CIVILIAN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE. The unemployment rate has declined significantly during the current expansion Percent c civilian labor force Note : Shaded areas represent recessions ; data are quarterly Source : Department of Labor Chart UNEMPLOYMENT RATES BY AGE AND SEX. Youth unemployment rates are higher than rates for adults. Rates for adult men and women converged in the 1980s Percent of civilian labor force Youth to f \ / /vv J/ \ / Women and over Men and over I i i I i i I Note : Data are quarterly Source : Department of Labor I I I I I I I with the baby-boom cohort exacerbated the unemployment problems for this group. The differential between youth and adult unemployment rates widened in the 1960s and 1970s. It is estimated that the higher percentage of young people in the labor force and their rising relative unemployment rates added close to percentage points to the NAIRU between the 1950s and late 1970s As the baby boomers moved into age groups with lower average frictional and structural unemployment rates in the 1980s and were followed by the smaller baby-bust cohort these trends reversed contributing about percentage point to the decline in the NAIRU in the 1980s. The unemployment rate for youth also fell as smaller cohorts led to decreased crowding in the youth labor market probably reducing the NAIRU another percentage point over the past decade. These favorable demographic trends should continue well into the 1990s Labor force participation among adult women rose steadily in the 1960s and 1970s and higher unemployment rates for that group also boosted the aggregate unemployment rate over that period. Women 's labor market participation continued to increase in the 1980s but their unemployment rate fell to about the same rate as for adult men. This decline in joblessness among women coupled with women 's rising participation has also contributed to the decline in the NAIRU in recent years LABOR MARKET MISMATCHES AND STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT A reallocation of workers across sectors in response to changing supply and demand influences the amount of structural unemployment associated with mismatches between workers and jobs Recent changes in structural unemployment can be seen across a variety of occupational industry or geographic markets. Some insight into these changes can be obtained by focusing on a key feature of the mismatch problem the coexistence of job vacancies and unemployment For the most part vacancies and unemployment move in opposite directions with faster economic growth leading to falling unemployment and rising vacancies while rising unemployment is associated with declining job vacancies. That pattern is consistent with the view that much of the unemployment variability in the United States over time represents changes in cyclical unemployment. Vacancies and unemployment sometimes move in the same direction however reflecting a change in structural unemployment arising from localized industry-specific or occupation-specific supply and demand mismatches The Conference Board 's index of help-wanted advertising normalized by the level of payroll employment provides a very rough proxy for a job vacancy rate and illustrates the relationship between unemployment and job vacancies. Over shorter periods comparisons show opposite movements in the unemployment and vacancy rates reflecting the effects of economic recessions and expansions. A gradual upward trend in both the unemployment and the vacancy rate is evident throughout much of the postwar period however suggesting that structural imbalances in the labor market worsened through the 1970s. In the unemployment rate and the vacancy rate were both below their levels in indicating that these imbalances lessened in the 1980s. A continuation of this trend would reduce the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation further in the 1990s Measures of the dispersion of unemployment across different labor markets can also be useful in assessing the efficiency of labor market adjustment. Uneven growth across markets will initially generate uneven patterns of unemployment and employment changes. Over time however efficient labor markets will tend to reduce those initial imbalances as workers in labor surplus areas geographic industrial or occupational move to areas with better job prospects Across geographic markets the evidence suggests that labor market imbalances worsened in the 1980s ; after holding fairly steady during the 1970s unemployment dispersion among States increased sharply through most of the 1980s. This rise in geographic dispersion reflected at least in part industry imbalances coupled with the industrial composition of particular regions. International competition and the decline in oil prices led to layoffs in the Midwest and Southwest while strong growth in services and light manufacturing fueled employment gains in the coastal regions. It is difficult to judge whether the widening in unemployment dispersion represents unusually large sector-specific economic shocks or declining labor market mobility. As noted earlier the geographic dispersion in jobless rates declined significantly over as the labor market began to adjust to those earlier shocks The existence of structural labor market imbalances clearly underscores the importance of labor mobility in reducing structural and frictional unemployment and hence the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation. Policies to improve the mobility of the work force and to improve the efficiency with which workers and employers find job matches could generate further declines in structural unemployment without building up inflationary pressures OTHER CHANGES IN LABOR MARKETS Some researchers argue that significant changes in the U.S economy also may have unexpectedly tempered wage inflation in the 1980s. Most prominently discussed is the increased exposure of U.S. producers to international competition. As the foreign exchange value of the dollar rose in the early 1980s employment in a number of core manufacturing sectors suffered resulting in unusually large layoffs that extended to workers with more seniority This increased openness to international competition may have had an important impact on the perceived unemployment risks associated with aggressive wage demands so that job security gained prominence over wage gains in the priorities of many workers reducing the inflationary pressures associated with any given level of the unemployment rate. Some evidence suggests that such considerations were important in selected industries particularly vulnerable to foreign competition. Because these industries constitute a small part of the overall U.S. economy however international competition thus far appears to have had only a small effect on economy-wide wage behavior A second oft-cited and related argument is that the declining importance of organized labor in the U.S. work force reduced the contribution of noncompetitive union wage premiums to aggregate wage inflation in the 1980s. The proportion of the private work force that is unionized fell sharply in the 1980s from more than percent in to around percent in Fewer workers receiving union wage premiums would reduce average wage growth all else equal. In addition proponents of this line of reasoning argue that the focus on job security in the 1980s was especially important in the union sector where management became more aggressive in negotiating with workers in response to international and nonunion competition. Data from the employment cost index indicate that union wages have risen less rapidly than nonunion wages since after rising more rapidly throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s. But that shift may partly reflect the typical cyclical behavior of the union-nonunion wage differential. Moreover several studies suggest that although the declining strength of unions may have slowed wage inflation in the union sector it has had only a small effect on aggregate wage inflation Finally some analysts point to greater flexibility in both pay schedules and employer-employee relationships as evidence that wage determination in today 's economy differs fundamentally from that in past years. Many union contracts now use lump-sum bonuses as a means of avoiding base wage increases during periods of uncertain demand. Moreover profit-sharing and employee stock ownership plans have become more prevalent in recent years tying workers ' pay at some firms more explicitly to overall company performance. In addition a greater use of part-time and temporary workers by firms has increased the ability to adjust employment levels promptly during periods of slack demand by lowering the costs typically associated with work force changes In general it is difficult to assess the importance of any one of these factors in changing the fundamental nature of wage determination in the 1980s or to forecast whether such trends will continue. Taken together the patterns over the past decade may have led to some small downward shift in wage inflation. It seems imprudent however to rely heavily on the continuation of these favorable factors in forming policies for the 1990s LOOKING AHEAD The design of sound economic policies depends on the level of the NAIRU. That level provides a gauge of how far the actual unemployment rate can be expected to decline without a significant buildup of inflationary pressures and thus represents one goal of an expansionary macroeconomic policy. Conversely it is also an approximate measure of the extent of frictional and structural unemployment in the U.S. economy ; reducing the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation thus is an important goal of labor market policies Unfortunately the NAIRU is not observable and it is more difficult to estimate its level than its change. But a rough estimate of the current level can be inferred from recent trends in the unemployment rate and in wage inflation. Both wage inflation and unemployment have shown little movement over the past year. Moreover the Michigan Surveys of Consumer Attitudes estimate that expectations of price inflation have stabilized at around percent. These patterns are consistent with a pace of wage growth that roughly balances the demand for labor with the available supply suggesting that the remaining unemployment is primarily frictional and structural in nature. Thus the average rate of unemployment in percent may not be far above the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment In this setting the most appropriate policy approach is to focus on reducing the NAIRU further in the years ahead. Maintaining steady economic growth and low unemployment is an important component of that policy because additional job growth will create opportunities for many structurally unemployed and disadvantaged persons as employers lower expectations about qualifications and increase the intensity of training. Similarly the decreasing number of new labor market entrants will give firms strong incentives to provide additional training for the existing work force and will reduce the number of labor market participants who experience frictional unemployment. Increasing workers ' investments in edu- cation and training and reducing the barriers to labor mobility will also reduce the NAIRU. The prospects are good for maintaining low unemployment rates on average in the future. But macroeconomic policies must be designed so that reductions in unemployment do not reignite rising inflation which would increase the risk of a subsequent economic downturn SUMMARY The U.S. labor market is remarkably efficient in adapting to economic change. Adjustments are not instantaneous however and public and private initiatives can help to speed the natural workings of the market. As the United States enters the 1990s attention focuses on increasing the skills and flexibility of the work force to meet changing economic demands. The Administration is committed to achieving excellence in education at all levels. It is particularly important to improve dramatically the achievement of elementary and secondary students which means improving the quality of the Nation 's schooling system. Increasing the numbers of students receiving education beyond high school may also be important in meeting the job demands of the 1990s Within the existing work force employers and workers must adapt quickly to changes in the supply of and demand for labor For the most part these adjustments are likely to occur automatically without government action. In some cases however strengthening training programs can facilitate the reemployment of workers whose skills have been rendered obsolete by economic change In other cases barriers to mobility can be reduced through policies that increase the affordability of housing or encourage the startup of business in economically depressed areas With population growth projected to slow over the next decade additional sources of labor will be needed. Tapping these sources can be facilitated by immigration reform and by encouraging businesses to hire and train currently underutilized segments of the population such as the elderly disabled and the unemployed or underemployed poor Indeed for the Nation to realize its full potential for economic growth in the years ahead society must bring the poor and disadvantaged more fully into the mainstream of the economy. Policies that assist the poor will certainly be needed but these policies must be linked with the goal of eventual self-sufficiency by ensuring education training and job opportunities for low-income households The challenges for the 1990s are large but the current economic environment is favorable for achieving further progress toward these important goals. Unemployment is low and inflation remains in check. Economic opportunities are plentiful. If the Nation can more fully utilize its human resources in the decade ahead the result will be rising productivity stronger economic growth increased opportunities and rising living standards for Americans CHAPTER The Economy and the Environment ECONOMIC PROSPERITY and environmental quality are widely regarded as two of this Nation 's most important goals. Some view these as competing goals and argue that economic growth begets environmental degradation. Increasingly however this conventional wisdom is being questioned and a new consensus is emerging that economic growth and environmental quality need not be incompatible. Indeed economic growth and environmental quality are in many respects complementary. For example economic growth provides the opportunity for firms to invest in new facilities that are cleaner and more efficient. It is no coincidence that the wealthy societies are the ones that are both willing and able to devote substantial resources to environmental protection Compatibility between economic growth and environmental improvement is far from automatic however ; it depends on selection of appropriate goals and careful design of regulatory programs. Environmental goals must balance the associated benefits and costs The public interest is best served when government provides a framework that creates incentives for the private sector to seek out the most cost-effective way to meet its regulatory goals. Government should not be in the business of picking environmental protection technologies and imposing them on firms their workers and their customers This chapter presents the Administration 's principles for environmental regulation and illustrates how they can be put into action to address local national and global environmental concerns. The consistent application of these principles will ensure that this Nation 's considerable investment in environmental protection $ billion in about the same as all American households ' electricity and natural gas utility bills will be made in ways that help to achieve both a strong economy and a healthy environment PRINCIPLES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION Market-based economies do not automatically provide the level of environmental quality that consumers desire. Understanding why environmental protection may require government action leads to an understanding of policies that best serve both the economy and the environment MARKET FAILURE Environmental problems arise in market economies when private individuals and businesses lack incentives to take full account of the environmental consequences of their actions. These market failures which provide a rationale for government action can be traced to three sources First individual producers or consumers who pollute the environment generally do not pay for their pollution even though it may harm others or cause others to incur additional costs. Excess pollution results just as free electricity would lead firms and households to use electricity without regard to the resources used to produce it Second no single individual can produce tangible evidence of an overall improvement in environmental quality by his or her own actions to reduce or control pollution. When there are some costs and no apparent payoff for individual cleanup effort rational individuals may be unwilling to act even in cases where a coordinated effort would yield environmental benefits that exceed the costs of collective action. This problem is analogous to that faced by a stadium full of standing football fans who would all be happier to see the game sitting down if only their actions could be coordinated Finally the private market does not always produce the information needed to solve public problems. Private firms typically do not realize profits from research and development aimed at understanding environmental processes or the relationship between pollution and human health. Government action is often necessary to produce such information to further public policy objectives Regulations can also be motivated by factors other than the market failures outlined above. Paternalism the belief of legislators and regulators that they can improve citizens ' overall welfare by taking certain choices out of their hands can play a significant role. Because the diversity of individual choice generally reflects differences in tastes needs and situations among individuals paternalistic regulation is much more likely to reduce overall wellbeing than to increase it. Another motive for regulation is the pursuit of private advantage which can be reflected in the specific design features of regulations that may be broadly grounded in public interest consideration. For example firms routinely seek to keep their existing products and facilities under the current regulatory regime when more stringent regulations are implemented for new products and facilities ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION The Federal Government 's involvement in environmental protection is relatively recent. The Congress first enacted major legislation between and Many environmental programs enacted in this era rely heavily on an approach referred to as command-and-control regulation. Alternative regulatory schemes that use market incentives to further environmental goals such as emissions charges or tradable emissions allowances can serve both the environment and the economy by reducing the costs of environmental protection ( Box ) Box A Glossary of Environmental Regulation Terms Command-and-Control Regulation a system of administrative or statutory rules that requires the use of specific control devices on classes of selected pollution sources or applies emissions standards to narrowly defined pollution sources Emission Standard a limit usually expressed as a maximum allowable emission rate applied to an individual pollution source Emission Charge a fee levied by the government on each unit of pollutant emitted Tradabh Emission Allowances System a regulatory regime in which all sources of poEution are required to hold allow * anees for all emissions of covered pollutants * The government distributes a number of allowances equal to the target emissions level which can then be freely bought and sold within the private sector In the final decade of this century new environmental issues that include stratospheric ozone depletion and possible global climate change are receiving increased attention. Advances in science are also leading to deeper understanding of problems such as acid rain and pesticide contamination. As the list of environmental concerns grows policymakers must carefully design programs to make progress on several fronts while minimizing adverse impacts on the economy Regulatory goals should be set so that the potential benefits to society from regulation outweigh the potential costs. Specific objectives should be chosen to maximize net benefits to the extent possible. It is impossible to remove all pollution or environmental risks just as it is impossible to remove all risk of accident or illness. As any given pollutant or risk is reduced the costs of further reductions rise and the incremental benefits fall. Because these additional benefits often become minuscule and the additional costs become astronomical as the limit of zero pollution or zero environmental risk is approached the pursuit of such extreme goals is likely to reduce the overall quality of life. Cost-benefit analysis can be useful both in setting appropriate goals within a particular area of concern and in setting priorities across areas Where regulation is necessary it should wherever possible employ economic incentives to achieve its goals rather than attempt to legislate behavior without changing the underlying structure of private incentives. Where incentive-based approaches such as emissions fees or tradable allowances can not be used it is preferable to let each firm decide how best to meet flexible performance standards rather than to impose inflexible design standards that specify how pollution must be controlled. Regulation should also define pollution sources broadly rather than narrowly to give plants that emit emissions at more than one point flexibility in meeting an overall emissions objective. Regulation of any type should pass a test for cost-effectiveness reaching its goals at the lowest possible cost. To forsake cost-effectiveness simply wastes resources that could be used for many purposes including further environmental improvement The command-and-control approach generally fails to create incentives consistent with regulatory goals. Indeed the hallmark of the command-and-control approach is the uniform treatment of pollution sources without regard for the differences in damages they cause or the costs of control. Because command-and-control regulation relies on administrative or statutory rules flexibility is limited and incentives to firms are distorted. The likelihood that innovation to reduce the costs of pollution control will be met by tighter regulatory requirements presents a particularly large disincentive to innovation ( Box ) Finally often an insufficient private incentive exists to undertake research that is necessary to understand and rationally address environmental issues. Government support may be required to spur inquiry into environmental problems benefits and costs of action and methods of pollution reduction In short the following principles should guide environmental regulation : Goals for pollution abatement and risk reduction should be based on a comparison of the costs and benefits involved Elimination of all risk is almost never a sensible goal Where possible market-based approaches that provide flexibility encourage innovation and support economic growth should be used to achieve environmental goals in a cost-effective manner Government policy should encourage the development and sharing of scientific and technical information relevant to environmental quality issues Box Problems with Command-and-Control Regulation Regulators generally lack the detailed knowledge of individual production facilities and processes and of alternative production and abatement methods that would be necessary to implement an efficient regulatory program by command-and-controL Firms sensibly expect that any demonstration of potential for environmental improvement or the exploration of new approaches to emission control will increase their risk of being targeted for tougher emission standards. Therefore there is a disincentive to innovate that magnifies the inefficiency of com * mand-and-control regulation over time. Eegulators may try to overcome the incentive problem by incorporating their own forecast of future technology into regulatory requirements This inflexible approach is a poor substitute for a decentralized innovation process in which many possibilities are pursued at the same time with winners emerging naturally only as additional information is developed Q>mmand-and-control regulation also fails to account for private responses that tend to neutralize its impact * For example a common regulatory practice is to impose new product stand * ards that are tougher than those for existing products and facilities. This practice locks in the continued use of old products or facilities that may actually be more environmentally damaging. Aside from being costly such standards can actually increase pollution from levels that might have been obtained without a bias against new investment Finally command-and-control regulation sometimes involves issuing threats that are not credible. In when it became clear that car manufacturers could not meet the automobile emissions standards for the model year the Congress quickly revised the standards. The implicit threat to shut down the U.S. auto industry was simply too draconian to be believed The rest of this chapter considers the application of these principles in the Administration 's proposals to update the Clean Air Act and food safety legislation in Federal soil conservation programs and in the Administration 's approach to global environmental issues THE CLEAN AIR ACT Prior to State and local governments held the primary responsibility for determining air quality targets and emission con- trol strategies. Some States and cities such as California and Pittsburgh did address pollution problems. Others however were reluctant to impose and enforce strict pollution controls that might drive industry elsewhere The Clean Air Act amendments enacted in expanded the Federal role in clean air issues beyond its previous focus on support for scientific research on air pollution problems. Under its provisions the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) which was also established in sets national air quality standards for major pollutants. These standards defined as permissible concentration levels of pollutants in the air over a specific time period are designed to protect the health of the most sensitive members of the population with an adequate margin of safety and without regard to cost. National emission standards for new industrial utility and commercial facilities that are significant sources of pollution and new car emission standards are also set and administered at the Federal level. State and local governments retain responsibility however for developing plans to reduce emissions from existing utility and industrial pollution sources so that air quality standards are met or exceeded at all locations EXPERIENCE UNDER THE CURRENT LAW Meeting the objectives of the Clean Air Act has been complicated by several factors. One is the sheer number of pollution sources There are an estimated major industrial and utility sources of air pollution in the Nation. Mobile sources of pollution ( automobiles trucks aircraft and locomotives ) number well over million and vehicle miles traveled have been steadily increasing Moreover because pollutants are transformed and transported in the atmosphere the selection of control strategies is complicated Despite rising levels of economic activity and automobile use emissions of the most common air pollutants have declined substantially since For example emissions of carbon monoxide particulate matter and lead fell by and percent respectively between and Yet in years past the original target date for meeting air quality standards more than million people lived in areas where air quality standards had not all been achieved. Failures to meet the ground-level ozone standard accounted for percent of these exposures. Some have argued however that this official measure of air quality status gives little indication of normal air quality in affected areas. For example air quality monitoring data show that the air quality standards are met more than percent of the time in all areas other than Los Angeles and percent of the time there even though it is the city with the most polluted air in the United States A major feature in the regulatory approach of the Clean Air Act is the requirement that new facilities meet EPA emission rate standards. This approach can effectively offer grandfather protection to old facilities and slow the rate at which firms replace older inefficient plant and equipment with newer plant and equipment that meet EPA standards This peculiar consequence of regulation is apparent in the utility sector. Concern over the impact of emission standards on mining employment in high-sulfur coal regions led the Congress in to mandate a design standard for new coal-fired power plants. Sulfur dioxide removal from exhaust gases ( via scrubbing technology ) was required even when the same emission rate could be reached at lower cost by burning low-sulfur coal. Because such scrubbing may add percent to the capital cost of a new plant and old generating units can be kept running for years or more replacement of old generating capacity inevitably slowed. Moreover because new generating units with scrubbers often have higher operating costs than old unscrubbed units utilities naturally chose to run the old units as much as possible. Having new clean plants sit idle while old dirty ones operated at full capacity was an unintended consequence that vividly illustrates the perverse effects that commandand-control regulation can have THE CLEAN AIR INITIATIVE The Administration has proposed a comprehensive plan for revising and strengthening the Clean Air Act. The Administration 's proposal includes initiatives to achieve complete attainment of air quality standards control toxic air pollutants address the problem of acid rain and reduce automobile emissions. The acid rain and automobile emissions programs provide particularly clear applications of the Administration 's regulatory principles. The former proposes the use of tradable emissions allowances to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions from utility plants that are a primary cause of acid rain ( Box ) The latter uses flexibly applied and carefully targeted standards to limit automobile emissions that are the major source of ground-level ozone pollution TRADABLE ALLOWANCES FOR SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSIONS The Administration proposes to achieve a permanent 10-millionton reduction in annual sulfur dioxide emissions in a cost-effective manner using a system of tradable emissions allowances. The use of tradable emissions allowances is an approach that has been repeatedly advocated in this Report for more than a decade. Emission allowances reflecting the required reduction in current emissions Box Acid Bain and Sulfur Dioxide Acid rain results from the formation of sulfuric and nitric acids in atmospheric reactions involving sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide. These acids fall to the Earth 's surface as dry particles or mixed with rainfall over an area that may extend for hundreds of miles from the location where emissions occur Thus emissions from the Midwest can cause acid rain in the Northeast. Rainfall in the most heavily affected areas is eight to nine times more acidic than it would be under pristine conditions Sulfur dioxide is regulated as a pollutant under the Clean Air Act. Federal air quality standards for sulfur dioxide are currently met at virtually all locations throughout the country In some areas compliance was attained by switching to fuels with lower sulfur content In others scrubbing technology was applied to remove sulfur from smokestack gases. Another approach was to build taller smokestacks that spread emissions over a much wider area and allowed standards to be met at all measuring sites near the emission point. Building taller smokestacks was very cost-effective within a local area. But over a larger region it exacerbated the contribution of sulfur dioxide emissions to the formation of acid rain. The Clean Air Act amendments limited allowable stack height While measured urban sulfur dioxide air quality has improved steadily aggregate sulfur dioxide emissions which heavily influence acid rain levels have declined by only percent since Almost two-thirds of sulfur dioxide emissions come from electric utility plants with industrial sources accounting for the bulk of the remaining emissions. Most utility emissions occur at coal-burning power plants particularly from older plants burning high-sulfur coal without emission controls are allocated to existing utility plants. Plant owners who are required to hold allowances equal to their actual emissions are then free to trade these allowances among themselves. Thus the emission rates of individual plants can vary considerably while overall emissions are automatically held at the target level. An additional requirement that operators of new utility plants hold allowances equal to their emissions after the system is fully in place guarantees against any rise in utility emissions over time The allowances trading system has several major advantages over the command-and-control approach. The tradable-allowances approach is estimated to result in cost savings of at least per- cent annually totaling billions of dollars over the next two decades compared with command-and-control regulations. These savings arise from the ability to trade allowances in order to take account of differences in plant access to low- and high-sulfur coal supplies in expected plant life and in site constraints that may rule out the installation of scrubbers at some plants. With tradable permits a plant with low control costs has an incentive to control more and sell its excess allowances to a plant that could only reduce emissions to its original allocation at very high cost. The scope for trading is widened by allowing industrial sources with low control costs to participate in the system and by a provision for the conversion of nitrogen dioxide emissions reductions in excess of required levels into allowances Incentives for Conservation and Innovation Because reductions in electricity generation levels translate directly into a reduced need to hold allowances the allowances system puts utility energy conservation programs on an equal footing with other emissions reduction strategies. Firms can also economize on allowances by using cleaner plants more intensively. By requiring utilities to buy or hold a costly allowance for each ton of pollution they emit the allowances system uses the private objectives of cost minimization and profit maximization to promote environmentally sound practices. By ensuring that each pound of actual emissions carries a cost which will be reflected in the price of electricity additional conservation is promoted as demand falls in response to higher prices. In sum a market-based approach sends the proper signals to both consumers and producers resulting in cost-effective reductions in pollution Immediate cost savings are only part of the benefits of the trading program. The possibility of future trading creates strong incentives for further cost reduction and innovation by both utilities and nonutility firms which could save additional billions of dollars. Utilities can take advantage of the opportunity to carry forward unused allowances for future sale or use. Such banking of allowances would shift emissions reductions from the future toward the present allowing for more rapid environmental improvement while lowering compliance costs. Firms always stand to gain if they can achieve additional emissions reductions at a cost below the market value of the allowances that would be freed up for external sale Thus these firms have a continuing incentive to explore new abatement and combustion technologies nonconventional energy sources conservation programs and other options that emerging technologies and local circumstances may suggest. Because allowances are transferable and continue in force after the retirement of the plant to which they were initially allocated the investment disincentive implicit in standard regulatory schemes is avoided The inherent flexibility of the allowances system which lets the market choose among competing approaches is particularly valuable given the impossibility of knowing which technology will prove to be best over the long haul. Several different technologies for burning high-sulfur coal cleanly without scrubbing as well as improved scrubbers are currently under development. New concepts will undoubtedly arise over the next decade. The government is no more capable of picking winners in emissions-control technology than in other industrial arenas. By encouraging decentralized innovation and avoiding the pitfalls of centralized technological planning the allowances system maximizes the potential for the invention and application of new ways to achieve environmental protection The Workability of the System There are several precedents for successful emissions trading and marketable allowances systems. Nationally marketable allowances were used during the phasedown of the lead content of gasoline with substantial savings. EPA 's longstanding bubble policy allows owners of an industrial facility with multiple pollution sources to balance more control at some sources for less control at others to meet emissions targets on a cost-effective facility-wide basis. Since their inception in the 1970s bubbles have saved billions of dollars compared with a policy of requiring each source to meet its own emissions standard. Trading is also used in EPA 's offset policy which allows construction of new facilities in areas that do not meet air quality standards to be offset by reductions in emissions from existing facilities. Trading in these programs has occurred despite the high air quality modeling costs incurred to verify that proposed trades will not worsen the air quality at any location. Transaction costs for sulfur dioxide emissions trading will be much lower because local air quality modeling will not be required and continuous emissions monitoring data will be available to verify compliance The incentive-based approach to environmental protection offers clear advantages over command-and-control regulation yet it generates several philosophical and practical criticisms. A common objection is that a marketable allowances system gives industry a right to pollute that it would not otherwise have. This view fails to recognize that command-and-control regulation confers exactly the same sort of pollution right only in a nontransferable form Some observers have raised the concern that trade in allowances will be inhibited by State regulatory actions or manipulated to prevent the entry of new producers into the electric power market However facts about market structure and behavioral incentives suggest that the market for allowances will work. The initial distribution of allowances among a large number of utilities means no one firm or State could exercise market control. Antitrust laws provide an additional safeguard against the possibility of anticompetitive behavior. Existing incentives for cost and rate minimization should lead regulators and utilities with low-cost emissions reduction opportunities to sell sufficient allowances to meet the demand from new plants and new entrants. Of course there is no guarantee that every utility or regulator will seek to minimize costs and electric rates and maximize shareholder returns. But in a competitive situation cost-minimizing behavior by every participant is not required for the market to work effectively AUTOMOBILE EMISSIONS CONTROL The goals selected in the President 's clean air package reflect the careful comparison of benefits and costs that is a fundamental consideration in the Administration 's approach to regulatory policymaking. For example the President 's package includes tighter tailpipe emissions standards for new cars and light trucks and other measures to reduce automobile emissions significantly. However it explicitly rejects a proposal for unreasonably stringent tailpipe standards that has been advocated in some quarters EPA estimates that the exotic technologies required to attain such an unreasonably stringent standard would add about $ to the cost of each new vehicle. At a projected sales rate of approximately million covered vehicles per year the additional costs would be more than $ billion annually almost doubling the projected costs of all actions proposed by the Administration to reduce urban ozone pollution. This standard would result in slightly lower emissions from each new car. However because consumers would undoubtedly respond to higher new car prices by buying fewer new cars emissions of pollutants that contribute to ozone formation could actually increase in the period immediately following adoption of these extreme standards as consumers would be led to make greater use of old vehicles with significantly higher per mile emission rates. Even after a complete phase-in of vehicles meeting the extreme standard total reductions in emissions of pollutants that contribute to ozone formation would be only slightly larger than emissions reductions under the President 's proposal. Spending $ billion or more per year to achieve at most very small environmental improvements is simply not sensible Flexibility and Targeting The President 's clean air initiative also incorporates flexibility in its provisions for automobile emission standards. Automakers can average across their product line to reach applicable standards opening the possibility of substantial cost savings while achieving exactly the same environmental benefits as a standard applied on a car-by-car basis. Because an automaker who elects to use averaging must necessarily produce some vehicles that are cleaner than the standard averaging implicitly encourages advances in emissioncontrol technology Cost-effectiveness is also enhanced by tailoring program requirements to local needs rather than using a one-size-fits-all approach Some areas currently meet air quality standards for ground-level ozone while others do not. Because air quality standards are set at levels that protect the public health with an adequate margin of safety areas that already meet standards have little to gain from further reductions in emissions. Cost-effectiveness requires focusing reductions where they are needed. For this reason the Administration 's plan for extra-clean alternative-fueled vehicles is carefully targeted on the areas with the most severe nonattainment problems. Even within these areas local authorities are free to opt out of the program if they can achieve equivalent air quality benefits in other ways The targeted approach is also evident in the President 's proposal for recovery of refueling emissions. Refueling vapors can be recovered using either on-board canisters or gasoline pump recovery systems. The latter approach is preferable because it can be applied selectively in areas with ozone problems without imposing unnecessary costs on new car buyers in clean areas. It also provides more immediate environmental benefits in problem areas because all pumps can be modified long before all cars on the road are replaced. In this matter as in many others environmental and economic interests are convergent RISK AND THE REGULATION OF AGRICULTURE Today the regulation of agriculture involves a complex array of Federal programs from traditional price support and acreage reduction programs to conservation environmental and food safety regulations administered by the Department of Agriculture the Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and Drug Administration. Some programs such as the acreage reduction programs affect a farmer 's land-use and crop-choice decisions. Others such as pesticide regulations affect choice of production methods. Still others such as conservation regulations may affect both land-use and management decisions. The combination of farm production decisions and the physical characteristics of farmers ' fields such as soil type depth of groundwater and proximity to surface water are key factors that determine the impacts agriculture has on the environment Two questions arise regarding environmental issues that relate to agriculture. What are the circumstances in agriculture that may justify government intervention ? When government action is justi fied how can policies be designed to reduce environmental risks to appropriate levels at least cost ? SOIL CONSERVATION RECONSIDERED The dust bowl of the 1930s dramatized by John Steinbeck 's The Grapes of Wrath left a public perception that the effects of soil erosion can have dire economic consequences. Because of the dust bowl experience a principal objective of soil conservation programs since the 1930s has been to prevent the loss of agricultural productivity. Yet analyses of data on soil erosion indicate that the principal benefits from soil conservation are the prevention of offsite damages such as water pollution not the prevention of agricultural productivity effects. There is accordingly a need to reconsider the design of soil conservation programs Soil Erosion and Productivity Alarming stories in the press periodically warn that erosive practices are again ruining American farmland and will lead to a food crisis. Such alarmist claims are not supported by the facts. The Department of Agriculture estimates that some billion to billion tons of soil are lost from farmers ' fields to erosion each year in the United States. Topsoil is a renewable resource however and is replaced as organic matter from crop residues is incorporated into the soil. Because of this replenishment the rate of net loss of topsoil in the United States as a whole is low The gains and losses of soil are not distributed evenly however Some areas are net losers and may experience lower productivity as topsoil becomes shallow. These productivity losses are largely offset by gains elsewhere. The Department of Agriculture recently estimated that continuing current rates of soil erosion for years would reduce productivity only about percent ( Table ) Because annual productivity gains in U.S. agriculture have averaged more than percent for the past years one year 's normal productivity growth will offset the likely effects of erosion on productivity over the next century TABLE Estimated Percent Loss of Productivity From Years of Erosion Water erosion Farming region Northeast Lake States Corn Belt Appalachia Southeast Delta States Northern Plains Southern Plains Mountain States Pacific States g United States Less than percent Source : Department of Agriculture The Second RCA Appraisal June Wind erosion ( i ) i i i i { Alarmist claims about soil erosion 's effects on agriculture also appear to run counter to basic economics. The farmer who uses erosive practices that cause a decline in current or future expected productivity of the land reduces the value of that land. This loss takes the form of lower farm output and a lower value of the land as an asset. Landowners thus have an economic incentive to limit erosion to the degree that it is profitable to do so. Department of Agriculture research shows that erodibility and topsoil depth do help explain differences in land values. These findings mean that buyers and sellers of farmland are in fact aware of these factors and generally take them into consideration in their decisionmaking. Even if some buyers and sellers of farmland are unable to know the impacts of erosion on productivity precisely there is no reason to believe the government would be able to do so significantly better In short private gains from soil conservation provide farmers and landowners with adequate incentives to protect soil productivity without government intervention. It is in environmental and other offsite effects of soil erosion that the market fails to account adequately for the effects of erosion and it is there that government conservation programs are needed Pollution Effects of Soil Erosion There are a host of offsite effects of wind and water erosion Wind erosion contributes to particulate air pollution in the Western United States that is estimated to cause $ billion or more in annual damages in the form of increased cleaning costs reduced recreational opportunities and impaired health. Erosion caused by water runoff is a major cause of water pollution that damages reservoirs and navigational channels harms aquatic and plant life and wildlife has adverse effects on human health and reduces the recreational value of lakes and rivers. These damages are estimated to range from $ billion to $ billion annually These damages reflect a classic market failure : farmers typically bear little if any of the cost of the offsite effects of erosion from their fields. Agricultural pollution usually originates on many farms and it is difficult to attribute any specific amount of damage to any one source. Consequently policies to control agricultural pollution usually must be designed to change farmers ' production decisions such as tillage practices or chemical use that are related to pollution. The design of efficient environmental policies is complicated by the effects that Federal agricultural subsidies have on farmers ' management decisions The Conservation Reserve Program This program was introduced in the farm bill to accomplish environmental objectives such as improved water quality by re moving highly erodible land from production. This program was also intended to help curb the production of subsidized commodities and to provide income support to farmers. About million acres are now enrolled roughly percent of U.S. cropland. In exchange for government payments farmers must plant grass or trees on the enrolled acres. All farmers can participate in the program provided their land meets technical criteria for erodibility The Conservation Reserve Program illustrates the potential benefits of conservation programs and the problems in designing programs to meet environmental income-support and broader policy objectives. In order to attract widespread participation the program originally allowed farmers to enroll any land in the program that met erodibility criteria whether or not erosion was likely to cause damages such as water pollution. The program thus provided an incentive for farmers to place low-valued land into the program Consequently a disproportionately large share of the acres enrolled more than percent is nonirrigated land in the Plains and Mountain States where most wind erosion occurs but damages are relatively small. Relatively few acres in the program are higher valued land in the Midwest and South where most water erosion occurs and a large part of the nationwide damages also occur. Because it is estimated that only percent of the most highly erodible land is now enrolled in the program it can be concluded that an even smaller share of the damage caused by erosion is being prevented Federal agricultural policy also strives to maintain and enhance the U.S. position as the major agricultural exporter in the world Conservation programs that attempt to achieve environmental goals by removing millions of acres of cropland from production are not consistent with this broader policy objective. The inconsistency in U.S. policy is highlighted by the Food Security Act The act established the Conservation Reserve Program to remove million to million acres of U.S. cropland from production and simultaneously instituted an export subsidy program the Export Enhancement Program to increase U.S. agricultural exports These conflicts between environmental and trade objectives may increase if current international negotiations discussed in Chapter of this Report lead to agricultural policy liberalization IMPROVING CONSERVATION PROGRAM DESIGN The targeting problems encountered with the Conservation Reserve Program and its inconsistency with broader U.S. policy objectives both suggest that the Federal Government should reconsider its approach to conservation programs. How can conservation programs be made more effective at meeting conservation objectives and also be consistent with broader policy and trade objectives ? The answer is to target environmental impacts while keeping as much viable land in production as possible. Land retirement could still be used in those special circumstances such as protection of wetlands in which there are no viable alternative methods to meet environmental objectives Conservation programs are not an efficient means of transferring income to farmers because they do not target those farmers who might be thought to be deserving of income subsidies. Hence they should not be used as a means to support farm income. Instead conservation programs should be designed to achieve environmental objectives by targeting land that causes offsite damages and land that needs to be protected for other environmental reasons such as protection of wildlife. The recent changes in the Conservation Reserve Program 's eligibility criteria to include environmentally sensitive lands such as wetlands and areas bordering rivers and lakes represent a move toward better targeting of environmentally sensitive land. These criteria could be further improved by explicitly linking them to potential damages. If the program enrollment is increased from the current million acres to million as proposed by the Administration participation should be extended to land meeting criteria that target environmental damages Conservation programs could also be made compatible with both environmental and trade objectives by using economic incentives to encourage farmers to invest in conservation improvements that reduce wind and water erosion damages while keeping land in production. Investments such as terracing and windbreaks can be used to reduce wind erosion and filter strips and grassed waterways can reduce water pollution. Federal conservation programs have long shared the costs of these investments but not in a way that targets the investments to mitigate offsite damages. Such targeting could be accomplished by linking these investment incentives to the potential for erosion to cause environmental damage PESTICIDES : BENEFITS RISKS AND REGULATION Pesticides are believed to have been a major contributor to the growth in the productivity of U.S. agriculture since the 1950s. This growth in productivity almost percent since the early 1950s has benefited consumers by making more food available at lower prices. Pesticides are poisons however and their widespread use in agriculture has led to growing public concern about detrimental effects on human health and the environment Many pesticides have immediate health effects that pose a risk to pesticide users and others from accidental poisonings. Some scientists also believe that low-level exposure to many pesticides may cause delayed health effects. These delayed effects cancers birth defects and neurological disorders are much more difficult to demonstrate than immediate effects. Because experimentation on humans is not possible researchers must infer delayed effects from animal studies or from statistical data on human exposure. Because neither method provides definitive data regulatory decisions regarding delayed effects are inevitably based on imperfect scientific evidence The effects of pesticides on nature may be even more difficult to measure and evaluate than the effects on human health. Countless plant and animal species inhabit the natural world. Plants themselves contain many natural pesticides necessary for survival. The scientific challenge to understand the effects of pesticides is great even if attention is focused only on those organisms that have immediate economic value. Researchers have only recently begun to construct a framework for systematic quantitative assessment of pesticide impacts The Regulatory Process The Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act ( FIFRA ) directs EPA to evaluate the effects of pesticides on human health and the environment and to regulate pesticide use as necessary to balance benefits and risks. Pesticides that pass the benefit-risk analysis under FIFRA must also meet a health-risk tolerance for residues in processed foods established by the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act ( FFDCA ) The risk tolerance is to be set in light of the need for " an adequate wholesome and economical food supply. " EPA uses available data including laboratory studies of effects on animals pesticide use data and food consumption data to estimate the risk of an adverse health effect ( e.g. the probability of a person developing a cancerous tumor during a lifetime ) This risk estimate is then used with other relevant information to make regulatory decisions This regulatory scheme is straightforward in principle but its information requirements are burdensome in practice. Within the next decade EPA must evaluate hundreds of active ingredients contained in thousands of pesticides. Because many studies and analyses are required on each active ingredient EPA faces a formidable regulatory task. The current regulatory process takes years to complete. In deciding whether to remove a dangerous pesticide from use current procedures can take to years. Some of the delays in the regulatory process can be attributed to the way it is organized and the Administration has proposed reforms to expedite the process. But a major constraint is still the time and cost involved in producing reliable scientific information needed to make responsible decisions Negligible Risk and the Delaney Clause Both risks and benefits of a pesticide are considered in setting most tolerances under FFDCA and in all regulatory decisions under FIFRA. For most decisions EPA uses the concept of negligible risk. A negligible risk is one below which it is deemed that the public health is not threatened and is often interpreted to be a lifetime cancer risk in the range of in When a chemical 's risk is estimated to be less than in its use is not regulated. When a chemical 's risk exceeds in benefits from use are weighed against risks in making a regulatory decision A different risk standard is applied in the case of pesticide residues in processed foods however because of the Delaney Clause in Section of FFDCA. The Delaney Clause states that a pesticide that has been found to cause cancer can not be registered for use if any residues are found in processed foods. This zero-residue standard implies a zero-risk tolerance for carcinogenic pesticides in processed foods no matter how small the risk or how large the economic benefit from their use. Thus benefits are balanced against risks if a carcinogenic pesticide residue is present on fresh produce but not if it is found in processed food The Congress adopted the Delaney Clause 's zero-risk standard in the 1950s when laboratory techniques were able to detect residues only in parts per million. With modern techniques such as gas chromatography it is possible to detect residues in parts per billion effectively increasing the stringency of the Delaney Clause 's risk standard by a factor of one thousand The current negligible-risk standard for pesticides is very stringent some would say excessively so and represents a high degree of safety. More stringent pesticide regulations could have little effect on the total number of cancers. To put pesticide health risks into perspective consider that the risk of cancer in the U.S. population is in Pesticides account for only a small fraction of the percent of cancers attributed to all sources of pollution whereas tobacco use and diet are believed to contribute to about percent of all cancers. The National Cancer Institute has announced its goal to reduce cancer mortality in the year by percent through changes in tobacco use diet and health care The Institute 's focus on reductions of large risks rather than ones that are already negligible is clearly sensible THE ADMINISTRATION 'S PROPOSALS FOR PESTICIDE POLICY REFORM The National Academy of Sciences recently studied pesticide regulation extensively and recommended that the inconsistencies between FIFRA and FFDCA be eliminated by abandoning the distinc- tions now made between residues in processed and nonprocessed foods and by replacing the Delaney Clause with a negligible-risk standard for all pesticides. The National Academy concluded that the consistent application of a negligible-risk standard for carcinogens in food would allow regulatory efforts to be focused on the most dangerous substances and would thereby dramatically reduce total dietary exposure to cancer-causing pesticides with modest reduction of pesticide benefits The Administration proposes to adopt the National Academy 's recommendation that a negligible-risk standard replace the Delaney Clause in FFDCA. Where risk is greater than negligible the Administration proposes to extend to processed foods the existing regulatory procedures for nonprocessed foods. These procedures allow economic and health benefits of a pesticide to be balanced against risks in all cases. By allowing better targeting of regulatory efforts this change should reduce cancer risks The Administration 's food safety proposal also would amend FIFRA to strengthen and simplify the pesticide regulation process The President 's plan would establish a periodic review of all pesticides simplify and make more effective the process of canceling the use of a pesticide found to be harmful to public health and improve enforcement of pesticide regulations Other Regulatory Reforms Pesticide regulation like air pollution regulation is based largely on command-and-control techniques ( Box ) Uniform regulatory standards are notoriously inefficient because they fail to take into account the diversity of local conditions. Because pest problems are often location-specific large production inefficiencies can be caused by uniform pesticide regulations. There is a need for alternative cost-effective methods of pesticide regulation that allow farmers to adapt production methods to the particular pest problems they face. For example it may be possible to employ a system of marketable pesticide-use allowances to reduce pesticide contamination of surface and groundwater efficiently. A marketable allowances system ( Box tradable allowances ) would restrict the total use of pesticides in environmentally sensitive areas and would allow those farmers who benefit most from pesticides to use them Both Federal and State governments have already financed research into production practices that impose fewer health and environmental risks. For example many States have developed research programs under the rubric of integrated pest management Also on the horizon are promising developments in biogenetic research that could enhance pest resistance and reduce the need for chemical pest control. In the Administration will begin a 5year interagency research initiative to improve understanding of the process of groundwater contamination develop safer produc tion practices and disseminate the new practices through the Extension and Soil Conservation Services Better data on actual pesticide use occupational exposure and environmental contamination are needed to enable regulators to make informed decisions. The Department of Agriculture is currently improving data on pesticide use. The EPA is now conducting the first national assessment of pesticide contamination of well water. Further funding of pesticide data collection and analysis is under consideration ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF FEDERAL FARM PROGRAMS Federal farm programs may encourage farming practices that increase health and environmental problems. Farm programs may have adverse environmental impacts through several channels Crop-specific subsidies can encourage farmers to use more fertilizers and pesticides. To limit the costs of programs farmers can receive subsidies only on those acres that are part of the farmer 's program crop base. This criterion for program participation creates a disincentive to rotate crops even though crop rotation is an important nonchemical technique for pest control. Thus the programs may further aggravate pesticide pollution by encouraging farmers to substitute chemical pest control for nonchemical control When farm subsidies are based on how much land a farmer devotes to particular crops such as wheat and corn land suitable for those crops becomes more valuable. Higher agricultural land values in turn encourage farmers to bring more land into production. Land that is not already being farmed is generally less productive or more costly to convert to agricultural uses. Such land may be steeply sloped and thus erodible or it may be wetlands that provide important wildlife habitat. Agricultural subsidies based on land use thus create incentives for farmers to use land in ways that may increase adverse environmental impacts Unfortunately only limited research has addressed the linkages between agricultural policy and environmental quality. Some evidence supporting these linkages is contained in case studies conducted by the National Academy of Sciences in its report Alternative Agriculture. Other research casts doubt on the generality of that evidence however. Research shows that pollution caused by agricultural chemical use for example depends on the physical characteristics of the farmer 's field and its proximity to groundwater and surface water. The diversity of conditions under which agricultural production takes place makes it very difficult to draw broad generalizations from limited data The potential adverse environmental impacts of Federal agricultural programs could be reduced by breaking the links between agricultural subsidies and farmers ' production and land-use decisions These links could be broken for instance by making three changes : continuing the reductions of price-support levels that were begun by the farm bill ; relaxing restrictions on the use of land enrolled in subsidy programs ; and changing the criterion for receipt of subsidies from one that is based on crop acreage to one that is not related to production of a specific crop. For example an income-based safety net could replace the current system of croprelated deficiency payments. These same policy changes would also bring U.S. agricultural policy in line with the broader trade policy goals of this Administration that are discussed in the next chapter of this Report GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES Like environmental problems at the local or national level global environmental problems arise because actions taken by one individual have unintended adverse effects on another. Global environmental problems are complicated by the fact that the individuals involved live in many nations. Because one nation can not impose its wishes on another international cooperation is required to solve such problems. Differences across countries in income natural resource endowments population sensitivity to particular environmental changes and the political strength of environmental movements mean that countries inevitably have different views on these issues. At the Paris Summit in July the President joined other heads of state in recognizing the need for cooperation in addressing global environmental concerns. The President has also encouraged international organizations to facilitate international cooperation to solve global environmental problems Stratospheric ozone depletion and possible climate change are two global issues that may affect the economy and the environment far into the next century. To evaluate the impact of a policy course chosen today the impact it will have on the economic wellbeing of both current and future generations and its environmental impact must be assessed Scientific evidence of possible stratospheric ozone depletion is stronger than scientific evidence of possible global warming although significant uncertainties surround both. These uncertainties extend to environmental and economic as well as scientific aspects of these two issues. Because policymakers must understandably make decisions before information on such issues is complete the government has an important role to play in supporting basic scientific and economic research that can reduce critical uncertainties in the meantime Even when uncertainty can not be eliminated identifying a probable range of effects can inform policy choice. For example a consensus that changes in global climate will lead to at most a small rise in sea level over the next years would make a policy response to protect high-value coastal areas more feasible than if a large rise were expected. Finally because the regulatory agenda is often influenced by public perceptions that may not accurately reflect available knowledge the government also has a responsibility to educate the public STRATOSPHERIC OZONE DEPLETION Ozone in the upper layer of the Earth 's atmosphere ( the stratosphere ) provides an essential screen from the Sun 's ultraviolet rays. In recent years evidence has mounted that the stratospheric ozone layer is being depleted. Several chemical compounds most notably chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) and bromofluorocarbons ( halons ) have been identified as sources of the increased atmospheric concentrations of chlorine and bromine that cause ozone depletion. These chemical compounds have long atmospheric lifetimes so that even if their production were halted immediately elevated concentrations of chlorine and bromine would persist for decades before subsiding. If production is phased out by current chlorine concentrations would be likely to increase by percent and then decline slowly to one-half of current levels by Without any production curtailment these concentrations would rise indefinitely The appearance of a major hole in the stratospheric ozone layer over Antarctica where no emissions originate illustrates the global scope of the ozone-depletion problem. Long before the hole was observed the United States acted in to ban the use of CFCs as aerosol propellants a use in which substitutes were readily available. Canada and Sweden followed suit. CFCs and halons are also used in applications such as automotive and residential air-conditioning systems refrigerators and fire extinguishers ; as blowing agents in the production of insulating board and other foam products ; and as industrial solvents. These uses of CFCs and halons have continued to grow Protecting the Ozone Layer : Benefits and Strategies The potential benefits from protecting the ozone layer improvements in human health and favorable impacts on crops fish and materials arise from lower exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation Both skin cancer and cataracts are related to cumulative exposure to ultraviolet radiation. A phaseout of CFCs and halons is estimated to reduce the incidence of these health problems in the current population by to percent from levels that would prevail if there were no curtailment of production. ( This estimate is likely to be high because it assumes that individuals take no offsetting actions to reduce their exposure to increased ultraviolet radiation. ) For future generations which would suffer a greater cumulative exposure to ultraviolet radiation if ozone depletion continued the health benefits would be even larger The geographic distribution of ozone-depleting emissions and their expected growth unless action is taken is such that no single country can act alone and have a significant impact on stratospheric ozone depletion. Individual countries have little reason to act alone. The benefits of national policies to reduce ozone-depleting emissions spill over national boundaries but costs are concentrated where reductions occur. Thus the application of cost-benefit criteria on a national level would cause any one country working in isolation to reject control measures that may be desirable from a global perspective Two international agreements regarding ozone depletion are currently in effect. The Vienna Convention established a framework for international scientific and technical cooperation. The Montreal Protocol commits signatories who are major CFG users to freeze production levels by and then to cut their production in half by In addition beginning in the production of several halons is frozen at levels. The United States and other major industrialized countries have announced further intentions to phase out production of CFCs and halons completely by the turn of the century if safe substitutes are available. Amendments and revisions to the Montreal Protocol including extending coverage to other compounds with ozone-depleting potential are currently under consideration Hydrochlorofluorocarbons ( HCFCs ) the most promising substitutes for CFCs in a wide range of applications themselves have one-fiftieth to one-tenth the ozone-depleting potential of CFCs. By allowing HCFCs to substitute for CFCs in the near term the Montreal Protocol rejects the uneconomic approach of barring all new ozone-depleting compounds regardless of their advantage relative to current products and their usefulness during the transition to substitutes with no effect on the ozone layer Atmospheric lifetime is one important factor in decisions regarding the coverage of the protocol. Decisions to reduce or eliminate the use of short-lived ozone-depleting compounds such as methyl chloroform involve weighing the short-term impact of delay against the opportunity to develop improved substitutes to lower the economic costs of action. Under these conditions it may be sensible to eliminate their use as good substitutes become available Costs of Protecting the Ozone Layer Preliminary estimates place the U.S. costs of a phaseout of CFCs and halons by at $ billion over the next decade if the schedule of intermediate reductions currently incorporated in the Montreal Protocol is maintained. Acceleration of this schedule would drive compliance costs upward significantly. These cost estimates reflect a substitution strategy involving conservation process changes and the use of more expensive substitute compounds. The availability of substitutes is critical to avoid economic disruption The United States is using transferable allowances to implement the reductions required under the protocol in a cost-effective manner. Manufacturers and importers of CFCs and halons will receive permits in proportion to their base period market shares. As supply is restricted rising prices will encourage users with available low-cost substitutes to switch leaving remaining supplies for high-value uses. This approach avoids unnecessary direct regulation of end-use applications while ensuring compliance with U.S obligations to reduce production and consumption. Moreover because there are significant economies of scale in the production of CFCs and halons the use of permit transfers to concentrate production in a small number of facilities during the phasedown has the potential to increase efficiency on the supply side. Allowing for this kind of flexibility on the international level would yield further cost savings GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE Greenhouse gases ( carbon dioxide methane CFCs and nitrous oxide among others ) absorb heat that radiates from the Earth 's surface and send some of the heat downward warming the climate Many scientists believe that fossil fuel burning certain agricultural practices deforestation and other human activities that increase the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases will alter the global climate. Scientists are much less confident of the magnitude timing location and character of the greenhouse-induced warming Many argue that no warming has yet occurred despite a substantial increase in greenhouse emissions ; some contend that appreciable future warming is unlikely. Others strongly dispute these views Computer models of the Earth 's climate system are a principal tool of global climate research. Economic models of energy supply and demand provide the future emissions projections used as input by the climate models. Economic models can also be used to assess the cost and growth impacts of policy actions to change the future emissions profile Economic and Scientific Uncertainties Projections of future emissions of greenhouse gases a critical input to climate models are highly sensitive to future rates of population growth economic growth and development of new technologies for energy production and use. The inability to place narrow bounds on any of these factors necessarily places very wide bounds on any forecast of future emissions. One recent study could conclude only that actual global carbon emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the year are likely to be between and percent of current annual emissions. This result is typical of the high degree of uncertainty in this area Even if estimates of future emission levels are correct the magnitude of actual climate change will depend on numerous interrelated and as yet poorly understood geophysical processes that have both positive and negative feedbacks on warming. For example an increase in evaporation from a warmer climate will almost certainly increase average cloud cover. Depending on their altitude and configuration additional clouds can either intensify or counteract warming. Current climate models are incapable of providing reliable estimates of the effect that clouds will actually have if warming occurs If the atmosphere begins to warm a transfer of heat from the air to the oceans is expected to slow the rate at which air temperature actually rises. This effect which would decrease as ocean temperatures increased could delay the full effect of any increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases on air temperature for a period ranging from decades to centuries with wide variations by region Regional variation in other critical effects such as seasonality rainfall distribution and soil moisture is also likely but current climate models lack sufficient resolution to identify regional differences clearly. This deficiency makes it difficult to specify among other things the sea level rise resulting from any degree of average warming Considerable resources and effort are being devoted to resolving uncertainties in climate modeling and in gaining a better understanding of processes that are poorly understood and are not explicitly treated in current climate models. The President 's budget proposal includes $ billion in funding for global climate change research. This figure reflects an increase of percent over the current funding levels and a 100-percent increase over expenditures. The United States has also taken a leadership role in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change the primary international forum for consideration of the scientific socioeconomic and policy issues concerning global climate change At the Malta meeting with the Soviet President in December the President of the United States announced his intention to host a White House Conference on Scientific and Economic Research on the Environment in the spring of The general purpose of this high-level international meeting will be to advance the quality and understanding of the scientific and economic analytical tools and data necessary to confront international environmental problems including global climate change. Sound scientific and economic analyses must be the foundation for any policy action in this area The President of the United States also offered to host the first negotiating session for an International Framework Convention on Global Climate Change in the fall of The compounded uncertainties of the projections of future emissions and the climate models present a formidable barrier to accurate forecasting. At present there is an extremely high level of uncertainty regarding possible future climate change. Some reputable scientists believe that there will be no significant greenhouse warming over the next century. But other reputable scientists believe that a warming of between C and C ( with most recent estimates falling into the lower half of this range ) could occur by the middle of the next century if emissions grow rapidly. A warming of this magnitude could result in a rise in sea level estimated to range from a little under one foot to about a foot and a half by the end of this period. Both the more optimistic and the more pessimistic judgments are subject to revision as scientific and economic inquiry progresses and additional data are gathered If the current understanding of greenhouse processes is correct some warming could occur by virtue of past emissions. Therefore some adaptation would be required even if future greenhouse emissions were sharply curtailed. Even though scientists may yet learn that no significant warming is likely it is nonetheless worthwhile to address two distinct policy questions. First what actions could be taken now to limit emissions of greenhouse gases and what are the likely costs of those actions ? Second what are the possible economic and other effects of warming that if these scientists are correct will occur in any event ? Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Some steps have already been taken that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to their role in stratospheric ozone depletion CFCs account for percent of total greenhouse emissions from human activities on an impact-weighted basis ; the planned phaseout of CFCs is clearly important. In the recently negotiated agreement to replenish the financial resources of the International Development Association the United States called for preparation of environmental action plans in borrowing countries expansion of programs for end-use energy conservation and renewable energy sources and other environmental reforms On the domestic front the Administration 's clean air initiative promotes the development of technologies that will improve the efficiency of converting energy stored in coal and other fossil fuels into electricity. The allowances system and the proposed cap on sulfur dioxide emissions may also focus renewed attention on improving efficiency in end-uses of electricity as an alternative to new fossil-fueled generating capacity. Although the measures cited above should reduce net greenhouse emissions the justification for taking these actions does not depend on resolving the high uncertainties about possible climate change Carbon dioxide accounts for about one-half of the current greenhouse gas emissions caused by human activity. The shares of methane CFCs nitrous oxide and other gases are and percent respectively. Clearly possible climate change is not a one-gas problem : gases other than carbon dioxide play a significant role Nonetheless international attention and current analysis of greenhouse gas limitation policies focus almost exclusively on carbon dioxide THE COSTS OF REDUCING CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS Fossil fuel combustion is the primary source of carbon dioxide emissions. Deforestation accounts for an additional to percent. Other activities such as agriculture and cement manufacturing contribute smaller shares. Although all fossil fuels contain carbon coal contains about times as much carbon per unit of heat energy as natural gas and about times that of oil In contrast to the situation for CFCs low-cost substitutes for fossil fuels used in electricity generation transportation heating and cooling and process heat applications are not currently available or on the immediate horizon. Unlike sulfur dioxide no commercially feasible technology for scrubbing carbon dioxide from combustion waste gases is available. Thus for the foreseeable future only lower energy consumption or fuel switching could reduce carbon dioxide that results from fossil fuel combustion. A substantial increase in the price of fossil fuels would likely be required to reduce consumption substantially Experience following the and oil shocks shows that large increases in the price of energy can reduce the energy intensity of economic activity. The period between and the sharp decline in oil prices in saw a significant increase in the relative price of energy. Between and the price of energy rose by percent relative to nonenergy products at the consumer level and by more than percent at the industrial level. The ratio of energy use to real gross national product fell by percent annually in the United States over this period as consumers and produc- ers responded to higher energy prices by substituting away from energy and energy-intensive products. With no growth in energy consumption over the period to carbon dioxide emissions remained level. The impact on carbon dioxide emissions of the increase in the share of primary fossil energy derived from coal over this period was offset by growth in the use of nuclear power which produces no greenhouse emissions and of natural gas. However the growth rates of output and productivity over this period percent and percent respectively were far below the corresponding rates of percent and percent for the preshock period The relationship between energy prices energy consumption and economic growth is also reflected in more recent data covering a period of significant decrease in relative energy prices at the consumer and industrial levels. Between and annual growth rates in output and energy use snapped back to percent and percent respectively Although the slowdown in productivity and output growth between and can be attributed to many factors higher energy prices clearly played an important role. Energy price increases of comparable or larger size would likely be needed to induce the large energy efficiency improvements and demand reductions that must occur to achieve the ambitious targets for carbon dioxide emissions reductions that some have advocated. Although much has changed since it may be harder now to expand reliance on nuclear power for instance even though the regulatory policy errors of that period are less likely to be made the oil-shock period provides a useful benchmark for consideration of the likely impact of emission reduction policies on output and productivity growth. On balance there is no reason to believe that an attempt to reduce energy use significantly would be substantially less economically disruptive today Modeling the economic effects of policies to curtail carbon dioxide emissions is still in its infancy and results of modeling efforts remain tentative and controversial. ( Even less has been done with regard to other greenhouse gases. ) Recent studies suggest however that the costs of policies to stabilize or reduce carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion would be high One recent study placed the cost of gradually reducing U.S carbon dioxide emissions by percent between now and to range from $ billion under optimistic scenarios of available fuel substitutes and increasing energy efficiency to $ trillion under pessimistic scenarios. These present-value estimates which reflect the discounting of real future costs at a 5-percent annual rate ( Box ) are between and times larger than EPA 's similarly discounted estimate of the costs that would be incurred over the next century by consumers and industries forced to use more expensive or less effective substitutes if a complete phaseout of CFCs and halons were implemented by the year Box Discounting Over Long Horizons The costs of reducing greenhouse gas emissions must be borne both now and well into the next century ; the benefits of slowing climate change may not be perceptible for many decades Discounting is required to compare costs and benefits both market and nonmarket that occur at different dates * Suppose for instance that a 5-percent real rate of interest is appropriate for these calculations Of an investment yields a 9percent rate of interest in dollar terms but prices rise by percent per year the real purchasing power of invested funds grows by percent annually * ) One dollar invested at percent per year in will return $ * in purchasing power in if the interest income between and is reinvested. Therefore it makes no sense to spend $ today to obtain benefits worth $ in : future generations must receive at least $ * in benefits to be better off than they would be if the dollar were invested instead It is always possible to compare values in either current or future terms. To compare in terms one must divide the value by Thus $ billion in is worth only $ billion in To compare in terms $ billion in is worth $ billion x = $ billion or $ trillion Either approach will give comparable results ; what matters is that all values are placed on a consistent baste The costs of carbon dioxide stabilization policies can also be looked at from a future perspective. The present-value estimates cited above reflect reductions in real U.S. output ranging from to percent over the to period. Other preliminary estimates place the cost of stabilizing emissions at levels in the range of to percent of gross national product ( GNP ) To put these estimates in perspective a 2-percent reduction in GNP in the year is worth about $ billion dollars assuming a 2-percent average annual rate of economic growth between now and The impact of carbon dioxide stabilization policies can also be considered in terms of growth-rate impacts. A recent estimate based on energy-output balance relationships suggests that global carbon dioxide stabilization could cut world economic growth in half even after accounting for substitution toward cleaner energy Other studies and U.S. experience following the oil shocks suggest substantial if less dramatic impacts. As shown in Chapter even small changes in growth rates can have a large effect on future output levels Clearly economic models as well as climate models are subject to considerable uncertainty. The early estimates of potential costs described above are far from definitive. The critical uncertainty regarding forecasts of the date and cost at which alternative technologies will become available is unlikely to be resolved soon. Meanwhile the refinement of current estimates and the development and application of new more detailed economic models would help to provide a stronger foundation for decisions regarding possible actions to limit carbon dioxide emissions Other Issues in Reducing Carbon Dioxide Emissions Reductions in U.S. carbon dioxide emissions on a unilateral basis or in cooperation with other Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) countries alone would not significantly alter the projected growth in world carbon dioxide emissions ( the OECD is an international organization of industrialized countries that promotes economic growth and trade ) Chart shows current and projected shares of total carbon dioxide emissions. The emissions share of the United States and other industrialized countries is projected to decline sharply as non-OECD economies experience growth and increasing energy intensity. Developing countries are expected to account for the majority of future emissions increases. Clearly any significant reduction in emissions growth would require the cooperation of the Soviet Union Eastern Europe and the developing countries The ratio of carbon dioxide emissions to energy consumption depends on the mix of energy sources employed and thus varies substantially among industrialized nations. This ratio is high for the United States which depends more heavily on coal than most of its major competitors ( Table ) as is energy use per dollar of GNP All else equal uniform international standards or user charges for carbon dioxide emissions are thus likely to have a larger adverse impact on the United States than on its major competitors. In particular a fee on carbon dioxide emissions ( discussed below ) would increase electricity rates in the United States relative to rates in countries that rely more heavily on nuclear and hydroelectric energy which produce no greenhouse emissions or in countries relying on fossil fuels with less carbon per unit of energy content This situation presents a marked contrast to the and oil shocks where greater U.S. self-sufficiency in energy provided an advantage relative to most other industrialized countries Other than hydroelectric or geothermal power which have very limited potential to supply increased electricity within the United States nuclear power is the only large-scale technology for electric Chart CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS BY REGION. The LDC share of carbon dioxide emissions is projected to grow rapidly. The U.S. share is projected to decline Billions of metric tons of carbon United States USSR& Eastern Europe Rest of OECD LDCs ( including China and India ) Source : Environmental Protection Agency,Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate ( Rapidly Changing World Scenario ) TABLE Fuel Share in Electricity Generation [ Percent ] Country Oil Coal Nuclear Hydroelectric and Geothermal Gas Canada France West Germany japan Netherlands Sweden United States Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development " Energy Policies and Programmes of IEA Countries Review " Paris ity production that is both benign from a greenhouse emissions perspective and commercially available now. Policies regarding the future role of nuclear power including the timetable for the development and commercialization of modularized inherently safe reactor designs will need to be closely coordinated with policies that affect the future role of fossil-fuel generation POLICY TOOLS TO IMPLEMENT A REDUCTION IN GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS A variety of policy tools including user charges correction of market failures regulatory standards expanded funding for research on and development of substitutes for fossil fuels and other sources of greenhouse emissions and efforts to reduce and reverse deforestation could be used to slow the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. These approaches are relevant for nearly all greenhouse gases not just carbon dioxide. While international attention has naturally focused on carbon dioxide as the single largest contributor to the greenhouse effect control costs must also be considered in the design of any strategy to reduce net emissions of greenhouse gases. A cost-effective strategy may involve a focus on other gases or on sinks that absorb greenhouse emissions. Different approaches may be suitable for different countries A fee charge or tradable allowances system for greenhouse gas emissions based on an index of the global climate impacts of each greenhouse gas would provide a least-cost reduction in such emissions. A fee or a tradable allowances scheme would lead firms and individuals to consider the social cost of greenhouse emissions in their private decisions. An emission charge or the need to consider the value of allowances would affect decisions ranging from the choice among alternative technologies for generating electricity to the energy efficiency of cars buildings and industrial equipment to the demand for automobile travel. Because market-based approaches are flexible and provide incentives that affect decisions at all points along the production-consumption chain and across all industries they automatically focus on those activities where emissions reductions can be achieved at least cost The economic impact estimates for carbon dioxide stabilization discussed above reflect the high costs of reaching very ambitious goals even when efficient market-oriented tools are used. Marketbased approaches could also be implemented at a less draconian level to nudge the economy gently and gradually in the direction of greater energy efficiency. Such an approach would test the flexibility of the economy without betting the current way of life on the outcome Publicly supported research and development of nonfossil energy sources including biomass solar and next-generation nuclear fission may contribute to a reduction in greenhouse emissions. It is often noted that the fruits of innovation can not always be fully captured by the innovator leading to underinvestment in the development of new technology. This problem is particularly acute for innovations that address a global problem such as greenhouse emissions. Breakthroughs in environmentally benign technologies hold the promise of lowering the future emissions trajectory while advancing economic progress. Opportunities also exist outside the energy area. For example emissions of methane from agriculture might be cut through the development of improved techniques for farming and livestock management Reforestation can contribute to reductions in net emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Just as tropical deforestation increases carbon dioxide emissions by releasing carbon that is fixed in trees through photosynthesis reforestation can increase the uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by increasing photosynthesis. Reforestation potential varies significantly across countries according to their climate and land use patterns. The United States has an abundant supply of urban and rural land suitable for reforestation. Large-scale reforestation efforts could have significant impacts on agricultural and timber production however which would in turn affect consumers and producers in those markets Correcting Market Failures In some cases market failures may serve to increase emissions of greenhouse gases. Interventions that address market failures directly are generally preferable to direct regulation via standards. Approaches that merit consideration include public information programs promotion of efficient appliances by utilities and changes in mortgage qualification rules to reflect appliance operating costs One promising concept to reduce the growth in electricity use is demand-side management. A utility faced with capacity constraints would consider proposals for demand reduction through efficiency improvements and proposals to increase supply on an equal footing and choose the lowest cost alternative. One barrier to implementing programs of this type is that utility profits under traditional State rate-setting regulation are often linked directly to the level of electricity sales. Regulatory changes at the State level possibly to permit nonutility companies to bid for demand reduction that can be compared with the costs of increasing supply are needed to implement demand-side management. Although estimates of the emissions reductions available through widespread application of this approach vary widely the removal of regulatory barriers and biases in the market for electric power makes economic sense The Limitations of Efficiency Standards Energy efficiency standards can also be used to overcome information barriers and institutional rigidities. However this command-and-control approach has several significant disadvantages compared with incentive-based systems or alternative approaches that address perceived market failures directly. First the burden of meeting standards can not be reallocated across industries or across the different greenhouse gases in private cost-saving transactions Second in the absence of price increases for fossil fuels standards can increase the demand for energy-using services. Finally standards reduce the range of products available to meet diverse consumer needs The costs of efficiency standards are often hidden. For example a higher average fuel economy standard might force consumers to buy only the more fuel-efficient and generally cheaper vehicles in the existing product line thereby actually reducing their purchase and gasoline costs. However out-of-pocket costs do not reflect costs imposed by denying consumers the option to purchase other valued attributes such as safety performance and comfort. Higher fuel efficiency without higher fuel prices also lowers the per mile cost of driving which encourages more trips more fuel consumption and more emissions. Because fuel economy labels already inform consumers about energy consumption and few apparent institutional rigidities exist the economic rationale for stringent auto efficiency standards is doubtful at best Assertions that efficiency improvements are cost-saving or nearly costless beg the question why these improvements are not automatically taking place. Such assertions must be examined to see if the claimed efficiency gains involve the sacrifice of other product attributes that were excluded from the analysis or market imperfections that could be addressed directly. One must ask whether the analysis considers the entire range of consumer usage rates and energy prices or is based only on national average values In the latter case efficiency standards may appear to be cost-effective on the national level while actually restricting the choices of only those consumers who face low energy prices or have low usage rates ( and thus energy consumption ) for the product. Those with high usage rates or those who face high energy prices would purchase high-efficiency products even in the absence of mandatory standards. Taking this diversity into consideration an efficiency standard that appears to save money on the national level may actually impose costs IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE Available assessments of the costs of substantially slowing the rate of greenhouse gas emissions may reach the trillions of dollars What benefits might be obtained with those costs ? This question is difficult to answer but it is possible to identify several nonmarket impacts of possible future climate change and to arrive at preliminary estimates of some market effects There may be both positive and negative effects of climate change on human health although these effects are controversial. Temperature extremes both hot and cold are associated with higher mor tality rates for populations such as the elderly that are susceptible to physical stress. These relationships suggest that higher temperatures in winter could reduce weather-related illness and death whereas higher summer temperatures could increase them. These adverse health effects are not well understood however as illustrated by the fact that the average temperature differential between New York City and Atlanta is as large as the most extreme predictions of warming yet there is no evidence that Atlanta 's warmer climate creates a greater health risk than New York 's There could also be changes in the regional distribution of vectorborne diseases such as those carried by ticks fleas and mosquitoes associated with climate change Substantial reductions in economic growth in low-income countries caused by attempts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions could have far greater adverse health consequences than any direct health effects associated with climate change. When one considers the very close relationship around the world between income levels and important health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy it is clear that one of the most important factors affecting health is the ability to afford adequate nutrition and health care If global warming occurs its impact on plants and animals including humans is likely to depend on how rapidly it occurs. Both the human and other species ' ability to adapt to warming appear to increase if the rate of change is slow. In agriculture plant breeding and biogenetic techniques can be used to adapt crop varieties to changes in solar radiation temperature and moisture. These techniques are more likely to succeed when the incremental changes are small and there is adequate time to undertake adaptive research. In the wild species can adapt to climate change by moving to suitable environments or adapting to new ones through natural selection. Scientists believe that some wild species of plants and animals may not adapt to rapid climate change and might be lost thus threatening the biological diversity that has evolved over millions of years. The fact that many medicines contain active ingredients obtained from substances in plants and animals especially those in the tropics suggests that a reduction in diversity could represent a significant economic loss There is also some reason to believe that extreme weather events may be more important than the increase in average temperature for adaptation to and survival of climate change. A change in the frequency and intensity of hurricanes and tornadoes for example could substantially affect their costs measured in both human life and property Sea-level rise is another possible effect of global warming. The U.S. coastline like the coastlines of other industrial maritime nations has been extensively developed with buildings often within feet of the sea. The cost of protecting the entire U.S. shoreline against substantial sea-level rise would be prohibitive as it would be for many countries with densely populated low-lying areas. The cumulative costs of protecting densely developed shoreline areas from a 20-inch rise is estimated to be between $ billion and $ billion or between $ billion and $ billion in present value under the assumption that all costs were incurred in If the costs of protecting against sea-level rise were spread over the more distant future as seems likely their present value would be lower. If the sea level rises gradually and predictably a reasonable response strategy might include steps to encourage some population and economic activity to relocate inland to higher ground when existing structures come due for routine replacement Most sectors of industrial economies are not climate-sensitive or could adapt to climate changes. The costs of adaptation depend on how rapidly warming occurs. Useful lives of plant and equipment tend to be shorter than years so that a slow warming trend would permit change in the location and composition of economic activity without major or unanticipated disruptions. More rapid changes could result in loss of some immobile private assets abandonment of certain public infrastructure and reinvestment at new locations The most significant impacts on industry are likely to be in activities that involve biological processes that are sensitive to temperature and rainfall such as agriculture forestry and fishing which account for about percent of U.S. GNP. Global climate change could have both positive and negative impacts on productivity. Up to a point higher carbon dioxide concentrations improve the efficiency of photosynthesis and thus increase agricultural productivity. Warming could change the amount and distribution of precipitation and shift cropping patterns regionally but regional predictions are now considered highly unreliable Preliminary analyses show that global climate change could result in a net loss in agricultural productivity but no evidence shows that it would threaten the world 's food supply even under the most pessimistic scenarios. The Department of Agriculture has made preliminary estimates of the regional and global economic impacts of changes in agricultural production that might be associated with warming. Under one scenario the net global costs of a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide were estimated to range from $ billion to $ billion annually with the United States losing $ billion annually. Equally plausible but less pessimistic assumptions about yield effects implied small net gains to the global and U.S. economies. Underlying these small net effects would be some redistribution of income from consumers to producers through higher agricultural prices These estimated impacts on global and U.S. agriculture can be put into perspective by comparing them with the impacts of agricultural policies discussed in Chapter Using the same economic model Department of Agriculture researchers estimated that the trade-distorting policies now in place around the world impose a net cost on the world of $ billion annually and $ billion annually for the United States. Thus the annual costs of current agricultural policies are estimated to be the same order of magnitude as the estimated agricultural impacts of global warming. However the agricultural losses from a doubling of carbon dioxide are not likely to occur until well into the next century. For example using a 5-percent real interest rate a global loss of $ billion in amounts to about $ billion in dollars ( Box ) Thus the costs of today 's agricultural policies are estimated to be more important in economic terms than even pessimistic estimates of the effects of global warming largely because the former must be borne in the present and the latter may occur if at all in the relatively distant future SUMMARY The United States is taking a leadership role in international efforts to reduce scientific and economic uncertainties about global climate change and to build a common understanding about all aspects of the climate change issue from the basic Earth science to impacts on human activities to potential response strategies. The data now available on the economic costs of reducing greenhouse gas emissions suggest that it may be as important to improve understanding of the economics of global warming as it is to improve current ability to predict warming itself Policies such as the phaseout of CFCs the President 's clean air proposal and reforestation can significantly reduce global net emissions of greenhouse gases. At the same time they can be justified on their own merits. Increased research and development funding and modest changes in fuel prices can reflect the broader social interest in promoting energy conservation. Currently available analyses indicate that near-term stabilization or immediate reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion is likely to impose large economic costs on current and future generations Such measures must be carefully scrutinized given the current limited understanding of the impacts and likelihood of global warming. The highest priority in the near term should be to improve understanding in order to build a foundation for sound policy decisions Until such a foundation is in place there is no justification for imposing major costs on the economy in order to slow the growth of greenhouse gas emissions. Policies that may result in slower growth in greenhouse emissions but can also be fully justified on other grounds are the best short-run way to address this potential problem while the uncertainties that exist today are reduced Being justified on other grounds means that a program yields nongreenhouse benefits commensurate with its costs ; it can not mean simply having some non-greenhouse benefits. The adoption of many small programs each of which would fail a standard cost-benefit test could significantly slow economic growth and eliminate jobs Because the intense research currently underway may reveal that it is desirable to slow the growth of greenhouse gas emissions it is useful to consider the elements of what would be an economically rational strategy to do so. Any strategy to limit aggregate emissions without worldwide participation would be likely to fail. A cost-effective policy must provide for comprehensive coverage of both sources and sinks of all major greenhouse gases. It must also provide appropriate incentives for emissions reductions and deal directly with market failures. Carbon dioxide emissions in particular could be reduced at much lower cost through the use of emissions fees than through government-imposed standards for energy efficiency CONCLUSION There is widespread agreement that both economic growth and environmental quality are desirable policy goals. They need not be incompatible and are in many respects complementary. Three principles should guide regulation. First realistic environmental and risk-reduction goals that balance benefits and costs must be set. Second strategies that work with rather than against market incentives should wherever possible be used instead of less effective command-and-control regulation. Market-oriented approaches such as marketable air pollution allowances create incentives for firms to achieve environmental goals in a cost-effective manner. Third government should support the development and dissemination of scientific and technical information about environmental and health risks The Administration 's clean air initiative its proposals to improve pesticide regulation and food safety and its efforts to improve the understanding of global environmental issues each illustrate how these principles for environmental regulation can be put into action. Other pressing environmental issues will face the Nation in the 1990s and beyond. The application of these principles to all environmental problems will help to achieve both a strong economy and a healthy environment CHAPTER Growth and Market Reform in the Global Economy THROUGHOUT THE WORLD there are welcome signs that barriers to free markets and to an open trading system are coming down. Indeed the movement toward free markets accelerated dramatically in Revolutionary transformations from centrally planned to market-oriented economic systems are being attempted in Poland Hungary and other countries in Eastern Europe. Economic reforms have improved performance in some of the heavily indebted developing countries such as Costa Rica Mexico and the Philippines and recent steps to reduce debt burdens promise to further this goal. Market-oriented development in the Asian Pacific Rim economies is proving a dramatic success and efforts are under way to translate the export orientation of these nations into higher domestic living standards. Barriers to the free movement of goods services labor and capital are being removed to establish a single unified market in Western Europe. The United States and its trading partners are continuing to work for a significantly freer world trading system by developing or extending rules for trade in agriculture services intellectual property and other areas through the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) which is to be completed this year What has been called the revolution of in Eastern Europe highlights the intimate interaction between political and economic freedoms. U.S. support for democracy and free markets as well as the recent success of the U.S. economy and its market-based system have been a key impetus to these transformations. During his first year in office the President took significant actions to further the development of market reform. He submitted legislation for financial and technical support to Poland and Hungary which was enacted by the Congress last November. More recently he has proposed a program of technical assistance and a trade agreement with the Soviet Union The United States has also been a leader throughout the postwar period in working with other countries toward a more open international trading system. However many steps have yet to be taken. Thus the successful completion of the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations and the strengthening of this rules-based insti- tution for liberalizing international trade is the highest priority of the President 's trade policy. The United States and all developed and developing economies can benefit greatly from a healthy global economy and full participation in an open international trading system MARKET-ORIENTED REFORM IN CENTRALLY PLANNED ECONOMIES In recent months the world has witnessed unprecedented developments in Eastern Europe as many countries moved toward democracy and economic reform. These countries have set out on a road that while difficult is the only hope for sustained improvement in the future economic well-being of their citizens. The new Polish government has already begun to implement a major economic restructuring and stabilization program. In October Hungary declared itself a republic. While economic reform has been under way for many years Hungary is to launch a new reform initiative in Since the opening of the Berlin Wall in November economic contacts between East and West Germany including plans for continued assistance have multiplied. There have been leadership changes in Czechoslovakia Bulgaria and Romania These countries have indicated some desire to undertake marketoriented reforms and are in the process of redesigning economic policies. As part of continuing reform efforts new economic policies were recently announced in Yugoslavia Economic reform has also been under way in other parts of the world. The People 's Republic of China has moved to reshape its economy and began in to rely increasingly on markets. However political actions associated with the Tiananmen Square repression set back these reforms. Through 'glasnost ' ( openness ) and 'perestroika ' ( restructuring ) the Soviet Union began to initiate political legal and economic reforms in Since the Lao People 's Democratic Republic has significantly increased reliance on market forces These changes in Eastern Europe the Soviet Union China and Indochina are of tremendous global significance. One-fifth of the world 's population lives in China and nearly percent live in the Soviet Union and countries of Eastern Europe These countries are all addressing the fundamental question of how some form of market economy can revive growth rates and raise living standards after years of disappointing economic performance The World Bank estimates per capita income for at $ in Poland and $ in Hungary. In contrast it was $ in the United States. ( Other estimates suggest that these figures may understate living standards in Poland and Hungary somewhat. ) Even if the economic reforms are successful it will take many years to close these gaps. However market-oriented economic reforms can generate noticeable improvements in the short run by reducing shortages of key goods and services by improving quality and by producing goods that people actually want rather than what central planners want them to have. Furthermore the freedom to choose is an important addition to human welfare that is not measurable by per capita income levels Bold and comprehensive plans for economic reform have been put forth by some of the centrally planned economies. These reforms will eventually improve living standards for citizens of these countries. If successful they promise future growth and prosperity However the difficulties of economic transition should not be underestimated. Transformation from one economic system to another will be extremely complex and the adjustment may be painful involving widespread unemployment with limited unemployment insurance or other social support systems currently in place No single set of policies will work for all countries and the appropriate mix and timing of economic policies must be designed on a case-by-case basis. Any policy package necessarily involves the risk of failure and a host of uncertainties. However external support will raise the likelihood of success. The President has taken a deep interest in the progress of political and economic reform and remains committed to providing assistance CENTRALLY PLANNED VERSUS MARKET ECONOMIES Between World War II and the early 1950s most countries in Eastern Europe adopted the Soviet economic model of central planning and became members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( CMEA ) Each centrally planned economy is unique just as the United States West Germany and Japan are each examples of market economies but with distinct characteristics. A fundamental distinguishing feature of centrally planned economies is that state authorities not private citizens own and control most of the means of production. Instead of allocating resources through markets that establish prices based on supplies and demands the state authorities generally formulate detailed plans for inputs and outputs. Coordinating this process properly requires an immense amount of information making it exceedingly difficult for a centralized system of managers to allocate scarce resources according to what people want or to respond to changes in demands supplies and technologies. The lack of private ownership implies that individuals have little stake in improving resource allocation. Of course the population as a whole would gain if resources were used to produce goods and services they valued more highly Although the operation of centrally planned systems is very complex a simple polar example illustrates key issues. Consider an enterprise producing shirts. In a centrally planned economy planners would typically determine the amounts of cloth dye thread and other inputs the enterprise would receive and the source and price of each input. Workers would be assigned to the enterprise and often allocated to particular tasks. The plan would also set targets for output of each type of shirt and determine the final prices to households The contrast with a market economy is striking. In a centrally planned economy prices of labor goods and services do not adjust to reflect supplies and demands and production decisions are not motivated by profitability. Unlike a market system producers typically have no leeway to reduce prices or production when inventories accumulate or to raise prices or production as inventories decline even if consumers form long queues. The enterprise does not base hiring decisions on its assessment of needs and worker quality nor does it choose where to purchase inputs so as to minimize production costs. Furthermore state-owned enterprises are allocated the credit needed to finance operations through a centralized banking system. Most centrally planned economies have never developed laws to deal with bankruptcies because enterprises are typically bailed out if costs exceed revenues. Consider the implications for U.S. firm behavior if the Federal Government promised to mail a check to cover the losses of every business that lost money Such a system severely weakens the incentives for producers to use resources efficiently Because individuals in centrally planned economies own few of the factories or other productive assets individuals have little incentive to respond to market signals about resource scarcity even if such signals exist. Instead the central planning system puts a premium on meeting output targets. The l&ck of private ownership also provides little incentive for innovation or quality control. New firms can not simply enter the market to take advantage of better management or new ideas Centrally planned economies have persistent problems with demand exceeding supply at officially set prices. As shortages of consumer goods and of inputs required for production develop the scarce supplies must be rationed to households and to firms often resulting in long queues and disruptions to production. At the same time other products may be overproduced and go to waste. The shortages often lead to black markets in which goods sell for far more than their official prices. If shortages get worse over time hidden inflation may develop. As official prices are decontrolled measured inflation soars. For example the removal of controls on food prices in Poland resulted in the acceleration of inflation in Poland last August ( Box ) Severe housing shortages in Poland provide another example of chronic excess demand. The wait for an apartment has been reported to be as high as years in large urban areas. Largely because of high government subsidies housing has been very inexpensive for households lucky enough to get it. One survey estimated expenditures on rent or cooperative housing at just percent of total household expenditure in the mid-1980s compared with more than percent in the United States. Unlike the United States however rationing constrains many Polish families from choosing housing of a different size or in a different area or from moving to their own residences. Although recent studies have found high returns to producers of new housing new building is inadequate. Private construction has failed to provide a remedy because of lack of materials undeveloped financial markets and counterproductive laws and regulations governing ownership and property transfer Centrally planned economies are often also faced with an inadequate tax base large budget deficits and a tendency to print money to finance this deficit fueling inflation. Inflation which has been estimated recently at percent per month in Poland and at an even higher rate in Yugoslavia has become the overriding problem. Reducing inflation is a priority of both governments. These difficulties worsen the problems arising from misallocation of scarce resources. Government pricing credit allocation policies and subsidies to state-owned enterprises can raise expenditures and increase the budget deficit. With few exceptions there is no domestic market to finance the deficit through bond sales so that the central bank can not make independent decisions about money growth ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF CENTRALLY PLANNED ECONOMIES Poor economic performance has been a major impetus for transforming centrally planned economies toward market economies Even economies such as Hungary that have been gradually undertaking reforms have experienced long-term declines in productivity product quality and economic efficiency. Planners have also been concerned about slow progress in developing and adopting new technologies Without meaningful price indices measures of aggregate output are unreliable. Official CMEA statistics use net material product which is a measure of national output like gross domestic product except that it excludes the value of depreciation and of nonmaterial services such as health education and public administration These data show that average annual growth of net material product has declined consistently over the past four decades. Real net material product growth averaged percent during the recovery Box Difficulties in the Transition from Central Planning : Food and Food Aid in Poland Developments in food supplies and food prices have been a focal point of Poland 's economic difficulties. These developments illustrate both the difficulties of implementing marketoriented reforms and the potential short-term hardships of a transition from central planning Long lines at food stores were an early visible sign of problems. Three main factors accounted for the queues. First political and economic uncertainties contributed to widespread panic buying and food hoarding by consumers. This response was related in part to memories of severe food scarcities and sudden price hikes. Second very rapid inflation meant that commodities such as food have been a better store of value than currency. Thus farmers withheld products from the market. Finally the distribution system had been disrupted State enterprises had difficulty procuring output from farmers as state-set prices had not kept pace with rising input prices Private distribution systems will take time to develop Removal of price controls on food in August introduced some market signals and the lines now seem to have abated. Food prices have risen substantially reducing demand and alleviating the shortages. Food supplies have not increased markedly however largely because higher prices have not generally been passed on to farmers Food is now relatively more expensive however and the price increases have been especially hard on low-income groups and people with fixed incomes. The United States and other countries have contributed substantial amounts of food aid. In addition to its nutritional value increasing the availability of food may bolster public confidence in the new government and help to ease the difficulty of implementing economic reforms Food aid must be managed $ o as to ease the difficult adjustment period without impeding longer run development of agricultural markets. Large amounts of food aid may disrupt Poland 's newly emerging market system. Greatly increased food supplies from external sources could seriously lower current prices which would discourage domestic production and lead to even more severe problems next year. Providing pesticides machinery and technical assistance that would help increase agricultural production may yield greater benefits than direct food aid from World War II in the 1950s but fell to percent during However official net material product statistics are widely believed to understate inflation substantially which implies that they greatly overstate real growth. Furthermore because the central planning system does not typically produce the goods that people actually want growth in physical production overstates the value of increased output Some centrally planned economies have also had mounting balance of payments difficulties with countries outside the CMEA Trade and current account deficits have grown especially since high public investment after led to a surge in imports from the West. These deficits have been financed primarily through foreign borrowing. Since both Poland and Hungary have had difficulties in servicing their external debts. Debt levels have risen recently in Bulgaria and in the Soviet Union and to a lesser extent in Czechoslovakia although these countries have not had debt-servicing difficulties ELEMENTS OF A REFORM PACKAGE Economic difficulties faced by centrally planned economies are extremely complex. There is no established policy package for reform nor is there a single prototype market economy that all reformers seek to emulate. However a growing consensus has emerged on many aspects of the reforms required. In addition to improved long-term growth as resources are more efficiently reallocated increased reliance on markets is likely to generate some quick payoffs through relieving shortages of food or other goods Price and Structural Reform Perhaps the most important reform is to establish prices that adjust to reflect relative scarcities of goods labor and capital. Such prices provide information that can be used to allocate resources effectively through decentralized markets without the need for an elaborate system of central planning. Institutions need to be put in place to facilitate a market system. These include banks and financial institutions that can help allocate savings to productive investments. Also important is a legal system that defines property rights provides for bankruptcy and deals with a host of other issues. Firms need useful and reliable accounting systems. Workers and managers also need to learn through training and apprenticeship programs how a market economy works. After or more years of central planning few residents will have developed entrepreneurial skills. Foreign direct investment and joint ventures can play an important dual role in raising economic growth while providing experience for domestic workers. In addition unemployment insurance and other support programs for low-income households can provide an important social safety net Stabilization Measures It is exceedingly difficult to reform prices and to provide incentives for private-sector investment and growth in the midst of very high inflation. Thus in some cases such as Poland the overall economy must be stabilized before the more fundamental economic restructuring can take place. The difficulties are compounded by the likelihood of large initial consumer price increases as prices that have been kept artificially low for years are decontrolled. The basic elements of a stabilization package are reductions in budget deficits measures to control money growth and the establishment of a competitive exchange rate History offers some useful examples of reforms. Israel and Bolivia brought down very high rates of inflation in the 1980s. The Erhard reforms in West Germany eliminated price controls and reestablished a vibrant private sector after several years of administered price controls. These reforms also stabilized the value of West German currency and revived its usage in international markets But there are no examples where after four decades of central planning an economy has successfully accomplished all of these at once. The centrally planned economies face a unique challenge RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Each of the centrally planned economies has its own economic and political situation calling for somewhat different policy responses. Similarly the appropriate response from the United States and other developed countries to support these reform efforts differs across cases Soviet Union The Soviet economy has many difficulties in addition to the inefficiencies inherent in central planning. For example military expenditures of more than percent of gross national product ( GNP ) compared with percent in the United States consume large amounts of scarce resources. Also many Soviet households have stored up massive amounts of rubles ( Soviet currency ) during years of waiting for scarce goods to become available. Distrust of the undeveloped financial system means that much of this wealth is simply hidden by domestic residents. The stored rubles are a problem because economic reforms that free prices and put appliances and other desired consumer goods on store shelves may trigger a buying spree that would fuel inflation. The inflationary impact of price decontrol will be mitigated if higher prices are fed through to producers thus raising incentives for increased productivity and output In the Soviet Union initiated a program to restructure its economy. Especially those measures taken since were intend- ed to increase reliance on independent decisions of enterprises This goal has proven difficult to achieve while prices as well as credit and production inputs remained controlled. The Soviet economy continues to rely on output targets set by a central plan Many fundamental steps toward market orientation of the economy have yet to be taken and the government 's commitment to genuine economic reform therefore remains questionable Following the Malta meeting between the Presidents of the United States and the Soviet Union in December the United States renewed efforts to increase its economic ties with the Soviet Union These efforts may involve negotiation of a trade agreement and an investment treaty. In addition the United States has offered technical cooperation for example to help the Soviets improve their system of economic statistics. To help further integrate the Soviet Union into world markets the President of the United States has supported Soviet observership status in GATT once the Uruguay Round has been completed Hungary Hungary was the first centrally planned economy to introduce major market reforms initiating a market-oriented reform program in It has gradually reduced direct control by central planners and has actively encouraged private-sector development It also has taken steps to reform the price system. Nonetheless most analysts agree that while prices in Hungary reflect relative scarcities better than in most other centrally planned economies mispricing has nonetheless slowed growth. Hungarian authorities continue to control prices of more than one-third of domestic products and to monitor other prices Hungary has fewer pervasive problems than other centrally planned economies such as inflation shortages low product quality and black markets ( although they exist for example for foreign exchange ) But the overall success of the reforms in stimulating the economy has been mixed. Hungary has developed a small but vibrant and growing private sector. Between and gross value added in the private sector as a percentage of GNP doubled to percent. In contrast employment and average incomes in the socialized sector declined. However more than percent of industrial production was still produced in the socialized sector. Although direct controls are no longer pervasive widespread indirect controls persist for example on the entry and exit of firms The Hungarian experience illustrates the difficulties in reforming a centrally planned economy gradually. With the basic institutional structure of a centrally planned economy still intact authorities remain involved in a wide range of decisions while managers take only limited responsibility for the operations of enter- prises. Not surprisingly the early reforms were only partially effective. Hungarian authorities continue to introduce measures to improve economic performance including steps to privatize some state enterprises and to encourage further foreign investment The United States has offered both technical and financial assistance to support the next phase of Hungarian reforms. U.S. aid includes an enterprise fund that will facilitate private-sector development including joint ventures Poland Poland has made repeated attempts to decentralize economic decisionmaking. Although reforms implemented during the 1980s reduced the central allocation of inputs and liberalized the agricultural sector severe problems remain. Reforming the Polish economy is especially complex because reforms must be implemented in the midst of an economic crisis. In addition to extremely high inflation Poland has accumulated a large external debt and is unable to meet its debt-payment obligations The new Polish government has launched a comprehensive and radical program of structural reform and macroeconomic stabilization. In contrast to the recent Soviet approaches the government plan calls for rapid removal of many price controls and subsidies and the reform of the budget process to eliminate the need for inflation-inducing money finance. It also lays out a sensible plan for gradual privatization of state enterprises and reform in banking and finance. Although the Polish plan is well formulated the adjustment period may bring high levels of unemployment and temporary reductions in living standards making the plan difficult to implement External assistance can play an important role in increasing the likelihood of success. The United States is actively exploring means to support Poland 's ambitious effort. In addition to technical assistance the United States has allocated an aid package that includes $ million in food aid $ million for an enterprise fund $ million in trade credit guarantees and a $ million contribution to a currency stabilization fund to bolster the credibility of the Polish reform SUMMARY Many centrally planned economies in Eastern Europe have taken steps toward market-oriented economic reform. Poland and Hungary especially have launched ambitious restructuring programs that can promote economic growth and raise living standards Because of important political and economic differences across centrally planned economies no single blueprint for the appropriate reform package exists While the transition to a market economy may involve unemployment and other costs in the short run there are likely to be some early benefits as shortages of some goods are alleviated The United States remains committed to support reform efforts among the centrally planned economies including both financial and technical assistance SUPPORTING GROWTH IN INDEBTED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES Like the economies of Eastern Europe heavily indebted developing countries must undertake significant economic reforms in ordfc to revive growth and gain full participation in the world economy Many nations in Latin America and Africa have suffered severe economic stagnation in the 1980s resulting from declines in investment high inflation heavy debt burdens capital flight and extensive government interference in economic activity. The revival of growth will require continued implementation of appropriate macroeconomic and market-oriented policy reforms and reductions in debt burdens. The United States continues to take a leadership role in developing and implementing a strategy of coordinated debt restructuring and support for economic policy reforms in the indebted countries consistent with reviving growth and restoring their access to world capital markets The recent growth rates of the severely indebted countries ( as defined by the World Bank ) are shown in Table The deterioration of growth rates in per capita income in the 1980s is striking Strong growth in the per capita incomes of these countries between and was followed by declines of percent between and and negligible growth of percent in the subsequent years. Growth in the severely indebted low-income countries including many in Sub-Saharan Africa deteriorated especially sharply. In these countries per capita income declined by percent per year on average between and and continued to decline by an average of percent par year between and Per capita income also declined between and in the middleincome severely indebted countries including many in Latin America and has since remained low. The declines in per capita income among the severely indebted countries between and and the failure to reach pre-crisis growth levels since stand in sharp contrast to the more stable growth rates of the high-income countries that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The same trends also characterize the growth of total GNP in these groups of countries. Although GNP growth has risen since it is still far below pre-crisis levels TABLE Average Annual Growth [ Percent per year ] to to Item to PER CAPITA REAL GNP Severely indebted countries Low income Middle income Total Low income Middle income _ } Total High income OECD countries REAL GNP Severely indebted countries High income OECD countries Preliminary Source : The World Bank Estimated per capita incomes of $ in the low-income severely indebted countries and $ in the middle-income severely indebted countries are particularly striking when compared with U.S. per capita income of $ The protracted decline in the incomes of many developing countries also dampened growth and contributed to trade balance deterioration in industrial nations in the mid-1980s by reducing the demand for their products It is important to note however that heavy debt burdens alone were not responsible for poor growth. Some countries that had very high debt levels in the 1980s such as South Korea and Malaysia have grown rapidly. Sound economic policies in these countries contributed to their strong economic performance Revitalizing growth is critical for the indebted developing countries as well as for the global economy more generally. The restoration of full access of these countries to world capital markets will be achieved only in conjunction with productivity improvements and output growth. Any long-term sustainable solution to the debt crisis must go beyond stabilizing the international trade and payments system to remove impediments to growth in the debtor economies HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT CRISIS The onset of the debt crisis in followed a decade of rapid expansion in foreign lending to developing countries. Many developing countries borrowed heavily in the mid-to-late 1970s when both the borrowing climate and prospects for repayment were particularly favorable. Their cost of borrowing was low because of low real interest rates on world capital markets. Their access to credit was enhanced by the recycling of surpluses from the oil-exporting countries to developing countries through commercial banks. In addition the prices of the major export commodities of many of the developing countries were at record levels Onset of the Crisis The crisis in international credit markets was the product of a complex conjuncture of unexpected shocks to the world economy and decisions taken by both lenders and borrowers. The developments that had favored high levels of international lending in the 1970s reversed during and the debtors found themselves unable to meet the payments on their debts. Interest rates on the debtors ' variable rate commercial loans rose sharply as the Federal Reserve System in the United States and central banks in other industrialized nations tightened money supplies to tame accelerating inflation. A steep increase in the value of the dollar sharply raised the effective cost of both the debtors ' dollar imports and of payments on the mainly dollar-denominated debt. Although the rise in the dollar strengthened the competitiveness of many exports this rise was offset by plummeting world prices of many of the debtors ' primary export commodities. The overall effect was to reduce the net export earnings debtor countries had available to service their debt just as the level of debt service was rising Debtor countries faced diverse problems. Highly indebted middleincome countries which were concentrated in Latin America had borrowed mainly from commercial banks and faced sharply increased debt-servicing burdens. Highly indebted low-income countries concentrated in Sub-Saharan Africa had obtained the majority of their credit at below-market fixed rates of interest from official creditors. Although their debt-servicing burdens were not adversely affected poor economic performance made debt servicing increasingly difficult In the countries that subsequently developed repayment problems the external shocks to interest rates and commodity prices were exacerbated by economic mismanagement and political instability. Many heavily indebted countries failed to implement economic policies to correct persistent foreign and domestic imbalances. These countries used much of the borrowed money for consumption or investments with low returns while countries that avoided repayment difficulties emphasized investments that raised productivity and diversified their export base. Between and export volume grew at percent per year on average in the debtor countries with debt-servicing difficulties in contrast to export growth of percent in heavily indebted countries that did not experience servicing difficulties. Faced with rising budget deficits the governments of many debtor countries resorted to printing money which fueled inflation and simultaneously attempted to maintain overvalued exchange rates which contributed to rising external deficits. Poor policy worsened the uncertain investment climate causing investors in debtor countries to send their capital abroad and diminishing the resources available internally to service the debt Stabilizing the International Financial System When it became clear that Mexico one of the largest and most prosperous debtors could not meet its payments at the height of the global recession in mid-1982 the stability of the international financial system was thrown into question. With a substantial portion of their portfolios in developing country debt and concentrated exposure to the largest problem debtors major U.S. banks would have been jeopardized by substantial losses on their developing country loans. Commercial banks in other industrial countries were in a similarly precarious position. U.S. commercial banks gradually strengthened their financial positions by increasing their capital base and setting aside reserves to cover losses. The banks sharply reduced new loans to debtor countries from $ billion in to a low of $ billion in In addition since banks have reduced exposure by selling developing country loans on the secondary market and participating in debt exchanges such as debt-for-equity swaps. Table shows that there was a substantial reduction in the exposure of U.S. commercial banks especially the smaller banks between and The decline in new commercial loans and the increase in debtservice payments were exacerbated by high rates of capital flight in the Latin American economies as domestic residents transferred their savings abroad in response to the uncertain and deteriorating economic conditions. One study estimates that the five largest Latin American debtors experienced outflows of $ billion in private sector assets between and TABLE Changes in Reported Exposure of Groups of U.S. Banks to Non-OPEC Developing Countries Millions of dollars Item Percent June to December December to December June to December Next banks All other banks Total Top banks Source : Federal Financial Institutions F-xamination Council Country Exposure Lending Survey The net effect of these factors was a marked reversal in the direction of resource transfer measured as the current account defi cit plus net investment income. Net resource transfers to the highly indebted countries declined dramatically from inflows of $ billion in to outflows of $ billion in While resource transfers abroad are necessary to prevent a country 's debt from growing at unsustainable rates they reduce the resources available for domestic investment or consumption The international response to the debt problem was to encourage macroeconomic stabilization policies and to coordinate additional lending by commercial banks and official creditors. Some new loans were made available through the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) to provide financial support for debtor countries undertaking economic reform under IMF guidance and to encourage lenders to continue to extend credit. Stabilization programs were put into place in several countries in consultation with the IMF with mixed results. Such programs typically emphasized fiscal discipline such as reductions in subsidies and improved tax collection reductions in monetary growth devaluation of overvalued exchange rates and export promotion. Many countries found such measures politically difficult to implement because they required substantial sacrifices in the standard of living and in investment needed for growth. A recent study concludes that while the stabilization programs led to reduced inflation and improved external balance in many countries little progress was made in reviving growth U.S. POLICY FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT Although the coordinated international response to the debt problem between and stabilized international financial markets and maintained the liquidity of the problem debtor countries economic recovery in debtor countries stalled. The governments of debtor countries were caught between internal pressures to direct resources to the resumption of growth and international pressures for continued external adjustment. And the commercial banks were increasingly reluctant to make additional loans to heavily indebted developing countries The Baker Plan Concern over the failure of indebted economies to resume growth prompted the U.S. debt initiative introduced by then Treasury Secretary James Baker the Program for Sustained Growth known as the Baker Plan. The program addressed the factors impeding the efforts of debtor countries to improve growth and living standards and the need to mobilize international financial resources to support debtor country reform efforts. The program called for international commercial banks to extend $ billion in new lending and for a 50-percent increase in lending by the multilateral development banks to the heavily indebted countries over to The program also called for the World Bank to play an expanded role in supporting institutional and sectoral reforms and market-oriented economic policies The major debtors made progress in reforming their economies and managing their debt burdens between and and several countries improved their economic performance. Reforms during this period reflected widespread recognition by debtor governments of the importance of well-functioning markets in generating growth : public-sector deficits were reduced exchange rates became more competitive real interest rates rose and trade protection was rationalized. In spite of this progress overall improvements in economic growth and performance on the scale that had been hoped for did not materialize partly because of disruptive changes in oil and commodity prices. In addition the increase in new lending from all international financing sources fell below the levels that had been expected The Brady Initiative The persistence of serious problems in the debtor economies and concern over the economic hardships sustained by their populations called for a review of the U.S. debt strategy. The strategy of this Administration outlined by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in March continues to emphasize the need for marketoriented economic reforms to promote growth. The Brady Initiative emphasizes measures aimed at mobilizing private-sector financing to generate growth. The major innovation of the Brady Initiative is that it emphasizes debt and debt-service reduction by commercial banks in recognition of the burden placed on growth by increasing levels of indebtedness. It also provides for IMF and World Bank financial support for debt and debt-service reduction to those countries implementing effective economic reform programs The emphasis on debt reduction represents an evolution in thinking about the needs of the debtor economies and a change in the relative emphasis on debt rescheduling new lending and debt reduction. Debt reduction is promoted in order to reduce high servicing requirements in the expectation that the freed resources will be used for investment and thereby promote growth. The shift in emphasis stems from concerns that growth in many economies has not revived despite appropriate policy reforms. In addition rising levels of indebtedness impede growth by creating an uncertain and unattractive environment for private investment. An important feature of the emphasis on debt reduction is that it may allow the debtors to take advantage of the secondary market discounts on the value of their debt. The discounting of developing country debt on secondary markets reflects high perceived risks of default and arrears The Brady Initiative also provides for debt rescheduling and new lending. Debt rescheduling efforts reduce the drain on debtor coun tries ' cash flow and the level of resource transfer in the near term by extending the period over which debt is repaid. New lending may generate cash to assist debtors in meeting debt-service obligations without sacrificing investment The Brady Initiative provides a framework for negotiated debt and debt-service reduction on a case-by-case basis to countries committed to implementing requisite economic reforms. The debtor government and commercial bank creditors negotiate a menu of options for the conversion and reduction of outstanding loans and the extension of new loans. The options are designed to enable banks to readjust their portfolios in terms of the timing level and riskiness of payments consistent with debtors readjusting their payment burdens to sustainable levels. The participation of the commercial banks is voluntary Negotiations between a debtor country and its commercial bank creditors are premised on a prior commitment to an economic adjustment program designed in conjunction with the IMF and the World Bank. In line with its emphasis on growth the Brady Initiative stresses economic reforms that improve the investment climate in the debtor economies in order to encourage foreign investment and the return of domestic capital that had fled abroad. Such reforms include the following : reductions in government budget deficits to reduce inflationary pressures devaluation of official exchange rates to reflect market levels and restore the competitiveness of exports in foreign markets removal of interest rate ceilings to stimulate domestic savings reductions in foreign trade barriers relaxation of regulations restricting foreign investment and privatization of state-owned enterprises. These measures are intended to encourage investment raise export earnings and decrease the drain on resources from government budget deficits and inefficient state enterprises Because of its case-by-case emphasis the Brady Initiative is best understood by comparing the three programs that have been negotiated under its auspices thus far. The agreements for Mexico the Philippines and Costa Rica differ significantly in ways that reflect the different needs of these countries and their creditors Mexico Mexico negotiated a preliminary debt agreement with commercial banks in July Prior to the debt agreement the Mexican government had undertaken substantial economic reforms with some encouraging results. Mexico had made sustained efforts to devalue its exchange rate and reduce its budget deficit. It made substantial progress in liberalizing the trade regime and adopting measures to encourage investment. Mexico has also made progress in privatizing state-owned enterprises. At the outset of negotiations Mexico had foreign debt of almost $ billion of which approximately one-half was medium- and long-term loans owed to commer cial banks. Annual interest payments amounted to percent of export receipts in Mexico 's difficulties in servicing its commercial debt were reflected in steep discounts on the secondary market of percent in early The debt agreement that was reached reflects both the large size of Mexico 's commercial debt and its need for cash-flow relief The agreement provides for debt and debt-service reduction as well as some new credit. It gives banks a choice of three options all of which lower Mexico 's current payment burden. Banks may ( ) swap existing loans for new bonds with a 35-percent discount on the initial principal value at a customary spread above the London Interbank Offer Rate ( LIBOR ) ; or ( ) exchange loans for bonds with the same principal value and a reduced fixed rate of interest ; or ( ) provide new loans over years equivalent to one-quarter of their existing loans at the customary spread above LIBOR. Funds from the IMF the World Bank Japan and Mexico are used to provide collateral for the principal and part of the interest on the debt and debt-service reduced bonds Mexico may benefit substantially from a reduction in its debtservice obligations. Preliminary estimates of gross interest savings on payments to banks are above $ billion per year. Gross cashflow relief between and is estimated to include approximately $ billion in interest savings $ billion in rescheduled amortization and $ billion in new money. It appears that Mexico has also benefited from favorable initial reactions to the agreement in financial markets. Between July and December domestic interest rates in Mexico fell by about percentage points which if sustained would reduce government payments on domestic debt substantially and thereby reduce the government budget deficit. There have also been substantial capital inflows amounting to around $ billion over the course of the year attributable in part to the debt agreement The Philippines In August the Philippines became the second country to reach an accord with its commercial bank creditors under the Brady Initiative. Along with debt reduction new lending is an integral part of the Philippine agreement reflecting an urgent need for money to close a large balance of payments financing gap and a relatively small level of commercial bank debt. Less than percent of the outstanding $ billion in the Philippines ' foreign debt is medium- and long-term credit from commercial banks The Philippine agreement gives banks a choice between extending new credit at a customary spread above LIBOR and selling existing loans to the Philippine government at a 50-percent discount in line with secondary market discounts. The cash buyback will total $ billion in outstanding debt ; the money for the cash buyback will be provided by the World Bank the IMF Japan and the Philippine government. It is too early to predict the amount of new credit that commercial banks will extend. Although the agreement emphasizes new credit the level of buybacks is expected to exceed that of new credit so that the overall level of debt will decline along with annual interest payments. The success of the debt agreement will depend on effective implementation of the economic reform program adopted by the Philippine government Costa Rica In October commercial banks and the Costa Rican government reached an agreement in principle. Commercial bank debt represents $ billion of Costa Rica 's total $ billion in foreign debt. The Costa Rican situation differs markedly from that of both Mexico and the Philippines in that the $ billion of commercial bank debt although onerous from the point of view of domestic resources represents a small percentage of the developing country debt of any particular commercial bank. The commercial bank debt includes $ million in accumulated interest arrears. Costa Rica 's poor debt-service record is reflected in a secondary market discount greater than percent. Accordingly the agreement places primary emphasis on debt reduction and makes special provisions for the interest arrears The agreement reached with the banks is designed to achieve a 60-percent reduction in commercial bank debt consistent with Costa Rica 's servicing capability. It gives banks the option of selling their existing loans to the Costa Rican government at a discount of above percent or swapping existing loans for bonds with the same face value and a reduced fixed interest rate. Banks tendering at least percent of their outstanding loans for buyback will receive additional enhancements on the conversion of their remaining loans in order to achieve the target of 60-percent reduction overall. The treatment of the arrears on the debt that is not sold back to the Costa Rican government is more stringent. Costa Rica must provide an up-front cash payment for percent of these arrears and the remainder will be converted to a 15-year bond at market rates Maintaining Flexibility The three agreements differ substantially in ways that reflect the different needs of the various debtors and creditors. The Mexican agreement combines debt and debt-service reduction and new lending in the most varied of the three packages. This approach reflects the large size of the Mexican debt the diversity of its creditors and the Mexican government 's need for both increased cash flow and debt reduction. The emphasis on new lending in the Philippine agreement reflects the large size of the financing gap relative to the commercial bank debt and the relatively smaller burden of commercial debt. The emphasis on debt-service reduction and debt relief in the Costa Rican agreement reflects the small and diffuse holdings of the country 's debt among commercial banks and its inability to service the outstanding debt The flexibility of the Brady Initiative will be important in addressing the varied needs of debtor countries based on their demonstrated commitment to appropriate economic reforms. The common feature among future debt agreements is likely to be an emphasis on reducing debt and debt service and on promoting an economic environment that mobilizes domestic and foreign resources for productive investment in order to promote growth SUMMARY Economic reforms are critical to reviving growth and raising living standards in the highly indebted developing countries just as in the centrally planned economies of Eastern Europe Debt and debt-service reduction by commercial banks in countries that undertake market-oriented reforms can be important in easing the transition to sustainable growth and healthy economies. It is a key component of the new U.S. initiative for the revival of growth in heavily indebted developing countries Access to well-functioning international financial markets in the 1990s will play a central role in the continued development of those countries that are currently undertaking needed reforms DEVELOPMENTS IN JAPAN AND OTHER ASIAN PACIFIC RIM ECONOMIES As a group the Asian Pacific Rim economies Japan Hong Kong Indonesia Malaysia the Philippines Singapore South Korea Taiwan and Thailand present a sharp contrast to the severely indebted countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. Most of the Asian Pacific Rim economies have benefited enormously from the international trading system achieving high rates of growth and increases in productivity and living standards. These economies in general have maintained an outward orientation in their economic policies and have succeeded in diversifying and strengthening their export bases. The economic policies employed by most of the governments in this region of the world have been very sensitive to the power of the marketplace. Owing to a strong diversified export base and a reliance on market incentives even countries with high levels of external indebtedness such as Korea have managed to maintain exceptional growth THE ASIAN PACIFIC RIM 'S ECONOMIC EXPANSION Rates of growth in the Asian Pacific Rim which have at times reached into the double digits are changing the global distribution of wealth production income and trade. The Asian Pacific Rim 's share of world gross domestic product rose from percent in to percent in Changes in trade flows have been even greater. Since the Asian Pacific Rim 's share of total world exports of manufactures has risen from to percent. A radical transformation has also occurred in the Asian Pacific Rim 's financial position. As recently as the Asian Pacific Rim was a net debtor to the rest of the world and held a modest percent of the world 's international financial reserves. By the late 1980s it had become a major net supplier of capital holding percent of global international reserves The economic successes of the Asian Pacific Rim economies have been accompanied in each instance by high rates of investment and saving rapid technological transfer and expanding international trade. In Asian Pacific Rim economies invested almost percent of their gross domestic product while saving percent. Still relying heavily on imported technology even the Asian Pacific Rim 's technological leader Japan paid $ million more in licensing fees and royalties than it received. High rates of investment and heavy use of technology developed abroad have gone hand in hand with an increasing role for international trade. Exports rose from percent of the Pacific Rim 's gross domestic product in to percent in Excluding Japan the numbers are striking with the share of exports rising from percent in to percent in The composition of exports has also changed dramatically. Since Japan has shifted from being the world 's preeminent exporter of textile products to being a net importer of textiles and apparel and now two-thirds of Japanese exports are machinery and transport equipment. For the Asian Pacific Rim as a whole machinery and transport equipment rose from percent of total exports in to percent in Although the performances of the Asian Pacific Rim 's successful economies have much in common the policies pursued have varied greatly. In some Asian Pacific Rim economies such as South Korea the government has had a major role in shaping the allocation of resources. In others such as Hong Kong the government interfered relatively little with market processes. In Singapore and Hong Kong foreign investment has been welcomed and has played a central role in promoting economic growth. By contrast Japan 's extraordinary performance has been achieved with domestic capital and management. In Taiwan economic policy helped small firms to play a predominant role while in South Korea govern ment policy on many occasions has discriminated in favor of largescale firms Rapid changes in the Asian Pacific Rim 's export structure have at times imposed a faster-than-desired degree of structural adjustment on its trading partners. The emergence of exports from the Asian Pacific Rim economies in sectors long established elsewhere has often forced a reallocation of capital and labor in other countries. Although painful such reallocations can be beneficial because they result in each country specializing in the goods and services that it can produce relatively most efficiently leading ultimately to gains for both producers and consumers. The rising share of global economic activity taking place in the Asian Pacific Rim has made structural transformation there an increasingly important issue for other parts of the global economy. This issue is seen most vividly in Japan 's international economic relations particularly those with the United States JAPAN AND THE WORLD ECONOMY Sales of Japanese goods in the United States have greatly benefited American consumers and demonstrate the significant gains from international trade. But Japan 's success in American markets as well as the large and persistent Japanese trade surplus and complaints by U.S. firms about difficulties in penetrating Japanese markets have prompted charges of unfair Japanese trade practices. Japan does maintain many important barriers on agricultural imports but has removed all but a few quotas and imposes low tariff barriers to imports of manufactures. Nonetheless scope remains for further development of Japanese policies practices and institutions to increase trade in manufactured products. Many such developments would help domestic markets to work more competitively. Japanese consumers would gain from lower prices and producers would gain from better functioning markets. Even if the volume of trade increased however the effect on market shares of U.S. or any other country 's products in Japan would be difficult to predict Several avenues to open Japanese markets further are being pursued in the United States. Some barriers such as Japan 's ban on rice imports are the subject of multilateral trade negotiations in GATT. There also have been recent bilateral trade discussions under the " Super " process. Super is part of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act which directs the U.S. Trade Representative and the Administration to identify " priority practices including major barriers and trade distorting practices the elimination of which are likely to have the most significant potential to increase U.S. exports... " and to initiate investigations aimed at eliminating the practices or barriers identified. Under these cri teria the Administration identified three Japanese practices in : government procurement of super computers government procurement of satellites and standards and codes for wood products. ( A total of three other practices were identified under Super two in India and one in Brazil. ) In identifying these practices the Administration has endeavored to support its principle of expanding a rules-based system for open markets and an open trading system. By naming only practices that are tangible and observable Administration policy contrasts sharply with a " managed trade " approach which would require the U.S. Government to second-guess market outcomes and to attempt to achieve different patterns of imports and exports by regulation. Rather than try to mandate trade flows and market shares U.S. trade initiatives seek to ensure that domestic and foreign firms have equal opportunities to compete and that markets not governments determine the outcomes A broader set of issues involving domestic structure and institutions in both the United States and Japan are currently under discussion in a series of bilateral negotiations called the Structural Impediments Initiative. These talks which focus on aspects of each economy that may create barriers to trade or impede domestic and international economic adjustment provide a forum for two-way exchange of perspectives and concerns. While saving and investment have been major topics of discussion a range of issues has been raised. In many cases these issues have already been raised domestically in both Japan and the United States. U.S. interest in these talks has focused on structural problems in six general areas : Saving and Investment. Reducing the current account imbalance requires reducing the gap between saving and investment. It seems unwise to pursue policies that would lower saving. More public investment by the Japanese government would reduce the gap and would probably improve the quality of life in Japan. Investment in parkland waste disposal systems and other social infrastructure in Japan is rather low relative to other industrial nations Land-Use Policy. Removing the bias toward agriculture in Japanese land-use policies would reduce land prices in Japan and thereby stimulate new construction investment in Japan by households and by domestic and foreign firms Pricing Mechanisms. A joint study of pricing by the Japanese and U.S. Governments found that prices of a variety of goods tended to be higher in Japan than prices of identical products in the United States in many cases even where these products were manufactured in Japan. The removal of structural impediments should work to reduce these differentials Distribution Systems. Laws restricting competition in the distribution and transportation sectors lead to high prices for Japanese consumers and can limit access to the Japanese market Antitrust Policy. For example a more vigorous enforcement of Japan 's Antimonopoly Law would ensure freer entry into Japanese markets and could have an important impact on Japanese trade Keiretsu Relationships. ( Used here to mean firms owning each other 's stock. ) Promoting shareholder rights and ensuring that management can not insulate itself from market discipline may promote increased foreign direct investment in Japan The Japanese government has also raised points about the U.S economy. High on the Japanese list is the low U.S. saving rate discussed in Chapter of this Report. Other areas include investment incentives export promotion and work force training and education Trade Barriers and the Current Account Current account surpluses and deficits are macroeconomic phenomena that primarily reflect the gap between domestic saving and domestic investment. Japanese domestic institutions and trade barriers such as Japan 's continuing protection of its agriculture sector can impair productivity and reduce real incomes by misallocating resources. There are good reasons to support work toward structural reform. Producers are likely to gain from more open markets while consumers may benefit from lower prices as firms produce more efficiently. These gains will be enjoyed by Japan as well as by its trading partners. But trade and structural barriers will only affect the overall current account balances of Japan or Japan 's trading partners to the extent they affect savings and investment behavior It is not plausible to attribute either the $ billion increase in Japan 's current account surplus between and or its decline by more than $ billion in the past years to changes in Japanese trade barriers. Although structural policies and institutions that affect trade can influence the saving-investment gap there are other determinants such as fiscal and monetary policies and demographic factors. In common with the experience in all other industrialized economies these factors are likely to have played a much larger role than trade barriers in explaining Japan 's recent current account developments. Efforts to reduce the U.S. current account deficit will also need to focus primarily on measures to raise public and private saving Japanese policies and institutional structure may have a greater effect on the volume and commodity composition of Japanese trade than on overall external balances. Japan stands out from most other industrial countries because it is rarely a major exporter and a major importer in the same industry. Some statistical studies have concluded that this trade pattern might be expected of a country with Japan 's resource endowments ; however others do not share this finding. In any case where low imports of manufactured or agricultural products result from distortionary Japanese government practices change is in order Changes in policies that raise Japanese imports may also raise Japanese exports. Unless these policy changes affect Japan 's saving-investment gap exports may increase to offset a large portion of increases in imports. Consider barriers that act like a tax on imports for example on agricultural products. Such barriers will tend to raise domestic prices of rice and other agricultural goods harming Japanese consumers. They will also tend to raise prices of labor land and other resources used to produce agricultural goods These higher input prices will tend to make Japanese export production less competitive as well. Thus the import barriers also act as a tax on exports. Removal of the import barriers is likely to increase both Japanese imports and Japanese exports. The net effect on overall trade balances is unclear While there are barriers to open markets in many countries bilateral trade imbalances between pairs of countries are not in and of themselves evidence of such barriers. For example even if the overall external accounts of both Japan and the United States were balanced and market barriers had been eliminated worldwide neither the United States nor Japan would have trade exactly balanced with each of its individual trading partners. Because countries have different endowments of land skilled and unskilled labor and capital and different tastes and technologies each has a comparative advantage in producing a different set of goods and services. A country such as Japan which has relatively few natural resources domestically should be expected to have trade deficits on average with countries that export raw materials offset by trade surpluses on average with countries that import the manufactured goods Japan produces relatively efficiently. Bilateral imbalances can not justify increased protectionism Thus removal of trade barriers while desirable in and of itself would not necessarily change Japan 's bilateral surplus with the United States. For example removal of the Japanese beef quota now in progress will raise Japan 's imports of beef. The higher imports could come from Australia the United States or other beef exporters. Thus the effect on particular bilateral balances is uncertain Furthermore the beef quota removal is likely to have little effect on saving or investment in Japan and thus is unlikely to affect Japan 's overall trade surplus very much SUMMARY Those Asian Pacific Rim economies that exhibit rapid and sustained growth provide striking examples of the potential bene fits from market-oriented economic policies. These economies have benefited substantially from the expanding international trading system. They are becoming an increasingly important part of the global economy The persistent U.S. current account deficit and Japanese current account surplus are primarily macroeconomic phenomena Macroeconomic policy is the key to improving overall current account imbalances There are gains to domestic and foreign producers and consumers from changes in government practices that allow markets to allocate resources more efficiently. Such changes will only affect overall current account imbalances however to the extent they affect the saving-investment gap. Furthermore bilateral trade imbalances are determined by a host of factors and are not in and of themselves evidence of trade or market barriers There is growing recognition that like tariffs or quotas a country 's domestic policies can have important implications for international trade. For example antitrust regulations or distribution systems may impede a foreign firm 's access to domestic markets ECONOMIC INTEGRATION IN WESTERN EUROPE Sweeping economic changes are under way in Western Europe as the member states of the European Community ( EC ) move toward elimination of economic barriers among them by The members have a population of million and a GNP close in size to that of the United States. Since the late 1960s they have progressively reduced internal restrictions on the movement of goods people and capital in order to reap the economic benefits of integration. In agreement was reached to implement a set of initiatives by The EC initiatives are the most ambitious set of reforms so far. The kinds of benefits anticipated from increased integration among EC members are similar to those motivating the U.S.-Canada Free-Trade Agreement ( FTA ) which went into force on January The EC initiatives promise to move the EC closer to the level of economic integration enjoyed by the States within the U.S. market particularly if there is further integration of monetary policy through the proposed formation of a European monetary union The European Community was established in by the Treaty of Rome. The original six members of what was often called the Common Market were Belgium France West Germany Italy Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Denmark Ireland and the United Kingdom became members in followed by Greece in and Portugal and Spain in Since the late 1960s the EC has operated as a customs union with a common external tariff. Tariffs and quantitative restrictions on trade within the EC have been largely eliminated. Citizens of member countries are permitted to reside in and travel to other member countries freely for the purpose of work The new initiatives focus on the remaining barriers among EC countries. Some examples of these barriers are : ( ) differences between countries in more than industrial standards and technical regulations ( for example safety standards on machinery and health standards on agricultural products ) ; ( ) delays at frontiers for customs purposes and related administrative burdens for companies that sell or purchase goods and services in other member countries ; ( ) restrictions on participation in competition for one EC member 's public procurement by suppliers from other EC member countries ; and ( ) restrictions on firms ' ability to sell or purchase services or to become established in certain service activities in other EC countries. These restrictions have been particularly important in financial and transport services where barriers to the entry of new firms also appear to be substantial. Taken together these barriers impose a substantial economic cost. Large and persistent differences in consumer prices among EC members suggest that these barriers allow for a considerable degree of market segmentation and reinforce the noncompetitive structure of many member country markets The progress toward removing internal barriers has already been impressive. By June the EC Commission had adopted about one-half of the directives in the plan to implement EC However much work remains to be done to achieve the degree of integration envisaged in the EC initiatives and obstacles to elimination of some existing barriers remain. For example security threats especially terrorism make it difficult to remove border controls. These controls also help national fiscal authorities to collect taxes the structure of which still differs widely across member countries. Proposals for fiscal harmonization are still under discussion. The process of economic integration in Europe should be seen as an ongoing and dynamic process that is likely to continue well beyond POTENTIAL GAINS The gains from economic integration in the EC may be substantial. The EC Commission estimates that integration of the internal market will raise the annual potential growth rate of the EC by around percentage point through Longer run dynamic effects may sustain a strong growth rate for several additional years The creation of a single European market will present substantial opportunities and cost savings to firms operating across national boundaries. Implementation of the EC initiatives will remove constraints that prevent firms from fully and efficiently using their resources. It will also establish a more competitive environment challenging firms that have grown complacent in insulated national markets to innovate and operate more efficiently. Harmonization of technical standards and tax codes and reductions in the administrative costs of trade between countries will enable firms to produce on a much larger scale at substantial savings. Integration of financial services markets is expected to lower the cost of capital Efficiency gains are also expected from more competitive bidding on the sizable member country government procurement expenditures U.S. firms and consumers also stand to benefit from the increased integration of the European economy. As long as barriers to trade and investment by firms from countries outside the EC are not raised U.S. firms will also have new opportunities to invest in and supply goods to a large prosperous integrated market. American consumers will benefit to the extent that the EC reforms stimulate increased competition and cheaper imports of EC products. In percent of total U.S. imports came from the EC and exports to the EC accounted for percent of total U.S. exports Growth in the European market induced by the EC initiatives may increase the amount of the EC 's external trade which would raise U.S. exports to Europe POTENTIAL RISKS The full gains will only be realized however if the EC remains open to the rest of the world. If barriers to external EC trade rise U.S. and other non-EC firms and EC consumers may suffer. Even without new external barriers American firms may find some opportunities constricted to the extent that the easier movement of goods within Europe gives insiders an advantage. EC consumers and firms may substitute products from firms of other member countries for imports from the United States or other nonmembers The EC should continue to have a strong vested interest in a liberal international trading system because it benefits from substantial foreign trade. While growth in trade within the EC has been percent faster than growth in the EC 's external trade between and external trade still accounts for more than percent of the EC 's total trade. Indeed the EC 's exports to nonmembers are percent of world exports as against a U.S. share of percent and a Japanese share of percent. Exports to nonmembers are equivalent to percent of EC gross national product compared with percent for the United States and percent for Japan. These external interests are too important to the EC to risk jeopardizing them by inward-looking protectionist policies. In addition low external trade barriers will continue to be the best insurance against EC firms losing their international competitiveness EC is not an indication that the international economic system is breaking down into competing regional blocks. But it is important for the United States and other nations to monitor closely the developments in EC Two areas have already been the focus of much attention Rules of Origin One area of particular concern to U.S. firms is the definition and administration of rules governing the determination of the origin of products in the EC. The determination of origin influences the regulations under which products are sold such as tariffs and duties quotas sanctions and preferential treatment in trade and government procurement. There is concern that adoption of more stringent or less transparent rules of origin within the EC will result in discriminatory treatment of foreign products especially intermediate goods. Avoidance of such rules may compel foreign companies to locate production facilities in EC markets and for foreign companies subject to antidumping duties to obtain inputs from EC producers rather than third-country producers. Rules of origin are an important and controversial issue for the international trading system more generally. Accordingly the United States is engaged in multilateral discussions to develop disciplines within GATT as well as bilateral consultations with the EC to ensure greater transparency clarity and predictability in rules of origin Financial Services An early EC proposal on financial services seemed to call for " mirror-image reciprocity/ ' where foreign firms would receive the same treatment in the EC market that EC firms receive in the market of the foreign firm. The difficulty with this type of reciprocity is that nations have different legal and regulatory systems often justifiably. The original proposal would have meant that firms from different countries would receive different treatment in the EC. The EC has since modified its proposal ; the current proposal comes closer to the " national treatment " principle favored by the United States. Under this principle foreign firms would be treated the same as EC firms in the EC market as long as EC firms were treated like foreign firms in the foreign markets. This is another area where developments within the EC may have important lessons for broader multilateral agreements. The United States will continue to monitor EC developments in this area and will continue to negotiate for a multilateral agreement on financial and other services within GATT SUMMARY EC represents important potential opportunities and benefits for U.S. firms and consumers as well as for EC firms and consumers. Whether U.S. firms and consumers benefit hinges on the continued openness of the European market to foreign trade and investment Concerns that economic integration under EC will lead to " Fortress Europe " appear to be exaggerated EC carries risks as well as opportunities. The United States and other countries must continue to monitor developments so as to minimize the major risk : that other countries ' access to the new market will be restricted which is likely to limit gains to EC members as well as nonmembers TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND GATT A fundamental principle underlying the economic policies of this Administration is that governments should establish clear and credible rules for economic policies in which private-sector decisionmaking and entrepreneurial activity can flourish. This principle is as applicable to international trade policy as to fiscal and monetary policy. The goal of U.S. trade policy is to create ever-expanding trade opportunities free of barriers and based on a system of clear and enforceable rules Acting on this principle in the trade area the Administration is committed to initiatives aimed at getting governments out of the business of managing trade whether it be through export-restraining arrangements subsidies to basic industries managed marketing arrangements agricultural import restrictions or any of the myriad other ways governments distort international trade flows Some of the more important U.S. initiatives have occurred in the multilateral trade negotiations of GATT ( Box ) Several Administration initiatives have been pursued in bilateral or regional contexts such as those reviewed earlier in this chapter in the section on the Asian Pacific Rim. But by focusing on rules such as nondiscrimination by ensuring that reductions in barriers apply to all countries and by eschewing the fixed quantity approach of managed trade these efforts have also helped to increase trade opportunities for all countries and are consistent with U.S. support for multilateral trade liberalization. In fact the principles guiding the architects of GATT the principal international agreement regulating world trade are the same as those underlying U.S. trade policy GATT comprises rules and mechanisms to encourage freer and fairer international trade. It was established in after a period in which deviations from the principles of free trade were taken to extremes and severely damaged the world economy. Many industrial nations resorted to extremely protectionist trade policies in the 1930s. The disastrous consequence of these policies was a sharp contraction in world trade that lengthened and worsened the Great Depression B0K What Is GATT ? At the conclusion of World War II the United States and other countries sought to establish rules for the international trading system based on the principles of free nondiscrimina * tory trade * The United States promoted the position that nontariff barriers should be abolished and that all tariffs should be reduced through international negotiations The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was drafted in as part of efforts to establish a broader International Trade Organization * GATT was signed by countries participating in a conference in Geneva in and went into effect to * Since then membership has grown to countries that account for percent of world trade * The GATT system serves several purposes : * GATT provides a uniform set of rules and disciplines for the conduct of international trade * Each member country must give the most favorable trade treatment it gives any country to all other GATT members * Tariffs are to be used rather than other types of trade barriers * GATT provides an institutional framework to support international consultations and to facilitate settlement of trade policy disputes * GATT provides a system for trade policy liberalization through periodic multilateral negotiations to lower tariffs and since the 1970s * also reduce nontariff barriers * Since GATT has sponsored seven rounds of tariff reductions. These rounds successfully reduced tariffs and expanded international trade. The international trading system continues to evolve and GATT needs to address these changes. As tariffs have decreased nontariff trade barriers have increased. Moreover areas poorly covered by GATT such as agriculture or not covered at all such as services intellectual property rights and investment are of much greater importance than they once were. All told $ trillion or more of international trade in goods and services may not be adequately covered by the GATT rules THE URUGUAY ROUND The President has made a successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round his highest trade priority. The Uruguay Round was launched in and is scheduled to end in The final year of negotiations will be critical to the outcome. The negotiations are intended to improve the existing GATT articles and procedures to negotiate reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers and to address specific areas. In addition to agriculture discussed below some of these areas are : Intellectual Property Protection. The trading system needs a comprehensive agreement on the protection of intellectual property rights such as patents and copyrights. It should include standards and procedures for enforcement of these rights both internally and internationally Services. GATT rules need to be extended to areas such as telecommunications services where many countries currently impose trade restrictions Trade-Related Investment Measures. Trade-related restrictions on foreign investment are used increasingly by many countries. These measures distort trade and result in resource misallocation. GATT needs to develop rules and disciplines in this important area Textiles. The Multi-Fiber Arrangement is an exception to GATT rules that allows restrictions on textiles trade in many countries Trade in textiles needs to be brought under normal GATT rules and disciplines Integration of Developing Economies. A major focus in these negotiations is to develop a system of rules that extends market-opening obligations to all participants. Bringing developing countries more fully into GATT will require tightening GATT rules governing the use of balance of payments difficulties to suspend GATT obligations and will also require greater participation by developing countries in GATT trade-liberalizing obligations Subsidies. The GATT negotiations offer the opportunity to establish internationally credible and enforceable regulations or disciplines for subsidies. This would include extending regulations for export subsidies and introducing prohibitions on domestic subsidies. It would include expanding export subsidy prohibitions to agricultural products AGRICULTURAL POLICY AND GATT Among the areas agriculture is perhaps the best illustration of the limitations of the GATT system as well as of its potential to further the process of global economic integration. GATT operates on a consensus basis and when GATT was established agriculture was exempted from some of its rules to obtain political support for its ratification. At that time agriculture was not an important trading sector of most economies. Since then agriculture has undergone a transformation from a national to a global industry. The United States the largest food exporter in the world exported about million metric tons of agricultural products in the 1950s and now exports nearly million metric tons Technology trade and government policy have all played prominent roles in this transformation. The postwar technological revolution began an unparalleled period of productivity growth in agriculture in the United States and elsewhere. U.S. agricultural productivity has grown more than percent since the 1950s and food exporting regions such as Canada Australia and Europe have experienced similar growth. The rice producing areas of Asia have seen rapid productivity growth since the mid-1960s. Agricultural markets became international as production expanded in the developed economies and global population income and food demand grew. The developing countries became major net importers of food with a net deficit in their food production of million metric tons in projected to grow to at least million metric tons by the year Throughout the world governments became increasingly involved in the production marketing and trade of agricultural products. Measurements of agricultural subsidies calculated by the Department of Agriculture show that subsidies in food-exporting countries increased substantially in the 1980s Agricultural Policies Agricultural policies of the major food-exporting and food-importing countries now stand as a major impediment to more complete integration of agriculture into the international trading system Because of the adverse impacts of agricultural policies on international markets agricultural policy reform has become a priority for many countries participating in the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations. Indeed some countries are insisting on progress in agriculture before they will agree to reform in other areas All governments intervene in their agricultural sectors either on behalf of producers or at their expense. Industrial economies tend to promote producers ' interests through protection or subsidization Developing economies on the other hand often use policies that have the effect of taxing agricultural producers for revenue to promote industrial development or maintain price ceilings to benefit urban consumers. In both cases policy encourages a different pattern of resource use from what would occur in the absence of intervention. The result has been substantial distortions of agricultural resource use production and trade around the world The increasing degree to which policies have disrupted world agricultural trade has fueled the movement toward international policy reform. The inflexible trade and domestic policies of most countries limited the ability of and the incentive for their agricul tural sectors to adapt readily to abrupt changes in world market conditions caused by weather and political shocks. Recent droughts and historically low grain stocks have rekindled fears of a world food crisis. Attempts to insulate domestic producers from changes in global market conditions have depleted the budgets of many governments and strained international relations. The failure of existing policies to address the needs of the emerging global agriculture is clearly a major reason for the willingness of many governments to put agriculture on the agenda for international policy reform. It will be an important and historic achievement if the GATT member countries are able to agree on improved and strengthened GATT rules for agriculture Recent studies suggest that meaningful policy reform would yield significant economic benefits. These studies conclude that multilateral reduction in trade-distorting policies would lead to higher world prices higher market-generated farm income less costly income support for farmers and improved global economic welfare Several studies have estimated the global economic gains from complete policy liberalization to be about $ billion annually and $ billion for the United States. The GATT reforms advocated by the United States which would eliminate the most trade-distorting policies could be expected to yield a large fraction of such benefits AGRICULTURAL POLICY REFORM IN GATT The participants in the GATT negotiations reached a consensus in April to agree by the end of on a long-term agricultural reform program. The long-term objective of the reforms is to provide for substantial progressive reductions in agricultural support and protection sustained over an agreed period of time to correct existing distortions in world agricultural markets and to prevent further restrictions and distortions. A key accomplishment of the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations thus far is the recognition that domestic policies are a major cause of world market distortions. Meaningful reform must therefore address both domestic and trade policies Proposals for changes in the GATT rules and disciplines to achieve agricultural policy reform were submitted to GATT in late by major participants including the United States the European Community Japan and the Cairns Group Argentina Australia Brazil Canada Chile Columbia Hungary Indonesia Malaysia New Zealand the Philippines Thailand and Uruguay Although there is now agreement about the need for policy reform there is little agreement on how to achieve it. One of the basic difficulties in developing GATT rules and disciplines for agricultural policy is that every country in GATT has its own complicated policies. The GATT negotiators can not write domestic policy for any country. The challenge facing the GATT negotiators is to develop guidelines that can help countries move to less distorting policies without compromising any country 's sovereignty The U.S. Proposal for Comprehensive Reform The United States has proposed broad principles for bringing agriculture into the GATT system. The application of these principles in a strengthened and more effective set of GATT rules would move the world toward a fairer and more market-oriented trading system. The U.S. proposal provides for reform in the areas of import access and export competition internal support and sanitary regulations pertaining to agricultural products The U.S. proposal to improve import access would convert all nontariff barriers to tariffs and then reduce these tariffs to zero or low levels over a 10-year period. The GATT article that currently allows countries to use import quotas to manage their domestic agricultural policies would be eliminated. Nontariff barriers would be converted to tariffs by computing the difference between internal and external prices and imposing an equivalent tariff. The U.S proposal thus conforms to original GATT principles for liberalizing trade through tariff reductions. The U.S. proposal calls for a 5-year phaseout of all export subsidies except for bona fide food aid. The proposal also calls for elimination of restrictions and prohibitions on exports of products in short supply. Safeguard measures are proposed to achieve an orderly transition process A major problem with most domestic agricultural policies is that they subsidize farmers in ways that artificially stimulate production and thus indirectly distort trade. The U.S. proposal limits the types of domestic subsidies that countries can use to those that have the least effect on trade. The most distorting policies such as administered price policies and income-support policies linked to production would be phased out over years. Other less distorting policies such as general input subsidies would be subject to certain disciplines. Policies that would be permitted include payments not linked to production or marketing decisions environmental and conservation programs general support for research and its dissemination to farmers and disaster relief TOWARD U.S. POLICY REFORM The President 's farm policy goals are a market-oriented agriculture that preserves an income safety net for the farm sector and meets other objectives such as environmental quality. The Administration is also committed to global agricultural policy reform fully consistent with its GATT proposal. Agricultural policy reform in the United States would maintain and enhance the U.S. role as the major world food exporter while furthering global reform. But many other countries also subsidize production and export of agri cultural commodities or restrict imports. Policy reform in the United States must be accompanied by comparable reforms in other countries if all countries are to reap the gains possible from mutual reductions in agricultural subsidies Benefits From U.S. Policy Reform The most important reason why the United States should simultaneously pursue agricultural policy reform both at home and abroad is the economic self-interest of the United States. The move to less trade-distorting policies could improve the performance of the U.S. farm sector and benefit consumers through increased availability and lower prices of some foods. The U.S. comparative advantage in the production of major traded commodities notably food and feed grains means that a large segment of U.S. agriculture can compete successfully in international markets when prices are determined by market forces rather than government subsidies Because the United States is one of the largest agricultural producers in the world agricultural subsidies are particularly costly to U.S. taxpayers. Reforms consistent with the U.S. GATT proposal could help achieve the President 's farm policy goal of a more market-oriented agriculture at lower budget and economic cost. Reductions in the budget cost of U.S. farm programs can make a contribution to the goal of a balanced Federal budget. After deducting Social Security defense and interest payments on the national debt from the Federal budget direct price and income-support payments to agriculture were about percent of the remaining budget in fiscal but fell to percent in fiscal because of high prices caused by the U.S. drought. Without suitable policy reforms a return to normal weather could lead to lower commodity prices and significantly higher budget costs in the 1990s Moving From Price Supports to an Income Safety Net Continuing productivity growth in global agriculture will make U.S. and other countries ' farm policies based on price support increasingly costly. This productivity growth is the cause of the persistent downward trend in real farm prices since the 1950s shown in Chart The chart also shows that price supports have followed the same trend as real farm prices. This is because it is too costly for the government to keep prices above the long-run trend The U.S. Government supports prices for certain major commodities ( including grains and dairy products ) by buying commodities and holding them as stocks an expensive practice and by managing supply through acreage reduction programs The acreage reduction programs are a policy response to the high costs of directly supporting prices by holding stocks. This pattern of stock buildup and supply management through acreage control is evident in Chart which shows wheat stocks and the forgone wheat output attributable to the idling of land through the wheat programs. A similar pattern of stock buildup and supply control occurred for feed grains. Two such policy cycles have taken place : one in the 1950s and 1960s and another in the late 1970s and 1980s Chart REAL WHEAT PRICES. Real U.S. market and support prices follow a similar long-term trend Price per bushel ( $ ) Market price Source : Department of Agriculture Reliance on supply control reduces U.S. agriculture 's exports by taking land out of production that could be producing crops for export. Moreover because farmers are provided an incentive to make cropping decisions according to program rules rather than market signals the programs reduce the responsiveness of U.S. agriculture to changes in world market conditions and reduce its international competitiveness Price and income supports redistribute income within the agricultural sector in unintended ways. Farmers who own assets when a price-support or supply-control policy is invoked earn capital gains because their land increases in value. Persons who subsequently want to become farmers must pay the capitalized value of the farm programs when they buy land. These newer farmers ' economic survival then depends on the continuation of the support programs. Having paid the capitalized value of the programs in Chart WHEAT STOCKS. Large stocks lead the government to reduce acreage and thus output Millions of bushels Total stocks ' \ Note : Output forgone equals average yield times acres idled Source : Department of Agriculture order to farm they need the high program prices and income subsidies to break even Understandably farmers are concerned that they will have to bear much of the cost of adjusting to a new domestic policy regime A reform program thus may need to include provisions that facilitate adjustments in the farm sector caused by policy change. To provide income support to farmers in a manner consistent with the principles espoused by the United States in the GATT negotiations policy could be based on criteria related to income not production An income-based safety net for agriculture could facilitate adjustment protect farmer income from unforeseen circumstances such as weather and political events and do so at a much lower cost to the economy than the existing system SUMMARY The principle underlying U.S. Administration trade policy is to expand the current rules-based trading system to foster open and competitive markets. The Administration strongly opposes all attempts by governments to manage trade GATT provides a set of rules for the international trading system and a process of multilateral negotiations through which further liberalization of trade can be achieved. The United States played a key role in the development of the GATT system in the late 1940s and continues to play a leadership role U.S. objectives for the Uruguay Round are to broaden and strengthen GATT rules and disciplines and to reach agreement with other members on reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers. Some of the areas under negotiation in the Uruguay Round are agriculture intellectual property rights trade-related investment measures services and subsidies Agricultural policy reform has become a priority for many countries in the Uruguay Round because domestic agricultural policies are becoming increasingly costly and are an impediment to trade policy liberalization An income-based safety net could provide income protection for farmers in a manner consistent with the principles advocated by the United States in the Uruguay Round CONCLUSION Recent developments in the global economy underscore the importance of free and competitive markets to promote and sustain growth. This Administration has taken a leadership role in promoting the development of open markets worldwide through important new initiatives to support economic reform in centrally planned and severely indebted countries. It has also played a leadership role in efforts to extend the GATT rules for the international trading system so as to eliminate barriers to open markets Market-oriented economic reforms can help to revive economic performance among the centrally planned economies as well as among the highly indebted developing countries. While these countries must implement the necessary policy changes assistance from the United States and other developed nations can be important The United States continues to provide financial and technical assistance to support reform efforts in Poland and Hungary. It has also initiated a new debt strategy to support reforms in Mexico the Philippines Costa Rica and other indebted countries through reduction of debt burdens The dramatic steps underway in the European Community to create a single unified market by highlight the potential gains from removal of barriers. The elimination of artificial restrictions that prevent free movement of goods services labor and capital across national boundaries promises to raise growth in the EC member countries the United States and all nations that participate in the global economy. These gains will be realized as long as the EC provides non-EC members access to its newly expanded internal market. The dynamic Asian Pacific Rim economies also provide examples of how reliance on both domestic and international markets can generate economic expansion and raise living standards. These economies will also gain from further steps to remove barriers to open markets All countries must press forward to facilitate and safeguard a smoothly functioning global economy. Conflicts should be resolved through negotiation of rules. In this regard GATT is a critical multilateral institution providing a unified set of rules and disciplines for trade policies of member countries and a framework for policy liberalization and dispute settlement. The current round of negotiations seeks to strengthen this rules-based system in existing areas such as agriculture and extend it to important new areas such as services and intellectual property. The President has made successful completion of the Uruguay Round a major trade priority In today 's highly integrated world economy international economic policy issues are inseparably intertwined with domestic policy issues. International features arise naturally as one considers traditionally domestic issues such as fiscal policy monetary policy and environmental policy The usual concerns with international economic events and international economic policy were heightened immeasurably by the remarkable economic reform movement that began in Eastern Europe in This reform movement as well as the economic reforms in some highly indebted countries the ongoing integration of Western Europe the success of the market-oriented Asian Pacific Rim economies and the bold U.S. proposals to expand GATT point to the same theme : an open free-market economy is the surest road to economic prosperity. This is also the lesson from the success of the U.S. economy in the 1980s which the first six chapters of the Report have endeavored to explain. The challenge of the 1990s is to build on this success and to continue support for economic and political freedom around the world. The return from this effort will be a safer and more prosperous world in the 21st century Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Michael J. Boskin Chairman Richard L. Schmalensee Member John B. Taylor Member Council Members and their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur Ml. Okun Oath of office date Position Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July l August February June October Chairman James S Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D Nordhaus LyleE. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January May September Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The mission of the President 's Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of : to advise the President on the most effective means " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Council accordingly focuses on providing the President with the best possible advice and economic analysis on the economic outlook and proposed economic policies. This focus usually complements the diverse perspectives and specific concerns of other agencies in the policy formulation process The membership of the Council of Economic Advisers changed early in upon the inauguration of the new President. President Bush nominated Michael J. Boskin as Chairman of the Council on January and on February following unanimous Senate confirmation Dr. Boskin was designated Chairman of the Council and was sworn into office. He succeeds Beryl W. Sprinkel who returned to the private sector. The Chairman is on a leave of absence from Stanford University where he is the Burnet C. and Mildred Finley Wohlford Professor of Economics President Bush nominated John B. Taylor and Richard L Schmalensee as the two other Members of the Council on May and July respectively. After Senate confirmation Dr. Taylor and Dr. Schmalensee were officially sworn in on June and October respectively. Both served as full-time consultants between the time of their nomination and official swearing in. Dr Taylor is on a leave of absence from Stanford University where he is Professor of Economics. Dr. Schmalensee is on a leave of absence from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he is the Gordon Y Billard Professor of Economics and Management Thomas Gale Moore resigned from the Council on May and returned to the Hoover Institution at Stanford University During this first year the Council has stressed the importance of maximizing sustainable economic growth to expand the real resources available to meet the needs and designs of all Americans It also stressed the importance of setting ambitious but realistic goals. In its interactions with various outside groups the Congress the press the business community international organizations as well as within the Administration the Council has emphasized that continued growth and higher standards of living re quire following the four principles of fiscal monetary regulatory and trade policy outlined in this year 's Report : Reduce government borrowing by slowing the growth of Federal spending while economic growth raises revenue until the budget is balanced and reduce the national debt thereafter ; Support a credible systematic monetary policy program that sustains maximum economic growth while controlling and reducing inflation ; Remove barriers to innovation investment work and saving in the tax legal and regulatory systems ; Avoid unnecessary regulation and design necessary regulatory programs to harness market forces effectively to serve the Nation 's interest ; and Continue to lead the world to freer trade and more open markets and to support market-oriented reforms around the world MACROECONOMIC POLICIES Economic growth was more moderate in than the rapid pace of and Significantly inflation was contained. The Council emphasized that the run-up of inflation early in was temporary and related to temporary disruption in the world oil market and the drought. Throughout the year the Council closely followed macroeconomic developments briefing the President and participating in regular discussions on macroeconomic policy issues with the Department of the Treasury the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) and other members of the President 's economic team. The Council also regularly exchanged information and met with the Federal Reserve Board on macroeconomic policy issues and the economic outlook The Council and the other members of the Administration 's forecasting " Troika " Treasury and OMB made good progress in establishing the credibility of the new Administration 's economic forecasts. This interagency forecasting group which is chaired by the Council develops the economic forecast and projections used in developing the budget. The forecasts made in the spring serve as the official economic assumptions for the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings baseline for the following fiscal year. The Administration 's first full forecast was widely described as reasonable and internally consistent when it was released with the Mid-Session Review in July Dr. Boskin testified on the forecast along with Dr. Taylor before the Joint Economic Committee. Although the forecast was a bit more optimistic than the average of private forecasters it has thus far tracked the economy quite well and as the year progressed many forecasters revised their expectations for towards the Administration 's forecast. Based on preliminary data it would appear that for the four major forecast variables real GNP growth inflation unemployment and interest rates the Troika forecast for was the most accurate forecast presented in the history of the mid-session budget reviews dating back to the late 1970s. In preparing its forecast for the budget the Troika developed and published alternative sets of economic assumptions to indicate that the forecast and the resulting budget calculations have a considerable degree of uncertainty The Council also worked to improve the economic information flow through a more comprehensive series of memoranda and briefing papers on economic events for the President and his White House Senior Staff ; regular briefings for the White House press on major economic news ; and meetings with outside economists forecasters financial analysts and business people. The Chairman and Council Members appeared before numerous other organizations explaining the Administration 's economic achievements principles and policies In the formulation of saving and investment policies the Council was one of the leading participants in developing proposals through various Cabinet and sub-Cabinet working groups. In testimony to the Congress and in talks to business and other groups the Chairman and the other Council Members stressed the importance of raising national saving by lowering the Federal budget deficit and removing barriers to private saving to reduce the cost of capital to American firms stimulate investment and improve U.S. competitiveness productivity growth and standards of living. The Chairman and the other Council Members also worked through various fora to educate the public and the Congress on the economic benefits of a lower capital gains tax rate The Council was also active on a range of budget issues this year The Chairman was a member of the President 's budget team and testified before a number of congressional committees on both the economic assumptions used in the budget and on the importance to the economy of lowering the Federal budget deficit and eventually reducing the national debt. The Chairman was also a member of the President 's review committee for the budget INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES During international economic issues occupied a substantial part of the Council 's time. Developments in the Eastern European economies called for economic analysis in preparing the President 's initiatives. As the current GATT round entered its final stage many economic issues required analysis. Despite substantial progress in reducing the U.S. trade deficit in recent years was a year of growing protectionist pressure. Growing concern over foreign investment in the United States was especially important in generating this increased pressure. The Chairman and the other Council Members strove to put these fears in perspective stressing the benefits of free trade and open markets for goods services and investment. They regularly reminded the Congress and others that foreign investment had helped to prevent the investment rate a fundamental source of improvements in productivity and standards of living from falling despite the Federal budget deficit and low personal saving. In the Congress and before various foreign governments and international organizations the Council repeatedly stressed the importance of freer trade and more open markets and the dangers to world economic growth of rising protectionism The Council was also increasingly active in trade policy issues through Dr. Boskin 's participation in the Economic Policy Council and Dr. Taylor 's membership in the Trade Policy Review Group The Council assisted the Administration in producing many important trade decisions that carefully balanced competing interests and goals on : steel quotas ; Super ; strategy for the ongoing GATT round ; and many other issues The Council undertook an increased role in its participation in international discussions. Dr. Boskin was one of the four leaders of the President 's Mission to Poland and was named a deputy coordinator of U.S. aid to Poland and Hungary. Dr. Taylor also participated in the Mission and was active in developing the economic analysis through an interagency group on policy planning for Poland and Hungary Dr. Boskin met in Japan with the Prime Minister and other officials to encourage Japan to shoulder its responsibilities as the second largest economy in the world by joining the United States in leading the world to freer and fairer trade. Dr. Taylor was a member of the Structural Impediments Initiative negotiating team and met with Japanese officials in New York Tokyo and Washington to discuss ways to reduce barriers to trade. He also testified before the Senate Finance Committee on the importance of these structural issues. Dr. Boskin and Dr. Taylor traveled to Tokyo to discuss the economic outlook and various structural issues with Japan 's Economic Planning Agency and Dr. Taylor participated in biannual sub-Cabinet meetings in Tokyo and Washington Dr. Boskin was elected Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Dr. Schmalensee chaired the U.S. delegation to OECD Working Party which focuses on structural change in the developed economies and Dr. Taylor was a member of the U.S. delegation to Working Party on macroeconomic policy coordination and the short-term economic outlook. Dr. Taylor traveled to Paris to chair the U.S. delegation to the Economic and Development Review Committee where the OECD reviews the U.S. economy and chaired meetings in Washington with the IMF and GATT in their review of U.S. economic policy. In these roles the Council stressed the importance of multilateral adjustment to trade imbalances macroeconomic coordination and the removal of structural rigidities and subsidies The Council provided the President and the White House senior staff with regular briefings and briefing materials on international developments including materials for the Economic Summit in Paris and the meetings in Malta between the President and Secretary General Gorbachev The Council also participated in discussions of a wide range of issues including developing country debt economic reform in Eastern Europe and macroeconomic policy coordination with other members of the Administration the Federal Reserve the World Bank the IMF and representatives of other countries. The Council and staff conducted numerous briefings on the U.S. economy for visiting officials and scholars MICROECONOMIC POLICIES The Administration considered and proposed action this year on a wide range of economic issues many of them involving problems that had been building for some time. In its work on these issues the Council repeatedly stressed that where government regulation is appropriate it should be formulated in a way that allows workers and firms maximum flexibility and provides incentives to meet social goals in the least costly manner. The Council also provided economic analysis of a variety of continuing issues. The Council worked with other agencies to assure that the Clean Air Act proposal balanced costs and benefits in protecting the environment and minimizing the costs of regulation. The Council emphasized these principles of promoting flexibility enhancing incentives balancing costs and benefits and placing maximum reliance on the private sector in a number of areas including : global warming telecommunications antitrust food safety strategic oil stockpiling and proposals by the Council on Competitiveness to remove regulatory and legal barriers to innovation. Dr. Schmalensee testified before the Congress on the economic importance of tradable permits in the Clean Air Act proposals. He also chaired the Interagency Task Force on Economic Costs of the Working Group on Global Climate Change The Council also participated in various interagency working groups in developing policies to aid the disadvantaged without destroying incentives and job opportunities. Dr. Schmalensee was a member of the Low Income Opportunity Board and was active in the analysis of the economic costs and benefits of the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) The Administration 's accomplishments in this area include passage by the Congress of the first training wage in the history of the U.S. minimum wage and improvements in the Job Training Partnership Act. The Council also actively promoted the importance of improving education in the United States through flexibility choice accountability and performance the values that underpin the Educational Excellence Act ECONOMIC STATISTICS The Chairman and the other Council Members took an active role in improving the quality of the U.S. statistical system Through testimony before the Congress public speeches and interagency working groups the Council stressed the relationship of good information to good policy. Dr. Boskin chaired an Economic Policy Working Group on Improving the Economic Statistics. ( Its work is described in detail in Appendix B. ) PUBLIC INFORMATION In addition to the Chairman 's and the other Council Members ' public speeches testimony before the Congress and briefings for the press the Council produces two publications a year for the public The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Annual distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress and has a distribution of approximately THE COUNCIL AND THE STAFF The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views on economic developments to the President through personal discussions and written reports. The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the Economic Policy Council and Domestic Policy Council meetings of the National Security Council on issues of economic importance daily White House senior staff meetings budget team meetings with the President and at many other formal and informal meetings with the President and senior White House staff as well as with other senior government officials. The Chairman guides the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff Members of the Council are responsible for the full range of issues within the Council 's purview and including direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meet ings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention The small size of the Council permits the Chairman and the other Members to work as a team on most policy issues. There is however an informal division of subject matter. Dr. Schmalensee is primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis and regulatory issues. Dr. Taylor is primarily responsible for international economic issues as well as for macroeconomic analysis including economic projections PROFESSIONAL STAFF The Council 's advice to the President is dependent on the analytical and empirical analysis of its professional staff. The Council benefited from an extraordinarily capable professional staff during The professional staff of the Council currently consists of the Special Assistant the Senior Statistician senior staff economists staff economists junior staff economists and research assistants. The professional staff and their respective areas of concentration at the end of were : Special Assistant to the Chairman J. Steven Landefeld Senior Staff Economists John M. Antle Rebecca M. Blank Susan M. Collins Howard K. Gruenspecht Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin Brian F. Madigan Marc S. Robinson Jeremy C. Stein Peter M. Taylor William L. Wascher Agriculture and International Trade Labor Economics and Human Resources International Macroeconomics and Trade Regulation and International Trade Public Finance and Macroeconomics Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Public Finance and Microeconomics Finance and Banking Macroeconomics and Forecasting Labor and Macroeconomics Senior Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Staff Economists S. Lael Brainard Barbara A. Claffey International Trade and Macroeconomics Agriculture and International Trade Junior Staff Economists Janice C. Eberly Elizabeth T. Powers Macroeconomics and International Economics Public Finance and Microeconomics David E. Weinstein International Trade Research Assistants Mark A. Condon Beth Anne Wilson Labor and Macroeconomics Macroeconomics and International Economics Jonathan S. Leonard ( University of California Berkeley ) served as a senior staff economist during the summer of Gary R Saxonhouse ( University of Michigan ) served as a part-time consultant during the fall of Jeremy A. Arkes ( Georgetown University ) Scott B. McCallum ( University of California Berkeley ) Steven H. Pious ( Georgetown University ) Brooke D. Rasche ( Stanford University ) and Omar N. Toulan ( Georgetown University ) served as research assistants during Catherine H. Furlong Chief Statistician began her career at the Council years ago as a statistical assistant. She is now our Chief Statistician and is responsible for the management of the Statistical Office. Her tenure has been one of exemplary service and her dedication and performance have earned her the respect and friendship of the Chairmen the Council Members and staffs with whom she has served Mrs. Furlong is assisted in the operation of the Statistical Office by Natalie V. Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Margaret L. Snyder The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council 's statistical information system and is responsible for overseeing the publication of the Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report as well as for the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches Joseph Foote provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report Two former staff members returned to assist in the preparation of the Report : Christine Dreylinger ( student assistant ) and Dorothy Bagovich ( statistical assistant ) SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office which provides general support for the Council 's activities consists of Elizabeth A. Kaminski Administrative Officer and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant The secretaries for the Council of Economic Advisers during were Alice H. Williams and Sandra F. Daigle ( secretaries to the Chairman ) and Francine P. Obermiller and Suzanne M. Tudor ( secretaries to the Council Members ) The secretaries for the Council 's staff were Lisa D. Branch Mary E. Jones Mary A. Thomas and Janet J. Twyman DEPARTURES The Council 's senior staff economists in most cases are on leaves of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to one or two years Most of the senior staff economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are James N. Brown ( State University of New York at Stony Brook ) David N. Hyman ( North Carolina State University ) Carole E. Kitti ( Office of Management and Budget ) Harvey E. Lapan ( University of Iowa ) and Daniel A. Sumner ( North Carolina State University ) Others went on to new positions. They are Gregory S. Crespi ( Southern Methodist University ) Lauren J. Feinstone ( University of Colorado ) Robert W. Hahn ( American Enterprise Institute ) and Kim J Kowalewski ( Congressional Budget Office ) Staff economists usually have just completed their dissertations and spend one year at the Council as additional preparation for their professional careers. Staff economists who took new positions are : Ellen E. Hanak ( The Brookings Institution ) and John A. Hird ( University of Massachusetts ) Junior staff economists are generally graduate students who spend one year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are : Marcel M. Cassard ( Columbia University ) Kenneth R. Richards ( University of Pennsylvania ) and Robert J. Scheinerman ( Harvard University ) Associate junior staff economists were Theodore G. Bernard ( Northwestern University ) and William A. Teichner ( Harvard Business School ) Jonathan A Parker Research Assistant accepted a position with The Urban Institute Gerry Garcia secretarial staff resigned in In addition Christine Dreylinger served as a student assistant during the summer and Amy J. Heir served as a student assistant during the fall Appendix B IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF ECONOMIC STATISTICS Improving the Quality of Economic Statistics The Council of Economic Advisers has by the nature of its basic mission always been intensely interested in the quality of economic statistics. Economic statistics are critical to the Council 's analyses of policy issues advice to the President forecasts on the economic outlook and production of this Report. The Council also has an important role in the dissemination of economic statistics through the monthly publication of Economic Indicators and Appendix C of this annual Report The Council and other agencies have become increasingly concerned with the quality of economic statistics and a number of reports in the 1980s addressed problems with key statistics. In addition to members of the Federal statistical system numerous professional organizations including the American Economic Association the National Association of Business Economists and the National Academy of Sciences as well as the Congress have become concerned over the quality timeliness accuracy methodological soundness and comparability of economic statistics NUMBERS THAT MOVE THE ECONOMY Although the United States has one of the finest statistical systems in the world changes in the structure of the U.S. economy are making it increasingly difficult to track the course of the economy accurately. Accurate measurement is critical because the " core " economic statistics have such a large impact on the economy. Statistics provided by the Federal Government alter private and public spending patterns move markets and drive government policy. Private contracts and orders investment decisions cost-ofliving adjustments the Federal budget and monetary policy are all based on the economic information produced by the Federal statistical system Many analysts question the accuracy of measurement of even the most basic variables such as output and inflation. This perceived decline in the quality of the basic national economic statistics series is particularly disturbing. Maintaining and improving these " core " statistics will be increasingly important as the Nation moves into the 1990s TRACKING ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN TODAY 'S ECONOMY MEASURING PRODUCTIVITY OUTPUT AND PRICES Measuring output involves measuring both increases in quantity and quality. The most serious problem in measuring output in our rapidly evolving economy is in estimating improvements in quality When the Nation primarily produced things such as steel and wheat output was easy to count tons of steel and bushels of wheat. Today a larger share of output is produced in sectors where increases in output are often in the form of improved quality and convenience : consider the impact of 24-hour automatic teller machines and of desktop and laptop computers. Measurement problems are most severe in rapidly growing industries such as services and microelectronics and it is likely that real output growth in these industries is underestimated In some industries output is now estimated by labor input. If total hours worked rises by percent then output is estimated to rise by percent. The result is that productivity ( output per hour worked ) is assumed constant so that measured productivity growth is automatically zero In other industries output is estimated by dividing net sales by a price index. Unfortunately in industries with rapid rates of innovation it is difficult to separate pure price increases from those arising from improvements in product quality or service. For example if problems in identifying and measuring quality changes cause the rate of pure price increase to be overstated the measure of real output will be understated and the overall rate of inflation will be overstated Price indexes that appropriately adjust for quality change can be quite important. When the Department of Commerce introduced a new computer price index that adjusted for quality change it raised the average annual growth rate of real gross national product ( GNP ) between and from to percent raising the level of real GNP by $ billion in Correspondingly the new computer price index lowered the average annual rate of inflation ( as measured by the GNP implicit price deflator ) from to percent over this period In other industries the statistical system may not have kept pace with changes in the economy. In the airline industry deregulation produced lower fares and passenger miles increased by more than percent in the 1980s yet reported output growth has been below average and productivity as measured by value-added per hour worked has been declining. Part of the problem may be the result of the difficulties in developing real price-adjusted measures of output during a period when the fare structure was chang- ing rapidly. Today less than percent of tickets are sold at full price ; in percent of travelers paid full price It is hardest to measure output in the service-producing sector where many problems arise : rapid innovation frequent changes in pricing and difficulties in accurately measuring and defining sales and units of output. Industries such as finance insurance and real estate which are among the fastest growing in the economy as measured by sales and employment are only average in terms of measured GNP growth. And despite rapid innovation based in part on revolutionary advances in computation and communications productivity in these sectors as measured by value-added per hour worked fell in the 1980s The increasing importance of the service-producing sector relative to the goods-producing sector has not only increased the difficulty of measuring total output but has also increased the difficulty of collecting data on output. It is easier and less expensive to collect data in manufacturing industries dominated by large firms than in service industries dominated by small firms. For example by surveying three firms in the auto industry it was possible to obtain data on more than $ billion in sales in ; whereas it would have required surveying all of the firms in the eating and drinking industry to obtain data on $ billion in sales Finally while the economy as a whole has gained from deregulation in transportation and services Federal statistics have suffered Deregulation has helped to increase competition spur growth and lower prices but it has meant that data once available from regulators must be collected directly in many cases from a larger number of firms MEASURING INVESTMENT SAVING AND WEALTH The problems in economic statistics are not limited to output and inflation but extend to other areas ranging from saving and wealth to income and poverty Investment and saving rates are critical factors in economic growth international trade flows economic stability and the evolution of national wealth. Understandably U.S. rates of saving and investment particularly in relation to other countries have been central to the debate on tax budget and trade policies. Yet estimates of U.S. saving and investment are not internationally comparable and may be seriously misleading The United States is one of only a few major industrialized countries in the world where national income accounts classify government expenditures on bridges highways and other investments as consumption rather than investment which renders international comparisons of national saving and investment rates difficult. U.S statistical conventions also use historical rather than replacement costs to value international assets. Since most U.S. investments abroad were purchased some time ago while most foreign investments in the United States have been made in recent years U.S assets abroad are undervalued relative to foreign assets in the United States MEASURING INCOME AND POVERTY Estimates of the level and distribution of real family income and of the extent and nature of poverty drive political debates and decisions about social policy and the safety net. Yet the poverty index we use is based on research that was done in the 1950s and 1960s and may not be well suited to the 1990s. Although most major statistical series are revised every years to reflect current price consumption and production patterns the official poverty measure has not had a significant revision in over years The Bureau of the Census in recent years has produced experimental measures of poverty that partly correct for well-known problems with the official poverty thresholds and with the definition and measurement of income. These adjustments significantly affect estimates of the level and trends in income and poverty. For example depending on the definition of income Census estimates of the poverty rate can vary widely ( e.g. by as much as percentage points ) A case in point involves the estimated rate of price inflation. Using a consistent measure of price change can lower the poverty estimate by percentage points. It also shows real family income rising albeit slowly rather than falling during the 1970s Nevertheless our basic understanding of appropriate measures of poverty remains far from complete. Additional research on relevant prices consumption patterns and family composition in the 1990s is needed to improve our understanding of the level and distribution of economic need in this country IMPROVING ECONOMIC STATISTICS The President has established a working group on improving the economic statistics. The working group is chaired by Michael J Boskin Chairman of the President 's Council of Economic Advisers and includes representatives of many of the major producers and users of economic statistics in the Federal Government. In its work thus far the group has : surveyed the statistical agencies to assess existing plans and priorities ; gathered suggestions for further improvements from the agencies and from the community of users inside the Administration in the Congress and outside government ; and developed a recommended package of the highest priority improvements in economic statistics In developing its initial recommendations the working group concentrated on developing priorities to resolve the inevitable con flicts between the various improvement goals such as those between accuracy and timeliness. The resulting recommendations focus on proposals that address well-known measurement errors that are in areas important to public policy that are cost-effective and that can generally be completed in a reasonable period of time Based on the working group 's recommendations the President has approved a multi-year initiative to improve economic statistics : This initiative will build on the data improvement efforts already underway at the statistical agencies. Wherever possible it will complement ongoing plans for improvement by reprioritizing using alternative methods or revising the existing timetable for improvements The President has approved the initial set of recommendations developed by a working group. These recommendations include both short- and long-term improvements and focus on the most important steps required to maintain and improve the " core " economic statistics in three major areas of policy concern : a ) productivity output and prices ; b ) investment saving and wealth and ; c ) employment income and poverty The statistical agencies have reprogrammed funds during fiscal to address the priorities identified by the working group and the relevant agencies are currently developing specific plans to implement the working group 's improvements The fiscal budgets for the relevant statistical agencies include additional funds to begin to implement some of the recommendations The statistical agencies will report back to the working group with their detailed plans to implement its recommendations The working group will develop a comprehensive long-term program to improve the economic statistics. In addition to developing options to fully implement the working group recommendations made to date the program will consider organizational methodological and other overall improvements as well as the resources required to implement them. It will present options to the Economic Policy Council for possible recommendations to the President As the Administration proceeds with this initiative it will continue to work in close cooperation with the Congress the private sector international organizations and the community of data users Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : C-l C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 C-8 C-9 C-10 C-ll C-12 C-13 C-14 C-15 C-16 C-17 C-18 C-19 C-20 C-21 C-22 C-23 C-24 C-25 C-26 C-27 C-28 C-29 C-30 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross national product by industry Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Personal consumption expenditures in dollars Gross and net private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars Relation of gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : C-31 C-32 C-33 C-34 C-35 C-36 C-37 C-38 C-39 C-40 C-41 C-42 C-43 C-44 C-45 C-46 C-47 Population by age groups Population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Average weekly hours and hourly and weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : C-48 C-49 C-50 C-51 C-52 C-53 C-54 C-55 C-56 C-57 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers'shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : C-58 C-59 C-60 C-61 C-62 C-63 C-64 C-65 C-66 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : C-67 C-68 C-69 C-70 C-71 C-72 C-73 C-74 C-75 Money stock liquid assets and debt measures Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Commercial bank loans and securities Bond yields and interest rates Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : C-76 C-77 C-78 C-79 C-80 C-81 C-82 C-83 C-84 C-85 C-86 Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : C-87 C-88 C-89 C-90 C-91 C-92 C-93 C-94 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : C-95 C-96 C-97 C-98 C-99 C-100 Farm income Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Balance sheet of the farm sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : C-101. International investment position of the United States at yearend C-102. U.S. international transactions C-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category C-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area C-105. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance C-106. International reserves selected years C-107. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries C-108. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries C-109. Foreign exchange rates C-110. Growth rates in real gross national product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies from January through January NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE C-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross national product I960 ',.'. " ! ' " f : IV IV : IV IV : IV : | | Ill IV : ' II Ill IV : | | Ill IV Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods See next page for continuation of table Change in busiProResiness ducers ' Struc- durable dential inventures equiptories ment Nonresidential Total Total Total TABLE C-l. Gross national product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter * : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Government purchases of goods and services Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total 7s Total Nation- al defense Nondefense State and local Final sales Gross domestic chases Gross national product ( GNP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from preceding period Gross national product ibis 9iO Final sales Gross domestic pur- chases ~ 8l9 TABLE C-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Year or quarter I960 '.'. " ~ UQBJ '.'.I " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : | | Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III IV > '. " .'. " Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable Services goods Total See next page for continuation of table Total Total Structures Producers ' Residurable dential equipment Change in business inventories -5'.2 TABLE C-2. Gross-national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Federal Net exports Exports Imports I960 ! ! ..I : : > : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV Total Total Nation- Nonal dedefense fense in : " III State and local GNP less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Final sales Gross domestic purchases l Gross national product Final sales ~ 2> LO Gross domestic purchases * ~ TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment * Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter * IV : IV IV : IV IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : | | Ill IV P Gross national product 23A t3.5 Fixed investment Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services See next page for continuation of table http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Export s and imports <>f goods and ser vices1 Year or quarter Exports " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : | | III IV P Imports Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense ' GNP less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ' ' State and local Final sales Gross domestic purchases 6&.4 Percent change from preceding period GNP implicit price deflator TABLE C-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Personal Year or Quarter " '.. '. ! ! ! " ! " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV II Ill IV : | | Ill IV : II Ill IV P conGross national sumption product expenditures Fixed investment Total Exports and imports of goods and services1 Nonresi- Residen- Exports Imports dential tial Percent change from preceding Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total State Total National Nondefense defense and local " SP fixedweighted price index '.8 Separate price indexes are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-5. Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Year or quarter Current dollars I960 " : IV IV : IV IV : IV II... Ill IV : | | III IV : | | III IV ! o Constant ( ) dollars ~ 2.B Implicit price deflator Chain price index Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars ~ L2 Implicit price deflator Chain price index Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) TABLE C-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Inventory change Gross national product Final sales ~ Durable goods Total Total Final sales Inventory change Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Final sales Inventory change Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change LI Services Structures Auto output " " " TABLE C-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Total Total I960 p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : | | ; IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Durable goods Final sales Inventory Final Inventory sales change Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output " " TABLE C-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter I960 % f : IV IV IV : IV IV II III IV II HI IV : j | HI IV P Gross national product Business * Total Total Nonfarm Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Farm Statistical discrepancy -J -lie Government2 Households and institutions Total Federal State and Rest of the world local ! TABLE C-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter * IV : IV IV : IV IV : | | III IV | | Ill IV II III IV p Gross national product Businessl Total Total1 Nonfarm1 Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Farm HouseStatis- holds and tical instidiscrep- tutions ancy -L8 -3i4 Government2 Total Federal State and local Rest of the world TABLE C-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Manufacturing Year Gross Connational culfure product forestry Mining strucand tion Total fisheries FiTrans- Whole- nance portation sale insurNonDuraand and ance ble durable public retail and goods goods utilities trade real estate Services Govern- Stament Rest t is- of the and govern- tical world disment enter- crepancy prises _ i -i ! s ~ L1 1B3.2 * * I960 Gross domestic product by industry is not available for Data for based on a revised methodology are expected to be published in the Survey of Current Business March Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on tee Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product Manufacturing Year AgriGross Connational culture forest- Mining strucproduct ry and tion Total fisheries Durable goods Transpor- Wholetation sale Nonand and durable public retail goods util- trade ities FiGovern- StaRest nance ment tisinsur- Serv- and tical Resid- of the ance ices govern- dis- u a l world and ment enter- crepreal prises ancy estate : -2'.8 '.'.'. * Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product by 2industry Gross domestic product by industry is not available for Data for based on a revised methodology are expected to be published in the Survey of Cumnt Business March Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital Total consumption adjustment Net domestic product Domestic income Indirect business tax etc.1 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total ComProfits pensation of Profits after tax employ- Total Profits Profits ees before tax Divi- Undistax liability Total dends tributed profits Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory valuation adjustment Capital Net con- intersump- est tion adjustment 3'.1 TABLE C-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars I960 ! " : IV IV : IV : IV : IV dollars Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit8 Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Profits after tax * : j | III IV : | | III IV : II Ill Total Output Net interest Profits tax liability Compensation of employees Indirect business tax etc.8 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Output Compenper hour sation of all per hour employof all ees employ ( ees dollars ) ( dollars ) is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Note. In hours of labor input were redefined as hours at the work site rather than hours paid and all historical data relating to labor input were revised Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE C-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Personal consumption expendi- Total * tures Motor vehicles and parts Nondurable goods Furniture and house- Total hold equipment Food Cloth- Gasoing line and and shoes oil Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing Trans- Medi- Elec- porta- cal Total i tricity tion care and gas TABLE C-15. Personal consumption expenditures in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter '...'.' P : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : iIVn " '. ; ! ; ; : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Personal Household Furniconoperation Motor ture Cloth- Gaso- Fuel sumption vehi- and Transline oil Total1 Housexpendi- Total1 cles house- Total Food Elec- portaand and ing * l tricity tures tion and hold Total and shoes oil coal parts equipgas ment 34J Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Medical care TABLE C-16. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Less : Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment p IV : IV IV : IV IV : | | III IV : | | III IV | | III IV Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Nonresidential Total Total L9 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures ~ L7 Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE C-17. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Equals : Net private domestic investment Less : Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV Oanital capital consumption Gross allowprivate ances domestic with investcapital ment consumption adjustment Net fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total ^ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE C-18. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventory-final sales ratio Inventories Nonfarm Quarter Total2 Farm Total Fourth quarter : ~ " : IV IV : IV : IV IV : | | III IV | | Ill IV : | | III IV * Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Final sales3 Retail trade Total Other Nonfarm4 Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in business inventories ( CBI ) component of GNP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at their respective end-ofquarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas CBI is stated at annual rates Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-19. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Quarter Fourth quarter : I960 * : IV : IV IV : IV : IV II Ill IV | | Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Nonfarm Total2 Farm Total * Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Retail trade Final sales3 Other Inventory-final sales ratio Total Nonfarm Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the constant- /4/ \ ll<lr * han/1A in KnpInA * * IrxutntArl/u. jwimn ^ nAn * A ( PUD i .t+/<w4 nnnnnl ro * <u> Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at -monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note.-The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-20. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Payments to foreigners Receipts from foreigners Year or quarter Exports of goods and services Total Total " IV : IV : IV : IV IV | | III IV : | | Ill IV II Ill IV Merchandise Services Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) '.1 Imports of goods and services Total Total Merchandise Services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Transfer payments ( net ) Total Interest paid by From governFrom ment to persons govern- foreigners ment ( net ) ( net ) .'2 'A -'.1 '.1 '.3 Net foreign investment TABLE C-21. Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars [ Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter '... " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV.. Total Imports of goods and services Merchandise Merchandise Total Durable goods Services Nondurable goods Total Factor in- come l Other Total Total Factor income exports less factor income imports equals rest-of-the-world product Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Durable goods Services Nondurable goods Total Factor income * Other 3.b TABLE C-22. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter I960 " : IV IV : IV IV : IV II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV Gross national product Less : consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net national product l'24l'2 I'eos'e 3992'4 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer pay- ments Plus : CnhciHioc Statistical discrepancy _.l less current surplus of government enterprises _1 _1 Equals : National income TABLE C-23- Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter * : IV : IV : IV IV IV. : II III IV II III. IV II Ill IV P National income * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Equals : Plu S : Le SS : Corporate profits with GovernWage inventory ment Contribu- accruals valuation transfer Personal Personal Business Personal Net tions for transfer and less interest payments interest dividend payments income social income income capital to insurance disburseconsumpments persons tion adjustments o o o o o o o o o o o o TABLE C-24. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter National incomel Total Wages and salaries Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments to wages and sal- Total Total aries p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III IV II Ill IV II Ill IV " Nonfarm Farm Supplements Proprietors ' income3 Capital consumption adjustment -.'2 -'.3 Total Proprietors ' income Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adjust- adjustment ment -'.2 -A -'.1 ! ~ '.Q ~ ! e ~ LO _7 ! 'A National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table C-22 See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-24. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total " : IV IV IV : IV : IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV | | III IV " " Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Rental Capital conincome sumption Total of persons adjustment " Capital Net Invencontory sumption interest adjustvaluProfits Profits ment before tax Undis- ation Divi- tributed adjusttax liability Total dends profits ment Profits Total Profits after tax ! o Consists mainly of employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds With inventory valuation adjustment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -l ! o TABLE C-25. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements1 Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total I960 " IV : IV IV : IV IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV v GovernDistrib- Service ment and utive indus- indus- government tries Manutries enterfacturing prises Other labor income1 Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C-24 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-25. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income Transfer payments of persons Personal Personal with Year or quarter capital dividend interest con- income income sumption adjustment " IV : IV IV : IV IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : I | | III IV P Total Old-age Govern- Aid to survivors Government families ment disability unememploy- with and ployment Veterans ees depend- Other health insur- benefits retireent insurance ment children ance benefits ( AFDC ) benefits benefits A '.5 A A Less : Personal contribu- Nonfarm personal tions for income2 social insurance '.6 Personal income exclusive of the farm component of wages and salaries other labor income proprietors ' income and net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income Is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-26. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter I960 p : IV IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV Personal income Equals : Disposable nontax personal payments income Less : Personal tax and Total Personal Interest con- paid by sumption consumexpendi- ers to busitures ness Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis '.5 '.5 Personal transfer Equals : pay- Personal ments saving to foreigners ( net ) A Percent of disposable personal income Personal outlays Total Personal consump- Personal saving tion expenditures TABLE C-27. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Year or quarter " IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV Disposable personal income Total ( billions of Per capita ( dollars ) dollars ) Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Total ( billions of Per capita dollars ) ( dollars ) Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE C-28. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV II Ill IV Total its Per- Total sonal saving Gross business saving Gross investment Governmer t surplus or deficit Capital ( ) na tional income and grants prod uct accounts received Total Federal i-M State and local by the United States ~ '.Q i ! o tic investment ( net ) ^ Total Gross private domes- Statistical Net foreign discrepancy investment A Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-29. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net investment in tangible assets Increase in financial assets Securities Year or quarter Total InsurCheck- Time ance able Money and depos- savings market Govern- Corpo- Other and Total its and rate securi- pension ment fund recurren- depos- shares securi- equi- ties4 its ties2 ties3 serves8 cy : II III... IV... : II III... IV... : II III.... Owneroccupied homes Consumer durables Noncorporate business assets8 Mortgage debt Con- Other on sumer non- credit debt farm homes ~ ! l -lie '.B 1&6 ~ L3 Other financial assets6 Less : Net increase in debt Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Corporate and foreign bonds and open-market paper Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit U.S. Government and policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-30. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race Families Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Year Number ( millions ) Median income Female householder Total Number ( mil- Rate lions ) ALL RACES * WHITE BLACK * Number ( millions ) Rate Median income of persons zyears old and over with income Number ( mil- Rate lions ) All persons Females Males Yearround full-time workers persons Yearround full-time workers $ $ All $ $ $ ^ he term " family " refers to a croup of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Prior to data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years * Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE C-31. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) Julyl Total Under and over I960 ~ * * * * * * * * * * K-- * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Total revised January ; detail not revised Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-32. Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population1 Labor Employforce ment Resi- includ- includdent ing Armed resident resident Forces1 Armed Armed Forces Forces Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural UnemPloyment Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ All Civilian work- work- tici- pop2 ulaers ers3 pation tion rate4 ratio5 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Thousands of persons years of age and over I9606 : Jan Feb Mar fci June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-32. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Labor EmployCivilian force ment noninsti- Resi- includ- including dent tutional Armed ing resident popula- Forces1 resident Armed tion Armed Forces Forces Civilian labor force Unemployment rate Employment Total Total Agricultural UnemNon- Ployagri- ment cultural Civilian labor force All Civil- parian work- work- ticiers2 ers8 pation rate4 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sep8t Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i iy Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment/ population ratio5 Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment ana agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagricultural employment Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population ana labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables C-32 through C-41 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-33. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month 1952x I9601 ! * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Way June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Total years years and over Total years See footnote Table C-32 Note. See Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Unemployment Males Females Females years and over Total Total years Total years years and years and over over 3il22 TABLE C-34. Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian workers Black Black and other White Total Males Females Both sexes Total FeMales males Both sexes Total FeMales males Both sexes I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June fc June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Note. See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-35. Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian workers White Total Males Black and other Females Both sexes Total Black FeMales males Both sexes Total FeMales males Both sexes I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr fay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " .'. " '.'.'.' June J " 'y Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-36. Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor force participation rate Employment/population ratio Civilian2 Year or month Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec FeTotal Males males Civilian Both Black sexes and White other Black years " " " ' " 59i9 Labor force Civilian labor Employment Total Total Males Females Both sexes years White Black and other Black including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional population including resident Armed Forces force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional population including resident Armed Forces Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-37. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Black and other or black Males years Males Females years Total and over years years Total Total and over Females years Total and over years years years and over Black and other I960 8Q.O : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Nov " " " I " ! Dec. Black July Aug : Jan Feb Mar.. May.. June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-38. Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total years Males Females Males years Total and over years years Total and over Total years Females years Total and over years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr fay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec May " ! '. ! " ! " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black : Jan Feb Mar Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-39. Unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Unemployment UnemployMales Females ment All rate civilian all work- work- Total years Total years and and years over ers ers years over rate civilian workers Both sexes years White Black and Black other Experienced wage and salary workers Women Marwho ried men mainspouse tain presfamilies ent ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec Unemployed Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-40. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Males years Males Females years Total and over years years Total Total and over years Females years Total and over years years and over Black and other : Jan Black Feb Mar Apr May June : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug sept.. : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept " : : : : Oct Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note.-See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-41. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Year or month Unemployment Less than weeks Reason for unemployment Duration of unemployment Aver- Median age New ReenJob Job weeks ( mean ) duraention losers leavers trants trants weeks weeks and duraover tion ( weeks ) ( weeks ) June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : sept : : : : : : : : : ' : : " : : : : : ' : : : : ' : Oct Nov Dec ' " Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Data for by reason for unemployment are not strictly comparable with those for later years and the total by reason is not equal to total unemployment Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table C-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-42. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered employment1 State programs Insured Total unemploy- benefits Insured paid ment unem ( weekly ployment aver-2 dollars ) * age ) <m r Thousands ' Jan Feb Mar Aor Hay June Juiv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Aor Say June : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " '1,973 Initial claims Exhaustions5 Weekly average ; thousands M46 '1,806 '298 Insured Benefits paid unemployment as percent Total Average of ( millions weekly covered of check employ- dollars ) ( dollars ) " ment * * " Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal Supplemental Compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE C-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month I960. " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr June July : " Jay : : r " : : : : : r : Aug Sept Oct Nov : : : : : : : : : : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Decp Total See next page for continuation of table Total Goods-producing industries Manufacturing ConMining struction NonduraTotal Durable ble goods goods TABLE C-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec... Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade Service-producing industries Finance insurRetail ance trade and real Services estate Government Total Federal State and local Note. Data in Tables C-43 and C-44 are based on reports from employing establishments and rejate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables C-32 through C-41 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-44. Average weekly hours and hourly and weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average weekly hours Year or month Manufacturing Average hourly earnings Average weekly earnings Total private Total private \ Total Current private Total Over- dollars time dollars Manufacturing Current dollars dollars ManuConfacturing struction ( current ( current dollars ) dollars ) Retail trade ( cur- Percent change from a year earlier total private rent dol- Cur- lars ) rent dollars ' : Jan Feb... Mar... MPay " .'.' JuneJuly... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb... Mar... fc June.. July... Aug... Sept. Oct.. Nov " Dec " $ $ $ $ $ Also includes other private industry groups shown Current dollars divided by the consumer price $ $ $ dollars _7 in Table C-43 index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Monthly percent changes are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table C-43 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-45. Employment cost index private industry [ Not seasonally adjusted ] Total private Goods-producing Service-producing Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year and month Total Wages Bene- Total Wages Bene- Total Wages Beneand and and compen- sala- fits * compen- sala- fits * compen- sala- fits sation sation sation ries ries ries Total Wages Total Wages and and compen- sala- Bene- compen- sala- Benefits * fits sation sation ries ries Index June = December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec ' " 83i2 86T " 'sis ' Percent " change ' " sli " from months ' " sis " ' " '82 " earlier Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of labor free from the influence of employment shifts among occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Through December percent changes are based on unrounded data ; thereafter changes are based on indexes as published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-46. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Output1 Hours of 2all persons Nonfarm Busibusiness ness sector sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Compensation per hour3 Real compensation per hour4 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator5 Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector : IV : IV..... : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Business sector 'ross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollarr gros : domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product gross Note. In hours of labor input were redefined as hours at the work site rather than hours paid and all historical data relating to labor input were revised Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-47. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Output1 Output per hour of all persons Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Implicit price deflator5 Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour4 Unit labor costs Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Hours of 2all persons '.B ~ L4 L9 ~ 2A _9 ! e '.5 : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV ! s ! o ~ i. \ : II Ill IV : II Ill -lie Output ~ l8 io ~ refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table C-46 See Note Table C-46 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE C-48. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month proportion I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr Aug Sept oct : : : : : : : : : Nov May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec p Total : : : : : : r : Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Durable May June July Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Manufacturing Total industrial production Min Nondurable I486 lltili ing ties TABLE C-49. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month proportion p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec p Total industrial production Materials Consumer goods Total AutoTotal ! motive products Equipment Home goods Total Includes clothing and consumer Two components oil and gas Business Defense and space Intermediate Nonprod- Total Dura- durable ble ucts goods goods staples not shown separately well drilling and manufactured homes are included in total equipment but not in detail shown Includes energy materials not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-50. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total proportion.. Jay ' " " " " ! " June July Aug Nov " Dec " I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar & = Iron and steel FabriNonElectricated eleccal metal trical machinprod- machinery ucts ery Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Total Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Motor vehicles and parts Lumber Apparel Textile Printing Chemicals and mill and prod- prod- publish- and products proding ucts ucts ucts Foods TABLE C-51. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month I960 " Total industry Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Utilities Industrial materials Primary processing Advanced processing June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar : Jan Feb Mar fen June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec p Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-tt. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction T n i_ | Year or month new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction l Residential buildings ' Total Total New housing units Total Commercial Indus- Other trial Total Federal State and local New series I960 New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-52. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Total new construction Year or month Residential buildings1 Total Nonresidential buildings and other constructionl Total2 New housing units Total Commercial3 Indus- Other4 trial Total Federal State and local5 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Septp Oct Nov Oct. Nov Dec : : : : : : : : Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Includes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-53. New bousing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized New housing units started Private and public ' Year or month Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Total ( farm and Nonfarm nonfarm ) Total unit ( ) ( ) " Type of structure Type of structure ( l 2to4 units Total units or more unit to units units or more 59C ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) V | j J ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ( ) July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov Dec " ( ( ( ( ) } ( ) ) ( ) : i fl ii ( ) ( ) ( ( j : ) ( ) Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Series discontinued December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-54. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Addenda Industries surveyed quarterly Manufacturing Year or quarter I960 : | | III IV II Ill IV : I II All industries Total Nonmanufacturing Dura- Nonble durable Total * goods goods ComMin- Trans- Public mercial ing porta- utili- and tion ties other Nonmanufacturing Total nonfarm business2 Manufacturing Total : : : : : : : Surveyed quarterly Surveyed annually3 Excludes forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate which effective with the April-May survey are no longer surveyed quarterly. See last column ( " nonmanufacturing surveyed annually " ) for data for these industries " All industries " plus the part of nonmanufacturing that is surveyed annually Consists of forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in October and November corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-55. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars,- monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar & : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Total manufacturing and trade InvenSales tories2 Ratio Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Retail trade Sales1 Inventories2 Ratio Sales Inventories2 Ratio Sales Inventories2 Ratio Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Beginning annual data are based on December inventories and monthly average sales for earlier periods data are weighted averages. For monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census wholesale and the year. For for month wholesale and TABLE C-56. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories2 l Shipments Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar Total fc : June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Materials and supplies Total Monthly Work in process Finished goods Total Materials and supplies average for year and tptal for month Seasonally adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for prior periods Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Work in process Finished goods TABLE C-57. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unfilled orders2 New ordersx Unfilled orders shipments ratio3 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries tries nondefense Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries " " " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Monthly average for year Seasonally adjusted end and total for month of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE C-58. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Housing Food and beverages Year or month All items Total * : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May'H ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec fc Food Includes alcoholic beverages not See table C-59 for components Total : i : : ; i " HouseOther hold Apparel TransEnterFuel and furnish- and portation Medical tainment goods care and Shelter other ings upkeep services utilities and operation ! ' Energy shown separately See tables C-60 for definition and C-59 for components Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ = except as noted ] Food and beverages Shelter Year or month I960 Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total l Total At Away Total Total from home " 'i'oio : " : : : : : " " " " Household fuels Home Home- mainteRent owners ' nance Total resi- costs and repairs dential I-Z-50.4 " " ibis " Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately December = See next page for continuation of table Fuel and other utilities Renters ' costs Food Fuel oil Other and Gas utilities other and house- ( Piped ) public Total and hold elec- services fuel tricity commodities " ' " 2l'.4 TABLE C-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = except as noted ] Medical care Transportation Private transportation Year or month Total I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aufi sept : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr : May. : : : : : : : Aug... : : : : : : Sept ocf : : : : : " ' Nov June July Dec Total3 New cars 34.F Used cars '267 " $ Motor fuel4 Automobile maintenance and repairs Other : : : : : : : : Public transportation Total Medical Medical care care commodities services Includes direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table C-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-60. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ = ] Commodities Services Commodities less food Year or month : Jan Feb Mar... fc JuneJuly... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec... : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov... Dec... All items All commodities Food AH All NonDurable durable services Medical care services Special indexes Services less medical care All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy Energy Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table C-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-61. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] All items less food All items Dec to Dec.1 Year or month I960 L3 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food and energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less food shelter and energy Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Change from preceding period Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " " " Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted '.5 '.2 Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table C-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-62. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] Commodities All items Food Total Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year ! Total Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year L3 Energy Services Commodities less food Changes ! e Dec to Dec.1 Medical care services Year to year Dec to Dec.1 1C.5 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year ! from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table C-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-63. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Total Crude Processed l Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July l Aue Sept od Nov : " ' : : Dec See next page for continuation of table Finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Total Consumer goods finished Capital consumer Total NonTotal Durable durable equipment goods TABLE C-63. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds2 Z ! " Z Materials and components Other For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Containers Crude materials for further processing Supplies Total JayZZ ! June July Aug * Sept Oct Nov Dec l : Jan Feb Mar fci June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-64. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Ener- gy Total Intermediate materials supplies and components Consumer Cap- goods ital excluding equipment foods and energy Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Crude materials for further processing Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Ener- gy Other fci Aug Seft Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar June July Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities / Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and l power Chemicals and allied products * Jan Feb Mar Aor MW June Julv Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec I960 Aug " " : : : : : : : : : : : : Sept oc ? : : : : : : : : Nov Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp Rubber Lumber paper Metals Machinery Furniture Nonand and and metallic and and and plastic wood metal equipment household mineral allied products products products products durables products Year or month Transportation equipment Total Motor vehicles and equipment Miscellaneous products Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sent Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Auc Sept. : Oct Nov Dec Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-66. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Finished consumer foods Total finished goods Year or month Finished goods excluding foods and energy Total Consumer Capital goods equipment Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec.1 to year Dec.1 to year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec.1 to year Dec.1 to year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to year Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods _3 _3 l ! ~ '.B ; g " ~ '.6 Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Season- S Unadjusted justed : Jan Feb Mar May " ; ; ; ; June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May..... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Season- S Unadjusted justed ~ IA ~ 'A SeaSeaSeason- Unad- son- Unad- sonally justed ally justed adadjusted justed justed _9 n _5 ; s '.2 o ' Unadjusted _5 ^ SeaSeason- Unad- sonally justed ally adadjusted justed -2& _i Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE C-67. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml December : I960 f Jan Feb Mar Aor May June July Aug Sect oct I ZZT ZZZ ! " Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug.'.... " " Sept Oct ZZZ Nov Dec " " M3 L Debt1 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Year and month M2 Ml plus overnight RPsand Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and small time deposits M2 plus large time deposits term RPs term Eurodollars and institutiononly MMMF balances M3 plus other liquid assets Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average ) Percent change from year or months earlier Ml M2 M3 Debt Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors ; data from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate Note. The nontransactions portion of M2 is seasonally adjusted as a whole to reduce distortions caused by substantial portfolio shifts arising from regulatory and financial changes in recent years especially shifts to MMDAs in A similar procedure is used to seasonally adjust the remaining nontransactions balances in M3. See Table C-68 for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Currency Travelers checks Demand deposits Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) net plus overnight Eurodollars NSA December : I960 P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : June Julv AUR Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " ! e See next page for continuation of table Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances General purpose and broker/ dealer Institution only Money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) NSA NSA NSA Savings deposits TABLE C-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] and month December : " Jan Feb Mar Apr May May I " : : ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : o o o o o Sept NSA ( RPs ) Term Eurodollars Aug June Julv Aug Sept ' Oct Nov p Dec June July Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Aor Large denomination time deposits l Term repurchase agreements NSA Year Small denomination time deposits * Savings bonds Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances Commercial paper Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted See also Table C-67 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-69. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures1 ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month December : I960 P Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements2 Reserves of depository institutions NonborMonetary rowed NonborTotal plus Required base rowed extended credit Data Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Total Seasonal Extended credit 4i are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act and other regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-70. Commercial bank loans and securities [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted * ] Year and month December : " Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue sept : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov p Dec Loans and leases Total U.S NonState loans Govern- Other ComForbank and For- eign Lease ment secumercial Real Indi- Secu- finanand politi- eign official financ- Other securi- securi- rities Total and estate vidual rity cial cultural cal ing ties ties indusinstiinstisubdi- banks tutions receivtrial ables tutions visions " " Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of weekly data for foreign-related institutions beginning July Prior to July data for foreign-related institutions are averages of current and previous month-end data. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Excludes loans to commercial banks in the United States Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-71. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and Bills ( new issues ) 3-month 6-month ' Cons tant matur 3year year Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Highgrade NewCommunici- home pal mercial bonds mort- paper gage ( Stand- yields * months ard & Poor 's ) " Prime rate charged 6by banks High-low : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities Series excludes public utility issues for January through Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve rate Bank of New York High-low by the Treasury Department October due to lack of appropriate issues Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates. ( This series now published by the Federal Housing Finance Board ; it was formerly published by the Department of the Treasury ( Office of Thrift Supervision ) and by the Federal Home loan Bank Board. ) See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-71. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) l 3-month 6-month Constant maturities2 o year IfL 1U- year Corporate hnnric Donas ( Moody 's ) * aa naa Raa oaa Highgrade NewCommunici- home pal mercial bonds mort- paper gage ( Stand- yicios months8 i/iolH ard & Poor 's ) Prime rate charged by banks " Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve Bank of rate New York High-low : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec High-low Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the8 one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE C-72. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors.. U S Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n e e Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n e e Open-market paper U S Government and other loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and ndirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Foreign funds At banks Credit market instruments U S Government and related loans net U S Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-72. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item II III IV II III Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors U S Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans nee Open-market Daoer. Other 7o ! o Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector * State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n e e Open-market paper U S Government and other loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Credit market instruments Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U S Government and related loans net U S Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources At banks Credit market instruments Foreign funds Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Deposits and currency Private domestic nonfinancial sectors TABLE C-73. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten Total Multi- Coml-to4- family mercial family proper- properhouses ties ties to 4-family houses Total Total VA FHA guarinsured anteed Total l-to4family houses I960 II Ill IV | | Ill IV : II Ill Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE C-74. -Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter I960 : | | HI IV II III IV I | | HI Total Total Savings institutions1 Commercial banks8 Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others4 Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Beginning data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE C-75. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month December : I960 198Q Jan Feb Mar fc June July Sent NOV : : : : : : Dec Jan8 Feb Mar Apr fay June July Auc sept : : : Oct Nov " Total consumer credit Total Installment credit l Revolving2 Mobile home3 Automobile Other Noninstallment credit4 Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Excludes 30day charge credit held by travel and entertainment companies. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes open-end credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on 6a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Data newly available in January result in breaks in many series between December and January Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE C-76. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] On-budget Total Fiscal year or period Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Receipts Outlays Off-budget Surplus or deficit Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Total Held by the public Addendum : Gross national product Transition quarter Not strictly comparable with later data Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-77. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Act ual '3 * RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) * * 186'l71 200'228 * * Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS- ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Off-budcet Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System : AH other OUTLAYS- ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off -budget On-budget Off-budget * * See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-77. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Estimates RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts total outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays ^ OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS- ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions Off -budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS- ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-78. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures : EXPENDITURES Total on-budget and off-budget outlays Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Lending and financial transactions Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Timing adjustments Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Coverage differences Other Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Timing adjustments Coverage differences RECEIPTS Total on-budget and off-budget receipts ~ ! Note.-See Note Table C-76 For further details see Survey of Current Business February Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-79. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter I960 P : IV IV IV IV IV II III IV : | | Ill IV II Ill IV P Receipts Federal Government Surplus or deficit Expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income Receipts and Expenditures product accounts Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts -J i ! o Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-80. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV | | Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Net interest paid ContriPurchases Transbutions for Total * of goods fer social and payinsurserv- ments Total ance ices Less : InterInter- est reest ceived paid by government Less : Dividends received by government Surplus Addenor dum : deficit Grants ( ) in-aid nato tional income State and and local product ac- governments counts ! l ! e -'.3 Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Prior to dividends received is included in interest received Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises oii " '.3 '.7 _3 TABLE C-81. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal : s Calendar : * : IV.. : IV.. : IV : IV : IV.. : II.. III. IV. : II.. III. IV. : II.. III. IV Total Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate tax and profits tax and for nontax tax nontax social Total receipts accruals accruals insurance Subsi- Surplus Grantsor dies deficit in-aid less to ( ) Net State inter- current national surplus income and of est To To for- local paid govern- and National per- eign- govproduct defense sons ment accounts ers ernenterments prises Purchases of goods and services Total Transfer payments ( ) ! Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE C-82. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year or quarter I960 " : IV IV IV : IV IV | | Ill IV | | Ill IV II Ill IV Total Expenditures Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-insocial nontax aid nontax tax receipts accruals accruals insurance ! Total1 Subsi- Surplus or dies Trans- Net deficit Purless fer interest current ( ) chases paypaid surplus national of less income goods ments diviof to and and per- dends govern- product services sons received ment accounts enterprises Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ! l ! l _4 TABLE C-83. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source2 Fiscal year1 Total I960 Sales Indiand vidual Property gross taxes receipts income taxes taxes General expenditures by function2 Corporation from All net Federal income Govern- other ment taxes Total Education Highways Fiscal Public welfare All other4 years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other governmental administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years which ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-84. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Totall interestbearing public debt securities Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July AUR Sept Oct Nov Dec Marketable Total * * * Treasury bills Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total Nonmarketable Foreign govern- GovernU.S ment savings ment and account bonds public series series Other3 Includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately in millions of dollars-. in September 1986-September ; in October 1987-May ; in June-September ; in October 1988-May ; and in June-December Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source-. Department of the Treasury TABLE C-85. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding private * Maturity class Average length Within year Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : $ Years Months Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv 595,'471 * izzzzz Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note.-AII issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE C-86. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month Total Commercial banks2 Individuals3 Total Total Insurance Savings bonds * Other securities X Money market funds Corporations6 State and local governments6 .tr international7 Other investors8 : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec.'. : ; : : ; : ; : : : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Deb : Mar June Sept feb : Mar June Sept U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value * Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and3 Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investment of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored agencies Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE C-87. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter " IV IV IV IV IV II HI IV | | Ill IV | | HI IV Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability L4 B1.1 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Undistributed profits with inventory Total Dividends valuation and capital consumption adjustments TABLE C-88. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or Quarter Financial1 Total Total Total I960 : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II iii ! " ! " IV : II HI IV : | | Ill Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial _ Other Total Manufacturing ransportation Wholesale and public and retail trade utilities Rest of the world Other A Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table C-89 for industry detail Note.-The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-89. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Year or quarter I960 " IV : IV : IV IV : IV II Ill IV | | Ill IV | | HI Total manufacturing Total Pri- mary metal industries Nondurable goods Fabri- Machin- Electric Motor and cated ery elec- vehicles Other metal except tronic and prod- electri- equip- equipucts cal ment ment Food Chemi- Petrocals leum and and and kindred allied coal prod- prod- products ucts ucts Total Other o 2A -'. * Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-90. Saks profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter I960 : IV New series : : IV Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity ' Profits Before After income income taxes1 taxes Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Stockholders ' equity * Sales ( net ) Profits .Before .After income income taxes1 taxes Stock ^ holders ' equity * : | | III IV : II III IV : II III In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-91. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent Year or quarter All manufacturing corporations I960 : IV New series : IV | | HI IV | | Ill IV I II HI manufacturing Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note.-Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table C-90 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-92. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses Internal InvenYear or quarter Total External Credit market funds Domes- valuation Capital con- Foreign tic and Total undis- capital sumption earn-1 Total allow- ings tributed conprofits sumption ances adjustments Total Securities and mortgages Loans and Other shortterm paper 67.C : II Ill IV : IL " " III IV : I II Ill Discrepancy Capital Increase ( sources in Total expendi- financial less s tures assets uses ) : Foreign branch Consists of tax profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-93. Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices1 New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Year or month Composite Jan Feb Mar Aor May June July AuJ Sept " " i Oct. " " " " Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Aor May " " " " " " " " " " June July AUK Sept Oct Nov Dec Industrial Transportation Utility % Common stock yields ( percent ) Standard Dow & Poor 's Jones composite Dividend- Earningsindex price price Finance industrial ( 1941average8 ratio6 ratio7 = ) BM Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through May are averages of weekly closing prices * Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange * Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index " Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE C-94. Business formation and business failures Business failures l Index of net business formation ( = ) Year or month I960 ' New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate2 Number of failures Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar & Jura Jutv Aug ; ; fof Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr jure ' js Juhr Sept " " " : " " '.'. Oct Nov Dec ' " " " ' ZZZZ zzzz Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data for based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data Data for are subject to revision due to amended court filings > Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation AGRICULTURE TABLE C-95. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year or quarter Total1 I960 | | HI IV II Ill IV | | HI Net farm income Cash marketing receipts Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 ! ! ! '.1 Production expenses Current dollars dollars3 * Casn marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the GNP implicit price deflator ( Department of Commerce ) Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE C-96. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Crops2 Year Total Total Livestock Oil and Food grains crops products2 * Crop producunit of hour of tion per total farm input work4 acre Per Feed grains ! ! Farm output Per Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production * Includes items not included in groups shown New survey-based labor productivity time series ; not comparable with data published in Economic Reports prior to January Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-97. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April * Farm employment ( thousands ) " As Num- percent ber of ( thou- total sands ) population8 Total Family workers I960 % Year Hired worKers Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Total Feed Meseed Farm chanical cultural and Farm real power livelabor estate and chemimachin- cals stock purery chases8 'Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table C-32 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected * Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Note.-Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE C-98. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by fanners [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month I960 * Jan Feb Mar Apr ! ! " July Augzzzzzz : Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May July * J odL : .....zzzz.. Nov DecZZZZZZ " ! All farm P2 ucts Crops Livestock and products All commodities services interest taxes and wage rates1 Prices paid by farmers Production items Tractors and selfFuels FertilTotal2 proand izer pelled energy machinery " Addendum : AverWage rates & real estate value per acre3 m zzz : " Includes items used for family living not shown separately * Includes other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through February for April for and February for Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-99. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Exports Year Food Feed Total grains grains ( < * ( ) ( ) /4 Oilseeds and products ( \ i ( ) V I960 /4 ( ) mports Cotton Tobacco ( ) AniCrops mals fruits and Total1 and prodvegeucts tabfes3 Animals and products Coffee Cocoa cultural beans trade and prod- balance ucts ( ) o.i ( ) M1 \ ) ) ) ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown Rice wheat and wheat flour ( ) _1 { separately Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Less than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-100. Balance sheet of the farm sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Financial assets House- End of year Total Real estate hold DeposLive- MachinInvestits U.S stock1 ery and Crops2 equip- and savings ments in ment motor coopercur- bonds and vehicles furnishings Total Real estate debt atives rency NonProprireal etors ' estate equities debt I960 l % i 1974s " Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC ' Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data include operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source * Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE C-101. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States.. U S assets abroad U S official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Pund Foreign currencies U.S. Government assets other than official reserve U S loans and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. shortterm assets Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Foreign assets in the United States Foreign official assets in the United States U S Government securities US Treasury securities Other Other U S Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not ineluded elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States Direct investment in the United States U.S Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds.. Corporate stocks U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis U S. private assets Direct investment abroad Foreign securities TABLE C-102. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Merchandise12 Year or quarter Exports : Imports Investment income3 Net Receipts Payments Net Net Net travel Other Balance military and serv- on goods transac- transpor- ices and tions tation net3 services4 receipts Remittances Balance pensions on and other current unilateral account transfers1 I II III IV : | II Ill IV : I II Ill " Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net In concept balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts ( and the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts ) although the series differ because of different handling of certain items ( gold capital gains and losses etc. ) revisions etc See next page for continuation of table TABLE C-102. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total U.S official reserve assets6 Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Of which : Total ( sum of Seasonal the items adjustment with sign discrepreversed ) ancy U.S private assets Statistical discrepancy Other U.S Government assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( S&Rs ) I960 * : II III IV : | | Ill IV : H III ' Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. Quarterly data for investment income payments net military transactions U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Imports Nonpetroleum products Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total culturCapital trial al goods prod- Total supplies except Auto- Other motive ucts mate- automotive rials Total leum and products Industrial Total and materials Capital goods except Auto- Other automo- motive tive HI " ; ! ! ; ; ; ! IV : I II Ill : ll " " " " " III IV : | * End-use categories beginning are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military urce : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Billions of dollars ] first quarters at annual rate1 Item Exports Industrial countries Canada japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC28 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated o Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC28 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Balance ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Canada japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC28 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated '3 Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted 'Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE C-105. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] General merchandise imports ( customs value ) Merchandise exports ( f.a.s. value ) * Principal end-use commodity category Year or month Foods Total8 feeds and beverages industrial supplies and materials Principal end-use commodity category Con- InAuto- summo- er Foods dustive trial goods vehiTotal feeds supexand cept cles ex- Other " bev- plies er- and auto- ' cept maages terimotive en- autoals gines mo- ft tive F.a.s. value * ft goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Trade balance ftan Exeral nnrte mer- ( Us. ) Exchan- less ports dise im- ( f.a.s. ) ( nonless Other ports ports im ( cusexfci.f. toms ports value ) val- fci.f. ) cept Consumer automotive \ uej Customs value F.a.s. value ? ? Customs value ? ? : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar AprMay June July AUK Sept Oct Nov ? ? ? 6.fi ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? s.a '2.2 39J ^ ^ Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning * Includes undocumented exports to Canada Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments * C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data beginning include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-106. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] 1QCO 1QCO IQfi ? IQfiC 1QB7 1QQO Nov Dec All countries Industrial countries * United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Iceland.. Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia * Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data for Luxembourg * Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; ; November ; and December Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics TABLE C-107. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada European Community1 Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) * : | | Ill IV : II III IV : 6'9 Consumer prices ( = ) II HI IV | | Ill IV : Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom West Germany Portugal and Spain. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in Data for Portugal and Spain which became members on January are excluded prior to All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Investment Analysis Trade Statistics Division ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE C-108. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( percent ) I960 % : II III IV : II .'. III IV U '.6 Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( = ) 2ft.O Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France West Germany and United Kingdom should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Many Italians reported as unemployed did not actively seek work in the past days and they have been excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts. Inclusion of such persons would about double the unemployment rate for Italy through and increase it to percent for * There are breaks in series for West Germany ( and ) and Italy ( ) Based on the prior series the rates for West Germany were percent in and percent in and the rate for Italy was percent in Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-109. Foreign exchange rates [ Currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ] Belgium ( franc ) Period March : II III IV : II III IV Netherlands ( guilder ) Period Canada ( dollar ) Sweden ( krona ) France ( franc ) Switzerland ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) United Kingdom ( pound ) Italy ( lira ' ) Japan ( yen ) Multilateral trade-weighted value of theU.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real2 March | | Ill IV : I | | Ill IV Cents per unit of foreign currency Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G-110. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] Area and country average annual average annual average annual average OECD countries2 United States Canada japan European Community France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Communist countries USSR Eastern Europe China Estimates OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) includes Australia Austria Belgium Denmark Finland. France West Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey and united Kingdom not shown separately Includes Belgium Denmark Greece Ireland Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal and Spain not shown separately Includes North Korea and Yugoslavia not shown separately * Not available Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers