& i Transmitted to thf L Febioi Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. CONTENTS ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER FOUNDATIONS FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH CHAPTER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS CHAPTER OIL PRICE SHOCKS AND ECONOMIC POLICY CHAPTER FLEXIBILITY AND CHANGE IN THE ECONOMY Ill CHAPTER INNOVATION AND REFORM IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR CHAPTER ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION AROUND THE WORLD CHAPTER TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report seepage ( iii ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate : Just over years ago the longest peacetime economic expansion in U.S. history began. By the start of the 1990s the unemployment rate had fallen to levels not seen since the early 1970s and inflation remained relatively low and remarkably stable when compared with the 1970s. More than million new jobs were created by our dynamic and diverse market economy the largest and the most productive in the world. Reflecting both the evolving needs and wants of the American people and the rapid advance of technology some industries and regions experienced much more robust job growth than others. And as is normal during economic expansions the rate of growth of the Nation 's output varied from year to year The events of were a reminder that even a healthy economy can suffer shocks and short-term setbacks. In early August Iraq invaded and occupied its small defenseless neighbor Kuwait and threatened Saudi Arabia. Oil prices rose substantially on the world market and business and consumer confidence plummeted. These shocks hit an economy that was already growing slowly for several reasons including worldwide increases in interest rates tightened credit conditions and the lingering effects of a successful attempt begun in by the Federal Reserve to prevent an acceleration of inflation. U.S. output turned down in the fourth quarter of and it became clear that the economy had entered a recession. I know that in some regions of our country people are in genuine economic distress This temporary interruption in America 's economic growth does not signal a decline in the basic long-term vitality of the U.S. economy. Indeed there were important economic achievements in Even though many analysts had earlier forecast increased inflation the underlying rate of inflation was contained and showed clear signs of declining by the end of the year. Low inflation is essential to lower interest rates and strong economic growth. The U.S. trade deficit declined for the third year in a row and U.S firms remained competitive in world markets. Exports of American products reached an all-time high in and exceeded those of any other nation. Productivity in U.S. manufacturing continued to grow impressively. Some regions and industries experienced relatively strong job growth My Administration 's economic policies are designed both to mitigate the current downturn and to provide for a solid recovery and the highest possible rate of sustainable economic growth. Because these policies are credible and systematic they reduce uncertainty and pave the way to higher growth with sustained job-creating expansions. With these policies in place the current recession is expected to be mild and brief by historical standards Economic growth is projected to recover by the middle of this year. Inflation and interest rates are expected to decline. With the adoption of my pro-growth initiatives the recovery and ensuing expansion are projected to be strong and sustained and to be accompanied by continued progress toward lower inflation As the Nation proceeds into the 1990s it is important to remember the simple secret of America 's economic success in the 1980s : a government policy that allowed the private sector to serve as the engine of economic growth. We must also remember that economic growth is the fundamental determinant of the long-run success of any nation the basic source of rising living standards and the key to meeting the needs and desires of the American people The process of growth necessarily involves change. Advances in technology shifts in world market conditions and changes in tastes and demographics have created major new industries and dramatically altered the fortunes of existing industries. The lesson of history is clear. Attempts to protect special interests by blocking the economy 's natural market-driven evolution through regulation subsidy or protection from competition reduce the economy 's flexibility and impair its ability to grow and to create jobs Growth and prosperity are enhanced by strengthening and extending the scope of market forces not by substituting government dictates for the free choices of workers consumers and businesses TOWARD RENEWED GROWTH The budget law enacted last fall gives fiscal policy a strong and credible medium-term framework. It increases the ability of the fiscal system to dampen the impact of the current recession while providing for strong controls to reduce Federal spending as a percentage of our gross national product. A major reason that the budget deficit is expected to increase this year before declining steadily thereafter is the increase in payments to those adversely affected by the current downturn and the reduction in tax receipts as incomes grow more slowly. These automatic responses to the recession will help cushion its effects I am committed to maintaining a tax system that will sustain strong economic growth. My proposal to reduce the tax rate on capital gains would give a needed boost to the economy and set it on a strong course of economic growth and job creation for years to come. A lower capital gains tax rate would encourage entrepreneurial activity which plays a critical role in creating new jobs new products and new methods of production. It would reduce the bias in favor of debt financing and thereby decrease the financial risks borne by U.S. corporations and their workers and shareholders The Federal Reserve 's control of inflation throughout the recent long expansion has given it the credibility necessary to mitigate the current downturn significantly without triggering an increase in inflationary expectations. Federal Reserve action in recent months will also help to alleviate tight credit market conditions that have hampered the economy. It is important that the Federal Reserve sustain money and credit growth necessary for the maintenance of sustained economic growth especially during an economic downturn. And while unwarranted risks should be avoided I believe that sound banks should be making more sound loans Comprehensive banking reform will help to alleviate tight credit conditions by reducing unnecessary restrictions on the banking sector. Healthier depository institutions are essential for a sound financial system. Lifting restrictions on interstate banking activities and on the ability of banks to combine with commercial and other financial firms will increase banks ' competitiveness. These changes will enhance banks ' ability to attract capital and reduce the risk of a contraction in lending Some have argued that the government should react to the recent oil price shock by reregulating energy markets. They would do well to remember the lessons of the 1970s when regulation worsened the impacts of two oil shocks and forced Americans to waste many hours in long and unnecessary lines at gas stations Long-term uncertainties about energy prices make it vital that U.S energy policy be based in both the short run and the long run on the flexibility and efficiency that only well-functioning markets can provide My Administration 's National Energy Strategy calls for removing unnecessary barriers to market forces so that ample supplies of reasonably priced energy can continue to foster economic growth The Strategy also outlines initiatives to enhance the energy security of the United States and its friends and allies to encourage costeffective conservation and efficiency measures to increase the use of alternative fuels and to continue to mitigate the environmental consequences of energy use SUPPORTING LONG-RUN GROWTH The Federal Government can not mandate or effectively direct economic growth but it can and should create conditions that encourage market-driven growth. That requires reducing barriers to saving investing working and innovating. Encouraging growth also requires sustaining and expanding the role of market forces and thereby enhancing the economy 's flexibility. Attempts to second-guess the market and to direct government support to particular firms industries or technologies in the name of promoting growth are inevitably counterproductive The multiyear Federal deficit reduction package adopted last year the largest and most comprehensive such package in U.S. history will reduce the Federal budget deficit by nearly a half-trillion dollars over the next years relative to baseline projections. This substantial reduction in government borrowing will raise the national saving rate and increase the pool of funds available to finance job-creating private investment in new productive capacity and new technology My Administration remains firmly committed to taking additional steps to lower the cost of capital and to encourage entrepreneurship saving investment and innovation. I have again asked the Congress to reduce the tax rate on long-term capital gains and to make the research and experimentation tax credit permanent. To encourage private saving my budget again includes Family Savings Accounts and penalty-free withdrawals from Individual Retirement Accounts for first-time homebuyers. My Administration will seek increased Federal support for research that has broad national benefits and we will make the results of government-supported research more accessible to the private sector so that they can be brought more quickly to market Strong economic growth will continue to require a sound national transportation infrastructure. My Administration 's proposals for restructuring highway programs centered around a new National Highway System program would make a substantial contribution to meeting those demands Economic growth requires skilled and adaptable workers as well as modern capital and new technology. Excellence in education is the key to increasing the quality of the U.S. labor force. My Administration is strongly committed to making the U.S. educational system second to none so that U.S. workers can continue to compete effectively with their peers in other nations. To meet this goal the performance of U.S. elementary and secondary education must be dramatically improved. More money will not ensure excellence ; America is already a world leader in spending on education. Fundamental reform is necessary Government policies should be designed to put power in the hands of individuals and families to give them the tools and incentives to improve their own lives. Thus students and their families must be given greater freedom to choose among competing schools and talented and skilled individuals must be freed from unnecessary obstacles to entering the teaching profession. My Administration will seek enactment of a new Educational Excellence Act that would support choice in education alternative certification for teachers and principals rewards for outstanding teachers and for schools that improve their students ' achievements and innovative approaches to mathematics and science education The Immigration Act of the first major reform of legal immigration in a quarter-century will substantially increase the overall level of immigration particularly of skilled workers. These new workers will contribute to U.S. economic growth as well as to the Nation 's social and cultural vitality The Americans with Disabilities Act is the most significant extension of civil rights legislation in two decades. It will enable more of our citizens with disabilities to enter the economic mainstream and thus to better their own lives while contributing to the Nation 's economic strength Last year important legislation passed that will give power and opportunity to individuals. The expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit the new health insurance credit and the other child care provisions in the 1990s budget legislation will put dollars for child care directly in the hands of parents instead of bureaucracies. The Homeownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere ( HOPE ) initiative in the National Affordable Housing Act will expand homeownership and give more families a stake in their communities. My Administration strongly supported the expansion of medicaid to provide health insurance to more pregnant women and children in low-income families But there is more to be done. My Administration will continue to press for the establishment of enterprise zones to encourage entrepreneurship investment and job creation in distressed communities. We will propose initiatives focused on infant mortality preventive measures and nutrition to improve the health of those least able to provide for their own needs FLEXIBILITY AND REGULATION The remarkable flexibility of the U.S. economy which stems from its reliance on free markets is a major national asset. Flexibility enables the economy to cushion the effects of adverse developments such as oil price shocks and to take full advantage of innovations and other new opportunities. Indeed the responsiveness of the economy to new opportunities is an important spur to innovation and a source of economic dynamism Government regulation generally serves to reduce economic flexibility and thus should have a very limited role. Where regulation is necessary regulatory programs should pass strict cost-benefit tests and should seek to harness the power of market forces to serve the public interest not to distort or diminish those forces The lesson of the savings and loan crisis to which my Administration responded swiftly is not that competition and innovation are incompatible with safety and soundness in the financial sector Rather this experience shows that poorly designed regulation inadequate supervision and limits on risk-reducing diversification can combine to produce behavior that undermines creditors ' confidence and imposes unnecessary burdens on taxpayers We can and must ensure the safety and soundness of our banking system and continue to provide full protection for insured deposits while allowing competition to improve efficiency and encourage innovation. My Administration 's proposals for comprehensive reform of the regulatory system governing banks will achieve these goals. In addition these reforms will enhance the ability of U.S banks to compete in the global markets for financial services Last year 's farm legislation embodied important steps toward a market-oriented agricultural policy and away from government domination of this vital and progressive sector. Farmers have been given additional flexibility in planting decisions in a way that will both sustain farmers ' incomes and save taxpayers ' money Market-based initiatives can and should play a key role in environmental policy as well. In my Administration proposed comprehensive legislation to combat air pollution. This proposal broke a logjam that had blocked congressional action for more than a decade and a landmark clean air bill was enacted last year the most significant air pollution legislation in the Nation 's history The centerpiece of this bill is an innovative market-based program for controlling at the least possible cost to the economy the emissions that produce acid rain. All provisions of this legislation will be implemented so as to minimize unnecessary burdens on American workers and firms Economic growth and environmental protection are compatible but only if environmental goals reflect careful cost-benefit analysis and if environmental regulation provides maximum flexibility to meet those goals at least cost. My Administration will continue to be guided by the responsibilities of global stewardship ; we will seek both to protect the environment and to maintain economic growth to give all the world 's children the chance to lead better lives than their parents LEADERSHIP IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY Throughout the postwar period the United States has led the world toward a system of free trade and open markets. The benefits of global economic integration and expanded international trade have been enormous at home and abroad. U.S. firms gain from access to global markets ; U.S. workers benefit from foreign investment in America ; and U.S. consumers can buy goods and services from around the world. Competition and innovation have been stimulated and businesses have increased their efficiency by locating operations around the globe. The phenomenal prosperity and vitality of market-oriented economies and the bankruptcy of the socialist model point the way to future progress and growth My Administration will continue to push aggressively for open markets in all nations including our own and will continue to oppose protectionism. Protectionist trade barriers impose burdens on the many to serve the interests of the few and can only reduce the Nation 's competitiveness. Government attempts to overrule the decisions of the international marketplace and to manage trade or investment flows inevitably reduce economic flexibility and lower living standards My Administration 's top trade policy priority continues to be the successful completion of the Uruguay Round negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) Success in the Uruguay Round would open agricultural markets lower or eliminate tariffs on many products strengthen the GATT system and extend it to cover important new areas such as services investment and intellectual property critical to U.S. economic vitality These improvements would significantly increase the ability of the global economy to raise living standards in the United States and around the world. Failure on the other hand would increase trade frictions and could lead to a destructive new round of protectionism In addition my Administration has moved to pave the way toward a hemispheric zone of free trade. We have announced our intention to begin negotiations on a free-trade agreement with Mexico. My Enterprise for the Americas Initiative promises to fuel growth and prosperity throughout this hemisphere by removing barriers to trade and investment. This initiative also aims to provide official debt reduction to countries engaged in significant economic reforms and thereby to build on my Administration 's ongoing support for commercial debt reduction America remains a beacon of hope to peoples around the world Our Nation continues to demonstrate by shining example that political democracy and free markets reinforce each other and together lead to liberty and prosperity. Nations in this hemisphere and the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe are eagerly moving to follow America 's example. The challenges these nations face as they fundamentally restructure their economies are enormous. My Administration will continue its strong support and assistance for their vital and historic efforts LOOKING AHEAD In my Economic Report last year I stated that I looked forward to the 1990s with hope and optimism. Despite the economic events of we have reason for both hope and optimism in full measure as the Nation approaches the next American century Following sound economic policy principles my Administration seeks to achieve the maximum possible rate of sustainable economic growth. We must continue to adhere to those principles if we are to soften the impacts of the current recession and to strengthen the foundation for strong growth in the years to come. Economic growth remains the key to raising living standards for all Americans to expanding job opportunities and to maintaining America 's global economic leadership THE WHITE HOUSE ( / FEBRUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Michael J. Boskin Chairman Richard L. Schmalensee Member John B. Taylor Member // CONTENTS Page CHAPTER FOUNDATIONS FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH Recent Developments and Prospects Developments in The Outlook Building on Strength Policies for Renewed Growth Fiscal Policy Monetary and Financial Sector Policy Policies to Support Growth Encouraging Investment and Improving Education.. Strengthening Market Forces Giving Power and Opportunity to Individuals Limiting Regulation and Making It Work U.S. Leadership in the Global Economy International Trade Liberalization International Macroeconomic Issues Support for Economies in Transition Conclusion CHAPTER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS The U.S. Economy in Monetary Policy and Credit Markets Federal Budget Developments Economic Growth and Employment Prices and Wages Summary Monetary and Fiscal Policy Outlook Monetary Policy Fiscal Policy Summary The Economic Outlook The Outlook for the Short Term The Prospects for Growth in the Longer Term Summary Conclusion CHAPTER OIL PRICE SHOCKS AND ECONOMIC POLICY Size and Duration of Oil Price Shocks Recent Oil Price Movements Comparison with Previous Shocks Page Summary The Effects of Oil Price Shocks Effects on Inflation Effects on Real Growth Estimates of the Effects Summary Macroeconomic Policies The Advantages of Systematic Policies Designing Fiscal and Monetary Policies Lessons from Previous Shocks Summary Short-Run Energy Policy Response The Dangers of Reregulation Energy Futures Markets and Speculation Strategic Oil Reserves Summary f Longer Term Energy Policies Long-Term Trends in Energy Prices and Use Energy Security Strengthening Market Forces Summary Conclusion CHAPTER FLEXIBILITY AND CHANGE IN THE ECONOMY The Process of Dynamic Change Sources of Economic Change The Changing Structure of the U.S. Economy Preserving the Flexibility of the Economy Summary Education Reform for an Adaptable Work Force The Current State of Education Toward an Effective Educational System Summary Agriculture : Technological Success and the Need for More Flexible Policies Technological Change and Productivity Growth Consumer Demand and International Trade Toward a Market-Oriented Farm Policy Summary Health Care : Dynamic Technology and Changing Demographics Recent Trends Perceived Problems of the Existing System Why Health Care Markets Perform Poorly Summary Telecommunications : Technological and Regulatory Innovation Ill Ill Lessons from Deregulation Maintaining a Dynamic Industry Summary Defense Industries : Adjusting to the End of the Cold War Historical Experience The Problem and Potential of Defense Conversion Summary Conclusion CHAPTER INNOVATION AND REFORM IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR Development of Financial Institutions in the United States Banks and Savings and Loans The Great Depression and Banking Reform Summary The 1970s : Inflation High Interest Rates and New Competition Rise of Money Market Funds Internationalization Summary The S&L Crisis Vulnerability to Interest Rate Increases Insolvency and Closure Resolving the S&L Crisis Summary Reform in the Financial Sector Context for Depository Institution Reform Issues in Deposit Insurance Reform Deposit Insurance Reform : Inducing Market-Based Incentives Removing Regulatory Obstacles Federal Credit Programs Summary Conclusion CHAPTER ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION AROUND THE WORLD Forces for Change The Failure of Economic Policies Repercussions of Economic Policy Failures Early Attempts at Reform Summary Principles for Economic Reform Macroeconomic Reforms Structural Reforms Summary Implementing Economic Reforms Page The Need for Comprehensive Reform Example : Reforming Polish Agriculture Summary Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union Poland Yugoslavia and East Germany Hungary and Czechoslovakia The Soviet Union Challenges in and Summary Reform in the Americas Recent History of Latin American Reforms Mexico Chile Summary The Role of the United States U.S. Support for Eastern Europe U.S. Support for Latin America Working with Multilateral Institutions and Other Governments The Role of the U.S. Private Sector Summary Conclusion CHAPTER TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH The Gains from Free Trade and Losses from Protectionism Efficiency Productivity and Growth Import Protection and Managed Trade Summary Global Trade and the Uruguay Round Process and Timing of the Negotiations Areas of Negotiation Summary U.S. Pro-Trade Initiatives in the Americas and Elsewhere U.S.-Mexico Free-Trade Area Initiatives for the Americas Structural Impediments Initiative Summary Multinational Corporations and the Trade-Investment Linkage The Benefits of Foreign Direct Investment U.S. Foreign Direct Investment Policy Summary Conclusion APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production Pa e s LIST OF TABLES CHARTS AND BOXES Tables Growth of Real GNP and Components Economic Performance and Projections for the United States and other G-7 Nations Economic Outlook for Alternative Projections and Their Impact on the Deficit Accounting for Growth in Real GNP Administration Economic Assumptions Aging of the U.S. Population Credit Provided by Private Financial Intermediaries... Parents of U.S. Multinational Corporations vs. U.S Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Corporations : U.S. Operations in Parents of U.S. Multinational Corporations and U.S Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Corporations : Input Supply Choices vs. Charts Real GNP Growth Federal Funds Rate Money Supply Interest Rates Long-Term Government Bond Yields The Unemployment Rate Regional Employment Growth Consumer Prices Oil Prices The Employment Cost Index Reductions in the Federal Budget Deficit NIPA Basis The Fiscal Budget Cycle Energy Consumption per Dollar of GNP Inflation and Oil Shocks in the United States Inflation and Oil Shocks in Japan Oil Spot Prices and Futures Prices Real Energy Prices Labor Force Shares by Industry Defense Purchases as a Percent of GNP Deposits and Money Market Funds Composition of Loans to Businesses Assets at U.S. Offices of Foreign Banks Charts New Mortgage Interest Rates and Thrift Portfolio Yields Estimated Increase in U.S. GNP from a Successful Uruguay Round U.S. Trade with Mexico and Canada World Stocks of Foreign Direct Investment Boxes Revised National Income and Product Accounts Sectoral and Regional Income and Employment Why Did Gasoline Prices Rise So Fast ? Futures Markets Speculation and Price Volatility International Comparisons of Energy Use Texas Alternative Certification Program How the " Triple Base " Provision Works Incentives in the Market for Health Insurance Inflation-Proof Bonds and Mortgages Alternative National Deposit Insurance Systems Economic Reform in China The West German Erhard Reforms The Role of the IMF in Economic Reform The Income Effects of a Successful Uruguay Round " Nontrade " Policies Can Cause Trade Disputes Export Subsidies : Who Gains and Who Loses ? The Composition of U.S.-Mexico Trade Foreign Direct Investment : Who Invests and Where ? CHAPTER Foundations for Economic Growth THE LONGEST PEACETIME EXPANSION in the Nation 's history began in Throughout the expansion inflation remained relatively low and stable compared with the 1970s. By the end of the 1980s the unemployment rate had fallen to levels not experienced since the early 1970s. As is normal in times of robust economic progress growth varied from year to year during the expansion. After a rapid recovery from late through growth slowed temporarily in gained considerable strength in and and turned sluggish in and The first year of the 1990s served as a reminder that even a healthy economy faces the risk of short-term setbacks from external shocks and other disturbances. In August Iraq outraged the world by invading and occupying Kuwait. In the weeks that followed oil prices rose sharply on the world market and uncertainty about the timing of the resolution of the Persian Gulf crisis caused business and consumer confidence to plummet. These developments were a substantial shock to an economy that had already slowed for several reasons including worldwide increases in interest rates tightened credit conditions and the lingering effects of a monetary policy that had begun to tighten in in a successful attempt to prevent an increase in inflation. In the fourth quarter of U.S output as measured by real ( inflation-adjusted ) gross national product ( GNP ) turned down and it became clear that the economy had entered a recession The Administration 's economic policies are designed both to mitigate the current downturn and to strengthen the foundations for a solid recovery and a return to sustained economic growth. The dominant factor in the success and failure of nations long-term growth is the fundamental source of improvements in living standards. By responding systematically and prudently to ongoing developments the Administration 's economic policies reduce uncertainty and maintain the credibility so important to long-run growth and to the ability to respond to shocks that may occur in the future The global wave of market-oriented reform most visible in Eastern Europe shows that the world has learned from America that reliance on free markets is the key to sustainable long-term growth and prosperity. In the U.S. economy free markets fuel and direct the process of economic growth. Market forces in the financial sector channel savings into growth-enhancing investment opportunities ; these forces both reward and encourage entrepreneurship the economy 's sparkplug The flexibility of the market-based U.S. economy both increases its resilience in the face of disturbances and enhances its ability to make the most of new opportunities. That in turn increases the incentives for productive innovation. As the global economy becomes more integrated and the pace of technological and economic change quickens flexibility grows ever more important The proper role of government is not to supplant or suppress the private market forces that drive the process of economic growth but to create an environment within which rapid growth can occur Because regulation inevitably reduces flexibility its role in the economy must be limited. Barriers to saving investing working and innovating must be reduced RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS The downturn in the U.S. economy in the latter part of does not signal any decline in its long-run underlying health or basic vitality. As stated in last year 's Report economic expansions end because of external shocks imbalances in demand or policy mistakes The oil price shock of makes clear that the economy is episodically buffeted by external shocks. If sound fiscal monetary regulatory and trade policies are maintained however such shocks will have smaller effects on the economy downturns will be shallower and shorter and expansions will be longer. In fact with such policies now in place the current downturn is expected to be shorter and milder than the average post-World War II recession DEVELOPMENTS IN The oil price shock the sudden drop in consumer and business confidence and the uncertainty about when the Persian Gulf crisis would end were undoubtedly the key factors in the downturn in late Oil prices more than doubled between July and October before declining toward the end of the year and again in early after the outbreak of hostilities in the Gulf. Consumer and business confidence may have been reduced by the superficial similarity of this oil price shock to those of the 1970s when unemployment and inflation soared The oil price shock hit an economy that was already growing slowly. A worldwide rise in long-term interest rates early in the year partly due to anticipated increases in the demand for capital in Eastern Europe and to concerns about accelerating inflation put upward pressure on borrowing rates in the United States and slowed the growth of consumer and business spending. This rise occurred when long-term interest rates were already high in part because of large Federal budget deficits and the prospect that they might continue indefinitely The Federal Reserve had initiated a more restrictive monetary policy in the spring of to ward off an increase in the underlying inflation rate. The lagged effects of this policy also slowed the economy in and as higher interest rates discouraged spending. This tightening successfully contained inflationary pressures and left monetary policy with much more latitude compared with the inflationary policies of the 1970s to ameliorate the adverse effects of the oil price shock Tighter credit markets reduced the availability of loans to some creditworthy borrowers and this also contributed to the slowdown Banks and other financial institutions tightened lending standards for a number of reasons : A slowing economy increased the risks of lending to businesses. The value of collateral on residential and commercial real estate loans fell with declining real estate values Overly zealous bank examiners discouraged some banks from making new loans. And the need to increase the ratio of capital to loan assets to meet minimum capital requirements forced some banks to curtail loan growth. Stricter lending standards for commercial and residential loans slowed business investment and housing construction There were several favorable economic developments in The underlying inflation rate was contained. After a temporary increase in the first quarter the growth rate of the GNP fixedweighted price index the broadest measure of economy-wide inflation declined later in the year as did the rate of change in the employment cost index a measure of wage pressures in private labor markets. Compared with when inflationary pressures were becoming evident and the Federal Reserve began to take actions to contain them the employment cost measure of wage inflation grew more slowly during rather than more rapidly as many had feared The continued decline in the trade deficit was also good news. Including trade in both goods and services the trade deficit has declined from $ billion in to $ billion in U.S. firms remained competitive in world markets exports reached a new record and the United States remained the world 's leading exporter. Labor productivity in manufacturing continued its recent strong growth. And although growth fell for the overall economy some regions experienced relatively strong employment gains THE OUTLOOK The Administration projects that real economic growth will be percent over the four quarters of with the downturn continuing through the first quarter and a recovery beginning near the middle of the year. Inflation is expected to remain under control declining substantially from the temporarily high levels reached as a result of the oil price shock. Continued progress in gradually lowering the underlying rate of inflation is also expected Interest rates are projected to be lower on average in than in reflecting slower growth in credit demand during the downturn as well as lower inflation rates The current downturn is expected to be short and shallow for several reasons. Most firms have kept inventories low relative to sales reducing the need for a sharp cut in production to work off excess inventories. Such inventory corrections accounted for much of the decline in output in earlier postwar recessions. Moreover net exports are projected to improve both because the Nation 's major trading partners are expected on average to experience stronger growth than the United States and because the decline in the value of the dollar since has lowered the price of U.S exports on world markets. Oil prices remain a source of uncertainty in the outlook but they have declined substantially since their peak in October particularly since the start of Operation Desert Storm. Finally both fiscal and monetary policies are well positioned to mitigate the downturn. There is a downside risk that the tightness in credit markets evident in will continue into a consideration that poses special challenges for monetary policy Assuming adoption of the Administration 's growth initiatives including a lower tax rate on long-term capital gains tax incentives to reduce barriers to household saving reforms to strengthen the financial sector and increased investment in children education infrastructure space and high technology all within the context of lower structural budget deficits the long-term outlook is excellent. Growth is expected to strengthen in with the economy in a relatively high-growth recovery through before returning to a solid sustainable expansion. With sound economic policies in place there is no fundamental obstacle to an expansion in the 1990s at least as long and strong as the record expansion of the 1980s BUILDING ON STRENGTH In designing policies to cushion the current downturn and enhance long-run U.S. economic performance it is critical to remember that the Nation already has the largest and most productive economy in the world. The historic changes that began in Eastern Europe in represent in part the triumph of the basic principles upon which the American economy has been built. The flexibility and adaptability of free markets have given America both the highest living standard of any major economy and the means to ensure the Nation 's continued prosperity With less than percent of the world 's population the United States produces about percent of the world 's total output ( measured by GNP ) The U.S. economy is more than twice as large as the next largest economy that of Japan. The average standard of living of Americans as measured by GNP per capita is above that in other major industrialized countries. U.S. productivity is also higher than in those other nations ; as measured by GNP per worker in productivity in West Germany and Japan was only about three-fourths of that in the United States Economic growth in a flexible market economy involves change as well as expansion ; the waxing and waning of individual industries and sectors is natural and healthy. In the United States as in most other industrialized nations changes in demand productivity and demographics have produced a long-term shift in employment from goods-producing to service-producing sectors. Dramatic advances in productivity have kept manufacturing 's share of total real output roughly constant throughout the postwar period even though its share of total employment has declined America is unsurpassed in basic research and has by far the world 's largest share of contributions to scientific literature. U.S firms have a distinct edge in many knowledge-intensive products and the United States continues to produce larger volumes of many high-technology products than any other nation Recent increases in foreign investment in the United States reflect both the size and health of the American economy and the trend toward greater global economic integration. Those who are concerned about this investment neglect the lessons of history Fears of foreign investment were widespread in Europe in the 1950s and 1960s when the issue was American investment overseas. However as Europeans have since learned foreign investment that helps to build plants and equip workers can increase productivity and raise standards of living. Foreign investment in the United States is a sign of America 's strength and a vote of confidence in its economic future POLICIES FOR RENEWED GROWTH Fiscal policy the Federal Government 's taxation expenditure and borrowing policies and monetary policy decisions directly affecting the money supply and interest rates can have powerful effects on the economy in both the short run and the long run. The government 's policy toward the financial sector the regulation and supervision of banks and other financial institutions significantly affects both the short-run stability of the economy and its long-run ability to channel savings efficiently into productive investments When unemployment increases or inflation seems to be accelerating fiscal and monetary policies can alleviate the economy 's immediate problems. But a sequence of short-sighted discretionary reactions can produce poorer performance on average than adherence to well-designed credible systematic policies. Businesses and households are forward-looking and expectations about future economic conditions and macroeconomic policies affect their decisions Frequent discretionary changes in policy impede long-term planning and thus undermine the economy 's performance Signals about the goals and approach that will guide monetary and fiscal decisions must be clear and credible. Credibility provides the latitude to respond to short-run developments without altering the public 's expectations that policy will continue to be stable and systematic. But credibility like respect must be earned ; monetary and fiscal actions must be consistent with stated long-run goals and policies Accurate and timely economic data reduce uncertainty and enhance the soundness both of private sector decisionmaking and of macroeconomic policy analysis and implementation. The Administration is thus committed to continuing improvements to the Nation 's statistical infrastructure FISCAL POLICY During an economic downturn government expenditures such as unemployment compensation increase and tax receipts fall relative to what they otherwise would be. Although they temporarily increase the budget deficit these changes in taxes and expenditures work as " automatic stabilizers " to reduce declines in income and spending and thus to hasten recovery. They are systematic and fast-working unlike discretionary changes in fiscal policy which require legislative actions may take too long to enact and are difficult to reverse To sustain robust economic growth the United States must maintain a high rate of investment in new capital and new technology. That in turn requires an adequate flow of national saving The substantial Federal budget deficits of recent years have decreased the national saving rate. Sound growth-oriented fiscal policy thus requires that the Federal budget deficit be reduced The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of contains the largest and most comprehensive deficit reduction package in U.S history. It is designed to reduce the Federal deficit by a total of nearly one-half trillion dollars over the next years relative to what it would otherwise be with the deduction in the deficit phased so as to minimize adverse short-term effects on the economy. The resulting higher level of national saving will fuel economic growth and contribute to U.S. prosperity for years to come. In addition the new budget law achieves two key fiscal policy objectives First it contains credible enforcement mechanisms using caps on spending and pay-as-you-go rules to prevent new legislation from increasing the budget deficit. The caps put into effect the concept of a " flexible freeze " : Within each discretionary spending category any spending increases must be offset by spending cuts to stay within the cap. Across-the-board spending cuts are required whenever the caps or rules are violated Second new systematic procedures enhance the ability of the automatic stabilizers to cushion downturns in the short run. Under the new law deficit targets are adjusted for changes in economic conditions as reflected in the Administration 's forecast. That permits the automatic stabilizers to work more effectively. In contrast the previous law had no procedure for adjusting the deficit targets without suspending the entire enforcement mechanism Another important element of the Administration 's fiscal policy is a commitment to a tax system with low marginal tax rates and the lowest possible barriers to economic growth. The Administration has proposed a reduction in the tax rate on long-term capital gains. A capital gains tax cut would affect real estate and other asset values favorably thereby alleviating capital and balance sheet problems in both financial and nonfinancial corporations. It would reduce the existing bias against financing through equity rather than through debt. It would also increase long-term economic growth by stimulating saving lowering the cost of capital and encouraging investment. And it would encourage entrepreneurship so essential for the creation of new jobs and the commercialization of new ideas To further stimulate private saving the Administration has proposed Family Savings Accounts. Contributions to these accounts would not be tax-deductible but withdrawals of earnings and contributions after years would not be taxed. The Administration also proposes to ease requirements for withdrawals from Individual Retirement Accounts for people buying a home for the first time That would make these accounts more attractive to young people and thereby increase private saving MONETARY AND FINANCIAL SECTOR POLICY Monetary policy also has an important role to play in mitigating the current downturn and providing for strong growth and a gradual reduction in inflation. Because of the past and potential future changes in the structure of the economy monetary policymakers must necessarily consider a number of indicators including output general price indexes interest rates exchange rates futures prices money and credit in judging the direction of the economy and the impact of monetary policy. But barring changes in the relationship between money and income an important characteristic of a credible and systematic monetary policy is a commitment to sustain the rate of growth of money and credit during a downturn. Such a commitment would automatically bring about a reduction in interest rates and soften the downturn. It is important to recognize however that a decline in interest rates during a downturn may not be a sign of monetary easing especially if the growth of money and credit has slowed It is vital to maintain a credible commitment to long-run goals and policies when responding to temporary disturbances. The relatively low and stable inflation rates that prevailed before the oil price shock permit the Federal Reserve to cushion the downturn without leading businesses and households to expect higher future rates of inflation Tight credit conditions may create special challenges for monetary policy in the year ahead. The reduction by the Federal Reserve in banks ' reserve requirements implemented toward the end of was aimed at alleviating these conditions and will help to moderate the downturn. In encouraging sound banking practices the Federal Reserve and other bank regulators should not pursue overly stringent regulations that unnecessarily restrict creditworthy borrowers. Historical experience and research show that sustained money growth can go a long way toward offsetting other sources of credit market tightness The Administration 's proposal for comprehensive banking reform will reduce unnecessary and antiquated restrictions on the banking industry and thereby help to ease tight credit conditions. Healthier banks are essential if the financial system is to provide adequate supplies of credit during economic downturns as well as in periods of expansion. Lifting restrictions on interstate banking activities and on the ability of banks to combine with commercial and other financial firms will enhance banks ' ability to attract capital and thus reduce the risk of a contraction in lending POLICIES TO SUPPORT GROWTH Efforts to protect special interests by resisting the economy 's natural evolution are often futile generally sap the economy 's vitality and always reduce its flexibility and ability to benefit from change Instead growth must be supported by policies that increase the role of market forces while ensuring that opportunities are enhanced for all Americans and that the Nation 's environment is protected ENCOURAGING INVESTMENT AND IMPROVING EDUCATION Continued growth in productivity and living standards requires investment in new buildings and equipment advances in technology and improvements in the skills of U.S. workers. All these must be encouraged if America is to leave its children a legacy of global economic leadership Investment in plant equipment and commercial technologies is the task of the private sector. Because market forces guide investment funds to their most productive uses the government can generally only slow economic growth by second-guessing private investment decisions. Government 's primary task is to create conditions under which high levels of productive investment guided by market forces can fuel rapid growth. The multiyear deficit reduction program enacted in is an important step in this direction Reducing the tax rate on long-term capital gains and enacting the Administration 's proposals to increase private saving would also significantly reduce barriers to robust long-term economic growth In addition of course governments at all levels must recognize their shared responsibility to provide an efficient U.S. transportation infrastructure which is necessary for sustained economic growth. Legislation passed in will make it easier for airports to finance needed capacity expansions. The Administration will seek both increases in Federal funding for highways and a restructuring of highway programs that will give the States greater flexibility while ensuring that the miles of roads in the National Highway System will be maintained rehabilitated and expanded The Federal Government has an important role to play in the process of technological change. Some research projects offer the potential of large benefits to the economy as a whole but do not offer much prospect of profit to any private firm that might undertake them. The knowledge generated by these projects would be valuable but no firm could prevent others from capturing most of that value. Such " spillovers " are important in the case of basic research the results of which can not generally be directly incorporated into a marketable product or process. The Administration has proposed substantial increases in Federal support for basic research and the President has announced his intention to double the budget of the National Science Foundation Some areas of applied research promise advances in generic precompetitive technologies that would also have large spillovers. The Administration will seek increased support for such research and will make the results of government-supported research more readily available to the private sector for speedier commercialization Adoption of the Administration 's proposed reform of the antitrust law governing joint ventures would increase the ability of the private sector to take advantage of research opportunities with industry-specific benefits. Finally the Administration will again seek to make the research and experimentation tax credit permanent to enhance incentives for private-sector investment in new technology Education is the key to increasing the skills of the U.S. labor force. If America 's children continue to learn less in school than their counterparts abroad America 's workers will not long continue to earn more. The United States already spends more per pupil in elementary and secondary education than all its major competitors but it does not receive an adequate educational return on this investment The Administration will continue its strong support of the fundamental reform necessary to achieve excellence in U.S. elementary and secondary education. The key to successful reform is to harness the power of market forces : Schools should be able to compete for students. Parents and students must be afforded more choice among schools and unnecessary barriers to entry into the teaching profession must be swept away The Administration will introduce a new Educational Excellence Act which will stimulate fundamental reform and restructure the Nation 's education system by promoting educational choice and alternative certification for teachers and principals. And to help ensure that all students enter school ready to learn the Administration has significantly expanded the Head Start program. The President will continue his close work with the Nation 's Governors to advance the vital cause of educational excellence The Immigration Act of the first major reform of legal immigration in years will enhance the quality of the American labor force. This legislation will significantly increase the level of skill-based immigration and reaffirm the Administration 's commitment to family reunification as a central tenet of U.S. immigration policy STRENGTHENING MARKET FORCES Free competitive markets for goods and resources maintain high U.S. living standards and both guide and stimulate the process of economic growth. The long-run performance of the economy is thus enhanced by policies that extend the scope of market forces and maintain market flexibility The Administration remains committed to an energy policy that relies on the flexibility and power of market forces to ensure that all the Nation 's resources are efficiently utilized. In the aftermath of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait some called for increased regulation of energy markets. But these policies would increase the economic burden of the oil price shock bring back the gasoline lines of the 1970s and make the economy less flexible and efficient. They are firmly opposed by the Administration. The Nation 's Strategic Petroleum Reserve was tested in October and November and an internationally coordinated program to make government-controlled stocks available to the marketplace began with the outbreak of hostilities in the Persian Gulf The National Energy Strategy which was under development well before the onset of the Gulf crisis continues the successful policy of reliance on market forces. It recognizes that in an increasingly integrated global economy U.S. energy security can not be separated from that of the Nation 's friends allies and trading partners ; all countries are affected by sharp unanticipated price changes in world energy markets. It reflects the need to foster economic growth through the availability of ample supplies of reasonably priced energy. Implementation of the National Energy Strategy would enhance energy security by increasing the diversity of energy supplies removing barriers to competition in energy markets encouraging economical conservation and increasing Federal support for. energy-related research with potentially significant spillover benefits Strong economic growth requires a financial sector that is sound efficient and innovative. Banks in the United States still operate under a regulatory system that dates from the 1930s. That system attempts to keep banks healthy and the deposit insurance system sound by limiting competition but it is simply no longer workable U.S. banks face increasing competition from other institutions and markets around the world. The long-term vitality of U.S. banks depends on their ability to compete effectively. The Administration 's proposal to reform financial sector regulation would make banks financially healthier and better able to compete while ensuring the soundness of the deposit insurance system An important planting flexibility provision of farm legislation enacted in makes market incentives a more important determinant of farm production decisions. This provision will save about $ billion in Federal spending over the next years GIVING POWER AND OPPORTUNITY TO INDIVIDUALS Without a healthy growing economy poverty in the United States can not be reduced. But growth alone is not enough. It should be supplemented by policies designed to give power and opportunity to individuals to give them both the incentive and the means to participate fully in the economy In after a 3-year debate the Congress passed child care legislation consistent with the President 's objectives of limiting governmental interference with parents ' decisions not discriminating against working families who care for their own children and targeting assistance to those most in need. The budget act provides an increase of about $ billion in assistance to low-wage workers with children over the next years by expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit The Administration 's Homeownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere ( HOPE ) initiative was also signed into law in This initiative will enable low-income families to become homeowners and give them a greater stake in their communities Increased tenant ownership and control of public housing would further help to build the bonds of community in distressed neighborhoods. And the Administration 's enterprise zone proposal would encourage entrepreneurship investment and job creation in urban and rural pockets of poverty The landmark Americans with Disabilities Act is the most important extension of civil rights protection in two decades. It will permit many disabled Americans to participate fully in the Nation 's economic mainstream and to contribute to and benefit directly from America 's growth and prosperity Medicaid coverage was expanded in to improve prenatal care and child health in low-income families and to reduce infant mortality. The Administration 's new infant mortality preventive care and nutrition initiatives would make significant contributions to the health of low-income Americans LIMITING REGULATION AND MAKING IT WORK When markets can work well regulation can only reduce flexibility and slow growth. Even when markets work poorly the inevitable imperfections of regulation often make its use costly and inefficient. Regulation should be employed only when its benefits clearly exceed its costs. Regulatory targets should be chosen by careful cost-benefit analysis and the methods of regulation should minimize the costs and disruptions of reaching those targets. Cost-minimization requires that incentives be carefully structured and that firms and workers be allowed maximum flexibility to meet well-designed performance standards. In particular economic growth and environmental protection can be compatible but only if environmental regulation does not impose unnecessary costs on the economy After the President 's leadership had broken a logjam that had long blocked congressional action the first comprehensive amendments to the Clean Air Act in more than a decade were signed into law in This legislation incorporated a flexible and innovative market-based system that will secure a substantial and permanent reduction in the sulphur dioxide emissions that cause acid rain The reduction will be achieved at an estimated cost percent lower than the cost of traditional less flexible command-and-control regulation. The Administration is committed to implementing all provisions of this legislation so as to minimize unnecessary burdens on American workers and firms U.S. LEADERSHIP IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY The principle that market forces not government planners are the best source of lasting prosperity is as valid in global markets as it is within individual economies. The Administration accordingly remains strongly committed to removing barriers to trade and investment in all nations to opposing pressures for protectionism and government management of trade to supporting market-oriented reform around the world and to pursuing macroeconomic policies conducive to strong noninflationary growth in the United States and the world economy INTERNATIONAL TRADE LIBERALIZATION Since the end of World War II the United States has led the world toward a system of free trade and open markets. As a consequence of this policy and of natural economic forces America 's economic prospects have become closely linked with those of other countries. Increased global economic integration has expanded markets for U.S. exports encouraged innovation and expanded the choices available to American consumers. World trade which has grown more than ll/2 times as fast as world income since the early 1960s has improved the living standards of all Americans. In recent years exports have made an important contribution to U.S economic growth Policies that target particular industries for protection from international competition whether by means of tariffs or quotas or through the newer device of managed trade impose costs on the economy as a whole. Such policies limit consumer choice raise domestic prices reduce competition impair the flexibility and competitiveness of the U.S. economy and invite retaliation against U.S. exports. This Administration will continue to resist protectionist pressures and to work to open markets here and abroad Sustained strong worldwide growth in the 1990s will depend on continued progress toward a free and open multilateral trading regime. Completing the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) remains the top trade priority of the Administration. In the Uruguay Round the United States has sought a significant agreement that reduces or eliminates tariffs in all nations in several broad sectors of manufacturing and that phases out other barriers to trade in textiles and agriculture. A key aim of the negotiations is to strengthen and modernize GATT rules and to extend them to new areas such as services investment and intellectual property In the Administration undertook several other market-opening initiatives that will both spur growth in this hemisphere and support the wave of market-oriented reform sweeping Latin America. A U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement was endorsed by the Presidents of both countries. The Enterprise for the Americas Initiative aims to expand trade through free-trade agreements to encourage liberalization of investment regimes in order to increase capital formation in the region and to reduce official debt of countries pursuing strong economic reform programs. Additional measures to reduce trade barriers were also undertaken to help support cooperation on anti-narcotics efforts with Andean countries. As the benefits of these programs to the United States and its trading partners in the hemisphere become apparent a clear signal of the gains from freer trade and sound economic policies will be sent around the world The Administration also initiated and completed a first round of bilateral market liberalization talks with Japan called the Structural Impediments Initiative. The aim of these talks is to open markets and reduce structural barriers to trade and balance of payments adjustment in both the United States and Japan INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC ISSUES The increased integration of the world economy has significant implications for macroeconomic policies. Both monetary and fiscal policies in the United States have fundamental effects on exchange rates and trade flows. These policies also affect the economic performance of other economies although to a lesser extent than the U.S. economy itself American economic leadership requires that U.S. macroeconomic policy maintain an environment conducive to strong noninflationary growth. That will benefit the U.S. economy and contribute to economic growth and stability abroad. A sustainable trade balance and relatively stable exchange rates are part of such a policy environment Coordination of macroeconomic policies across countries can help governments increase sustainable growth worldwide. The regular economic meetings of heads of state finance ministers and other officials of the G-7 nations ( United States Germany Japan United Kingdom France Canada and Italy ) provide a framework within which economic issues of mutual concern can be discussed This evolving process of cooperation has achieved some important successes. During the recent expansion economic growth was strong and inflation rates among countries tended to converge to lower levels. In the last several years trade imbalances have declined significantly. International macroeconomic policy coordination continues to be essential as the world economy reacts to the effects of the oil price shock and changing credit conditions SUPPORT FOR ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION The emerging democracies of Eastern Europe many nations in Latin America and other countries around the world have learned from America 's example. As nations adopt democracy their new leaders turn away from central planning and government control of economic activity and toward reliance on flexible market forces The economic collapse of communism has made it clear that free people working in free markets are best able to create high and rising living standards American support for democracy and free markets throughout the world provided a major impetus to what the President has called the " Revolution of " in Eastern Europe. In many governments in this region deepened their historic efforts to rebuild their failed economies. Many nations in Latin America increased their reliance on market forces and opened their economies to international trade The United States continued to provide extensive technical and financial assistance to the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe and the President was instrumental in establishing the group of Western governments that has already committed about $ billion in assistance to Eastern Europe. The United States was also instrumental in encouraging the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to increase lending in this region. And U.S. initiatives aimed at reducing barriers to trade and investment provided powerful support for the forces of reform in Latin America CONCLUSION Writing on the eve of the American Revolution Adam Smith was the first to make clear the power of flexible competitive markets to raise living standards and the costs of misguided interference with market forces. As the United States prepares for a new century Smith 's principles remain central to sound economic policymaking Policies that remove barriers to market forces and thus increase the economy 's flexibility can encourage investment innovation entrepreneurship and growth. Credible and systematic macroeconomic policies can keep the current downturn mild and brief add strength to the recovery and provide the foundation for a sustained expansion in the 1990s. The Administration 's proposed growth incentives and its proposals for education and financial sector reform and for giving power and opportunity to individuals along with its other major initiatives can significantly contribute to the economy 's long-term health and vitality In as always the United States confronts both economic challenges and exciting opportunities. The U.S. economy remains the largest and most productive in the world and its flexibility and resilience give America the ability to meet its challenges and make the most of its opportunities. But the Nation can not take economic growth for granted. Unless sound policies are followed there is no guarantee that American living standards will continue to rise substantially from one generation to the next or that the United States will remain the world 's leading economy. The Nation must choose between sound policies that will promote long-term growth and policies that will reduce economic flexibility stunt incentives and place its economic future at risk CHAPTER Economic Developments and Prospects AFTER ALMOST YEARS of expansion the economy entered a recession during the latter part of In the fourth quarter of the year real gross national product ( GNP ) registered its largest decline since and industrial production fell sharply. The downturn was caused in large part by the economic effects of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait. That caused a jump in oil prices and directly reduced business and consumer confidence. Those factors coupled with continuing uncertainty about the timing of the resolution of the crisis dealt a substantial blow to an economy already sluggish from other factors. These included worldwide increases in interest rates unexpectedly tight credit conditions and the lingering effects of a tightening of monetary policy from early through mid1989 that was undertaken in a successful attempt to prevent an increase in inflation Several factors suggest that the economic downturn is not likely to last long and that a recovery will begin by the middle of Inflation after adjusting for the temporary impact of the oil price increase remained under control during and slowed at the end of the year giving the Federal Reserve greater latitude to mitigate the recession without causing an increase in inflation expectations. The prospect for export growth continues to be strong. Inventories remain relatively low suggesting that firms need not cut production as much as in previous recessions to reduce inventory levels. Interest rates declined toward the end of the year following passage of the new budget law an easing of monetary policy and the decline in economic activity. Lower interest rates stimulate credit-sensitive sectors of the economy and after a lag of several quarters will increase growth The Administration forecasts that growth will be percent over the four quarters of It is expected that the downturn will continue through the first part of and the recovery will begin around the middle of the year. If the Administration 's proposed policies are enacted the long-term economic outlook is good Growth should strengthen in and remain well above the rates of the past months through the mid-1990s. Inflation and interest rates are projected to decline gradually Even greater uncertainty surrounds this year 's outlook than has been the case for the past few years. The future path of oil prices remains uncertain. An early resolution of the Persian Gulf crisis could restore consumer and business confidence and strengthen growth early in However the rapid political changes in Eastern Europe and the economic effects of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait once again illustrate how quickly widely held views about economic prospects can become outdated THE U.S. ECONOMY IN Real GNP grew only percent during well below the very strong 4V4-percent annual rate during ( Chart ) Growth in the first part of was an extension of the modest growth in when real GNP grew percent. But in the last part of the economy turned down. The unemployment rate rose percentage point during the last months of Despite the increase the unemployment rate was low compared with the average over the previous years. Consumer price increases excluding food and energy a measure of core or underlying inflation accelerated in the first quarter but were slowing at the end of the year. These developments in were influenced by and in turn affected monetary policy fiscal policy and conditions in credit markets MONETARY POLICY AND CREDIT MARKETS Monetary policy and credit market developments in were influenced by policy actions and developments that occurred in previous years. For example the rapid economic growth in and pushed capacity utilization to high levels and reduced unemployment rates to the lowest levels since the early 1970s but it also spurred serious concern about the possibility of rising inflation. In the spring of the Federal Reserve began to reduce the flow of money and credit gradually and to increase interest rates. The Federal Reserve 's goal was to reduce inflationary pressures by engineering a " soft landing " ; that is by reducing overall demand slowly enough to avoid causing a recession. Since then the difficulties inherent in distinguishing more permanent threats of rising inflation from temporary but sharp price-level changes coupled with the long and variable lags through which monetary policy affects economic activity have complicated the task of predicting the economic consequences of any given level of monetary restraint After falling about IVz percentage points in the second half of the Federal funds rate remained relatively constant in the first half of but it declined sharply in the fourth quarter and in early ( The Federal funds rate a short-term interest rate at Chart Real GNP Growth Real GNP growth slowed in after rapid growth in and and moderate growth in Percent change ( Q4/Q4 ) Source : Department of Commerce which banks lend reserves to other banks is a short-run indicator of the stance of monetary policy. ) Long-term interest rates rose early in the year then declined slightly before rising again in late summer. In the last quarter they fell sharply responding to a slowing economy expected declines in short-term interest rates and the passage of the new budget law. Throughout the year evidence mounted that credit was becoming less available causing serious problems in credit-sensitive sectors Monetary Policy The ultimate goal of the Federal Reserve is to promote strong noninflationary economic growth. The Federal Reserve pursues its goal by influencing interest rates especially the Federal funds rate and by regulating the volume of bank reserves relative to demands by depository institutions reserve availability. Changes in reserves and the Federal funds rate affect the supply of money and credit inflation and economic growth. In general the Federal Reserve acts to raise the Federal funds rate when inflationary pressures increase and economic growth is very rapid and it acts to lower the Federal funds rate when inflation expectations appear to be falling and weaker economic growth or recession is more likely The Federal Reserve maintained a level of reserve availability that resulted in a relatively constant Federal funds rate in the first half of From January to July the rate averaged 8V4 percent below the average but nearly % percentage points above its level in early spring when the Federal Reserve began to tighten policy to contain inflationary pressures ( Chart ) This tightening of policy was a factor in lowering economic growth in and Chart Federal Funds Rate The Federal funds rate was relatively flat in the first months of and fell thereafter. By year-end it had nearly returned to spring levels Percent per annum Note : Data are monthly averages of daily figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System In July the Federal Reserve noted that lack of credit in some regional and sectoral markets might be creating a tighter monetary policy than suggested by the level of the Federal funds rate alone. Thus the Federal Reserve increased the availability of reserves reducing the Federal funds rate basis points ( there are basis points in a percentage point ) to percent In October the Federal Reserve again increased reserve availability reducing the Federal funds rate by another basis points This reduction came soon after the budget summit negotiations were completed and a comprehensive budget plan was proposed During the rest of the year mounting concern about declining em- ployment and production lagging money growth and tight credit conditions led to a series of reductions in the funds rate resulting in a cumulative decline of basis points from early July. By early February the Federal funds rate had fallen further to around * A percent its lowest level in years. In addition as market interest rates fell at the end of the year the discount rate the rate at which the Federal Reserve Banks lend reserves to member institutions was lowered from percent to percent That was the first reduction in the discount rate since August An additional reduction to percent occurred in early February In December the Federal Reserve eliminated the requirement that banks hold reserves against net Eurodollar liabilities and time deposits held by businesses. That was done to enhance bank incentives to lend in light of accumulating evidence of credit constraints Movements in other short-term interest rates were either similar to or anticipated the general pattern of the Federal funds rate. The rate on 3-month Treasury bills rose slightly over the first few months of It then declined evidently reflecting anticipations of later declines in the Federal funds rate and fell to percent by the end of the year In addition to considering the Federal funds rate carefully the Federal Reserve monitors the growth of money and credit and attempts to maintain money supply growth within announced ranges. In February the Federal Reserve announced it would maintain the to 7-percent target range for growth in its M2 money aggregate provisionally established in the middle of for the four quarters of ( see Appendix Table B-67 for definitions of the money supply ) The target range for M3 was set at * /2 to 6V2 percent for In July however that range was lowered to to percent as the restructuring of the savings and loan industry reduced actual and expected M3 growth relative to GNP growth. That is the velocity of M3 the ratio of GNP to M3 appeared likely to have undergone a shift Growth in monetary aggregates was relatively low in M2 was below the lower bound of the target range through the first half of although growth accelerated in the second half. M2 growth was percent during below the 5.2-percent growth during M3 growth was percent during down from percent in From the fourth quarter of through the middle of the first quarter of M2 growth accelerated. However M2 growth slowed substantially after February and from early April through the end of the year M2 was consistently in the lower half of the target range. The slower growing economy probably contributed to lower M2 growth by reducing the public 's demand for monetary balances ( Chart ) M2 grew percent during while M3 grew percent Chart Money Supply M2 growth was below the middle of the target range in and stayed in the lower half of the range through most of Billions of dollars | % Upper Limit [ \ x ^ CXX ^ % Lower Limit / ^ ^ ^ % Upper Limit % Lower Limit i i i i i i i i i i i Note : Data are weekly Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Long-Term Interest Rates While short-term interest rates were relatively stable in the first half of the year long-term interest rates were more volatile ( Chart ) After declining somewhat in the second half of longterm rates rose sharply in the first few months of The yield on 10-year Treasury bonds increased basis points between December and March Concern about a possible increase in the underlying inflation rate caused by the temporary jump in inflation in the first quarter may have contributed to the rise in long-term rates. A more important factor however was the anticipated increase in the demand for capital associated with developments in Eastern Europe and the unification of Germany. These events caused interest rates to rise around the world as shown in Chart The expected increase in the demand for financial capital did in fact materialize during In West German governments ran a surplus of about percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) Chart Interest Rates While short-term rates were relatively flat long-term rates rose in early Both fell toward the end of the year Percent per annum \ \ \ \ k \ i \ 10-Year Treasury Bonds ( constant maturities ) x * ' / \ \ N r 3-Month Treasury Bills Note : Data are monthly averages of daily figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System With greater capital needs at home to finance the rebuilding of the deteriorated infrastructure of the former German Democratic Republic the surplus became a deficit of about percent of GDP in Because long-term interest rates in the United States are influenced by developments in world markets and because those rates play a large role in determining real economic activity their rise contributed to the domestic economic slowdown in the United States After peaking in May long-term rates fell basis points through the end of July. This drop was erased after Iraq invaded Kuwait. The jump in oil prices renewed concerns about the risks of higher inflation. The general uncertainty surrounding the Persian Gulf crisis and in particular about the future course of oil prices increased the riskiness of lending funds for the longer term and put upward pressure on interest rates By mid-December however long-term rates had fallen back to their early January levels with the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds reaching percent before rising slightly at the very end of the year. One reason long-term rates began to fall was the expectation that the multiyear budget law would lower the Federal Gov- Chart Long-Term Government Bond Yields Long-term bond yields rose around the world in early pushed up by increased demand for capital and concerns about accelerating inflation Percent per annum Japan Note : Data are weekly average of daily figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ernment 's future credit demands and thus ease demand pressure in long-term credit markets. Other factors including falling oil prices in late November and December declining economic activity and easing monetary policy also contributed substantially to the decline Credit Market Developments By midyear surveys indicated that bank lending standards had tightened and that credit was becoming more difficult to obtain. As the year progressed the effects of the tightening began to appear in aggregate bank lending figures. From August through October commercial and industrial loans at commercial banks fell at an annual rate of percent. In addition a Federal Reserve survey of senior bank lending officers in October reported that nearly twothirds of respondents had tightened their lending standards for construction and land development loans in the previous months and almost half had tightened their standards on commercial and industrial loans. Overall bank credit increased about percent during compared to a 6.9-percent rise during Tightened lending standards and slower growth in bank lending were partly the result of a sluggish economy. Demand for credit usually falls as the overall economy weakens. Moreover as the economy slows the probability of bankruptcy increases. To compensate for the increased risk of lending lending standards may have become stricter. Concerns about overzealous bank examiners may have discouraged some banks from making loans and declining real estate values reduced the value of collateral on residential and commercial real estate loans Tighter lending standards during the year can not be entirely attributed to caution in the face of a slow economy or an anticipated recession. The restructuring of bank lending portfolios in anticipation of meeting the capital guidelines established in the Basle framework an international banking agreement setting minimum capital adequacy requirements also contributed to credit market tightness. The new guidelines require higher capital reserves on loans with greater risk of default. Thus for example more capital must be held against a portfolio of commercial and industrial loans than against a portfolio of equal size that contains only government-backed securities. By changing the relative cost of different types of assets these guidelines changed the incentives for extending different types of credit. Thus while the growth of commercial and industrial loans by banks slowed during the growth of bank credit extended to governments or borrowers with government guarantees increased Although business borrowing from banks slowed in business borrowing from other sources offset some of the slowdown Overall domestic nonfinancial sector debt ( excluding Federal debt ) was up percent at an annual rate for the first months of By October and November however this debt was rising at a slower percent rate. These rates were lower than the growth rate of percent FEDERAL BUDGET DEVELOPMENTS Federal spending tax and borrowing activities have an important influence over economic activity. The slowdown in the economy and the large financial transactions associated with the resolution of the savings and loan ( S&L ) crisis require that particular care be taken in describing budgetary and deficit changes for and beyond In fiscal ( October through September ) total Federal expenditures were $ billion. Transfer payments ( including grants-in-aid to State and local governments ) accounted for roughly half this total. Federal purchases of goods and services accounted for one-third of Federal spending. The other major component was interest payments on the Federal debt. Among these components the largest increase from fiscal occurred in transfer payments which grew percent. Federal purchases of goods and services rose percent Federal tax receipts grew more slowly in fiscal than in fiscal That was mainly a result of two factors : slower growth in household income which reduced the growth of individual income and payroll tax payments ; and falling business profits which reduced corporate income tax receipts. Corporate profits were $ billion in fiscal down from $ billion in fiscal Corporate income tax receipts fell percent in fiscal after rising percent in fiscal Total receipts rose percent in fiscal compared with percent in fiscal The Federal Deficit From to the consolidated Federal budget deficit as a percentage of GNP increased steadily to percent its highest level since World War II. ( The difference between Federal outlays and receipts is the deficit. ) The deficit-to-GNP ratio was around percent between and and then fell to its recent low of percent in primarily as a consequence of reductions in Federal spending. Since the ratio of tax receipts to GNP has been percent while the ratio of outlays to GNP has been percent The ratio of the deficit to GNP rose in mostly due to spending increases. The ratio was expected to remain high which led to concerns that interest rates would also remain high harming prospects for long-run growth. These concerns led to enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act signed in November The budget law is expected to reduce future deficits substantially from what they would have been in the absence of the act. Nevertheless by all conventional measures the current deficit is large and will remain large during the next few years Federal budget accounting distinguishes between on-budget and off-budget outlays and receipts. The more comprehensive consolidated budget combines both on-budget and off-budget accounts Some items are classified as off-budget based on economic reasons ; others for legislative or government accounting reasons. Currently outlays and receipts of the Social Security trust funds are offbudget yet changes in these trust funds affect total government saving and thereby the net borrowing requirements of the Federal Government. In fiscal Social Security receipts exceeded outlays which was the main factor leading to an off-budget surplus of $ billion. As a result the fiscal on-budget deficit of $ billion substantially exceeded the $ billion consolidated budget deficit The financial transactions of the Resolution Trust Corporation ( RTC ) and other deposit insurance programs have made the inter pretation of the effect of the budget on the economy more complex The RTC reimburses federally insured depositors in failed savings and loan institutions. The funds required to pay the full value of these deposits are large and the problems created by the incentives associated with deposit insurance have had negative effects on the economy ( see Chapter for a discussion of deposit insurance ) Transactions of the RTC and other deposit insurance programs are classified as on-budget. Unlike most other on-budget expenditures and receipts however these transactions have little effect on interest rates and the overall economy. Though they are valuable for other reasons measures of the budget deficit that include deposit insurance financing can be misleading for evaluating the macroeconomic effects of the deficit. As noted above for this purpose deposit insurance outlays should be excluded and the Social Security surplus included. Hence of the various accounting measures movements in the consolidated budget deficit excluding deposit insurance probably best measure the impact of Federal borrowing on credit markets and the economy To understand how borrowing to cover deposit insurance differs from borrowing to cover other government outlays consider the following example. Suppose the RTC acquires a failed S&L with insured deposits of $ million and assets such as mortgages and loans worth only $ million. To do this the RTC would borrow $ million to pay off the depositors and acquire the S&L 's assets worth $ million. The remaining $ million is an accrual of net Federal indebtedness and acknowledges the liabilities incurred earlier when the S&L could no longer support the insured depositors ( This portion of the RTC outlays is sometimes termed " hole-filling. " ) The entire $ million paid out to depositors is likely to be redeposited in the financial sector. The depositors chose to hold $ million in the S&L on the assumption their money was safe ; the RTC 's confirmation of its safety is unlikely to cause them to change the level of deposits they hold or any other aspect of their economic behavior There are also unlikely to be any credit-market effects. The RTC has directly or indirectly provided $ million to honor the deposit insurance commitment to depositors. Since these funds are likely to be redeposited the financial sector can be expected to receive an infusion of $ million that solvent institutions will want to invest in interest-bearing assets. The increased demand for assets corresponds exactly to the $ million increase in assets the government sells to the market. Therefore in contrast to what happens when the government borrows to purchase goods and services there will be no direct effects on interest rates in the financial sector The acquisition and subsequent disposition of S&L assets by the ETC are expected to lead to a large swing in the consolidated and on-budget deficit measures. Net ETC expenditures are currently large because the RTC is acquiring insolvent S&Ls and paying out funds to depositors. By fiscal these expenditures are projected to be falling ; that is expenditures for acquiring S&L assets minus the receipts from sales of these assets are expected to be smaller than in the preceding year An alternative measure of the deficit that is useful for assessing the effects of the deficit on credit markets and the economy comes from the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) published by the Department of Commerce. The NIPA deficit does not include transactions such as loans that are an exchange of existing assets and liabilities. Accordingly nonadministrative RTC and deposit insurance funding are excluded from the NIPA deficit and the Social Security surplus is included. On a NIPA basis the Federal deficit was $ billion in fiscal an increase of roughly $ billion from In contrast the consolidated deficit was $ billion in fiscal an increase of $ billion from It is also important to distinguish between the actual deficit and the structural deficit especially when the economy is in a downturn or boom. In a downturn tax revenues decrease and expenditures especially for entitlement programs such as unemployment insurance increase. The rising deficit that results helps keep the economy from going deeper into recession. During booms the opposite happens and the falling deficit helps keep the economy from overheating. The structural deficit removes the effects of these swings in economic activity from the deficit calculation by assuming a steady level of employment and trend GNP growth. This cyclical adjustment can be made in both the consolidated budget deficit and the NIPA budget deficit measures. In fiscal the NIPA structural budget deficit was only about $ billion higher than in compared with a $ billion increase for the actual NIPA deficit. That difference suggests that the economic slowdown accounted for more than twothirds of the increase in the actual NIPA deficit in All these deficit measures are typically reported in current dollars. Even if spending and receipts were to increase only at the rate of inflation the deficit would rise. Moreover the economic effects of the Federal deficit depend on its size in relation to the size of the economy. To adjust for the economy 's size the ratio of the deficit to GNP is often reported. Even though the structural deficit increased slightly from to for instance it declined slightly as a percent of GNP Other issues arise when measuring the deficit and interpreting its economic effects. Some economists have argued that deficit measures should reflect the reduction in the real value of outstanding liabilities caused by inflation. With a Federal debt held by the public of roughly $ trillion an inflation rate of percent would reduce the real value of the debt outstanding by about $ billion in one year. This revaluation lowers the real value of government liabilities and therefore could be thought of as lowering the deficit But even with this adjustment the deficit would still be large The economic importance of the deficit depends in part on the level of private saving. By definition a decrease in the budget deficit increases public saving. Private saving plus public saving constitute national saving which together with inflows of foreign capital provides the funds available for investment in the United States. Low public saving caused by a large Federal deficit is particularly detrimental to investment and future economic growth when private saving is low as it has been for several years ECONOMIC GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT The growth slowdown during as in was concentrated in interest- and credit-sensitive sectors such as residential investment commercial real estate and consumer spending on durable goods. In addition export growth slowed from its extremely fast pace of the previous years. The manufacturing sector was hard hit as both production and employment fell Consumption and Saving Consumer spending rose percent in real terms during below the 1.2-percent growth in and substantially below the rates of the mid-1980s ( Table ) ( Spending in real or inflationadjusted terms is measured in constant dollars. Box describes an important upcoming NIPA data revision. ) Real disposable personal income a key determinant of consumer spending fell percent during That compares with a 1.7-percent gain in and a 4.3-percent rise during Consumer outlays and income rose at roughly the same rate in leaving the personal saving rate at percent essentially unchanged from its average value. While the saving rate for was substantially above the low of percent it remained well below the 6.5-percent average of the post-World War II period and below that of most other industrialized countries Spending on consumer services rose percent during led by a 6.5-percent spending increase in medical care. However consumer purchases of nondurable goods of which food and clothing account for nearly percent fell during the year after a slight 0.7-percent rise during Rising gasoline prices reduced real spending on gasoline and also contributed to the decline in spending on nondurables Consumer purchases of durable goods declined during Interest rates on consumer loans frequently used to finance purchases of durable goods remained high during the year. Measures TABLE Growth of Real GNPand Components Item to * Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter GNP Personal consumption expenditures Presidential fixed investment Residential investment Government purchases of goods and services Annual level billions of dollars Inventory investment Net exports of goods and services Average annual rate Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce of consumer confidence which often are directly related to purchases of durables plunged in the last months of the year. Spending on motor vehicles declined and the number of autos sold during was down percent from the second straight yearly decline Several additional factors contributed to declining automobile demand including the large number of vehicles already owned by consumers and the tendency for owners to keep vehicles longer. Financing arrangements also contributed to weak sales. Interest rates on new car loans remained high the average length of auto loans fell and lenders required larger downpayments Residential Investment In residential investment was percent below its level the third straight year of decline. Housing starts reached their lowest levels since averaging more than percent below For all of starts in the Northeast were only percent of their recent peak. For the country as a whole multiunit starts continued their 5-year slide Many factors contributed to the decline in residential investment. Housing starts were held down by oversupply in many regions. Vacancy rates for rental housing units remained relatively high. Builders and developers found credit more difficult to obtain The low growth of consumer income in and rising mortgage rates in the first half kept demand low House prices rose in the early part of but declined somewhat during the rest of the year. The median price of a new singlefamily house reached $ in April before declining by percent by November. For the year the median new house price rose percent its smallest rise since In the fourth quarter of prices of existing homes were down nationally about per Box Revised National Income and Product Accounts The Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) produces the UJSL national income and product accounts the most comprehensive and consistent set of production and income statistics available for the United States The NIPA are frequently revised as new data arrive and measuring methods are improved * In the first month after the end of a calendar quarter the GNP accounts are released for the previous quarter These data the advance figures are revised in the following months as data for the previous quarter continue to arrive and be processed These monthly revisions are called thepreliminary and the final. Every year BEA releases revisions to the NIPA for the current and the previous years reflecting new data from various annual surveys and other information not available when the final estimate is released About every years BEA produces a comprehensive " bench * mark " revision in which all NIPA components are subject to change. In the upcoming benchmark revision the base year for the calculation of constant-dollar ( inflation-adjusted or real ) GNP will change from to Real GNP measures the value of goods and services the Nation produces at prices in a given " base " year * Valuing the goods and services at one year 's prices is necessary so that physical quantities of goods can be added meaningfully and compared across time. Since late the base year has been Maintaining the base year for too many years however results in an increasingly inaccurate picture of the economy since the importance of goods with high relative prices in the base year tends to be overemphasized. This bias is likely to be more important as the economy moves further away from the base year because producers and consumers are likely to be using fewer goods with high relative prices. Moving to as a base year should provide a better picture of the current economy since the current price structure is more like the structure than the structure The differing relative price structure between and will result in different real GNP growth rates when measured in constant and constant dollars. Since early BEA has published a small set of GNP data in dollars in addition to 1982-dollar data. Between and real growth averaged percent in dollars and percent in dollars. The difference is typical of benchmark revisions and reflects the size of the bias that builds up as the base year becomes more distant cent from their average in Prices fell even more in the regions most affected by the economic slowdown such as New England Business Fixed Investment Business fixed investment spending by businesses on new plant and equipment grew percent in real terms during Spending on new structures was down percent with continued weakness in new office-building construction. An oversupply of offices vacancy rates nationwide were around percent in the third quarter of the year reduced new construction activity. However spending on industrial buildings new plants was up percent during after a nearly 20-percent increase in Total equipment purchases rose percent in real terms during Information-processing and related equipment continued to increase faster than total equipment purchases rising percent during the year. Auto purchases by businesses jumped percent but industrial equipment purchases fell during Inventory Change The real level of business inventories fell by $ billion in and the ratio of real inventories to sales was below the figure This is unusual during the early stages of a downturn and is one factor pointing to a mild recession rather than a more serious slide In most business cycles an overaccumulation of inventories toward the end of the expansion leads to production shutdowns and layoffs creating a sharper downturn in production and employment than the underlying demand conditions would have produced Some economists suggest that computerization and the adoption of new inventory and production management techniques ( the just-intime method for example ) during the last decade have allowed firms to reduce the size of their normal inventory holdings and to respond more flexibly to changing economic circumstances. With inventories relatively low at the start of this downturn a protracted period of inventory reduction that would deepen the downturn is less likely than in the typical postwar recession Exports and Imports Export growth was strong in the second half of the expansion averaging percent at an annual rate between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of Though growth in real exports of goods and services slipped to percent in real exports reached an all-time high during the year and the United States remained the world 's largest exporter. Some categories of exports were stronger than others. Exports of capital goods rose percent and exports of consumer goods rose a strong percent Exports of foods feeds and beverages fell during Exports of services ( other than profits and interest income ) have become increasingly important to the economy accounting for about percent of total exports in For the year as a whole exports of services rose percent in real terms compared with merchandise export growth of percent Two of the major determinants of export demand contributed to slower export growth. First although it remained at relatively low levels compared with the mid-1980s the foreign exchange value of the dollar rose about percent from late to June By December it was still percent above its level in December Changes in demand for U.S. exports lag behind price changes so by increasing the price of U.S. exports in overseas markets the dollar 's rise through most of may have helped to reduce demand for U.S. export products in In contrast to the dollar fell during most of By December it had fallen almost percent against the yen and almost percent against the deutsche mark compared with December All else being equal the declining dollar in points to rising export growth in Slower growth in countries that trade extensively with the United States also contributed to slower export growth in For example Canada which typically accounts for about percent of our merchandise exports and the United Kingdom both were in a recession in the second half of Growth also slowed in other European economies in ( Table ) However growth in Germany and Japan increased in For the first months of the merchandise trade deficit with Japan was down about percent compared with the first months of TABLE Economic Performance and Projections for the United States and Other G-7 Nations * [ Percent ] Country Canada France Germany iSr " ^ " " " " " " " " " : " " " : " " ^ " " " " " i " " : " Japan United Kingdom United States Consumer price inflation Real GNP growth Total unemployment rate Data for are projections except for the United States which are preliminary full-year estimates Consumer prices are measured by the private consumption deflator Note. Data for GNP growth and price inflation are percent changes from previous year Data for Germany are only for western Germany Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD Economic Outlook December ; Department of Commerce ; and Department of Labor Imports grew percent in compared with a 6-percent increase in In contrast to the early part of the expansion when imports of consumer goods and autos rose rapidly consumer goods and auto imports posted almost no increase in Instead capital goods imports were the fastest growing major category of im ports. For the year real petroleum imports were up percent ; however they fell sharply in the fourth quarter As a result of continued export growth and slowing import growth the real net export deficit narrowed for the fourth consecutive year. By the end of the year the real net export deficit was at its lowest level since mid-1983 Government Purchases of Goods and Services Government purchases of goods and services at the Federal State and local levels grew percent in real terms during Federal purchases rose percent. Nondefense purchases rose percent ; however excluding changes in Commodity Credit Corporation inventories nondefense purchases rose percent. Defense purchases rose percent during with an increase in the fourth quarter partially reflecting spending in support of Operation Desert Shield. State and local purchases rose percent during with a relatively strong 8.2-percent increase in spending on structures Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization Sluggish consumer spending on goods falling residential construction and slowing export growth caused manufacturing output to fall during after slowing substantially in Sharp declines in the fourth quarter led to a 1.4-percent fall in overall industrial production during as production of motor vehicles fell more than percent. Excluding motor vehicles and parts industrial production fell percent during compared with a 1.8-percent rise during Slowing production in the first half and falling production in the second half pushed down capacity utilization in the industrial sector percentage points during In December capacity utilization in manufacturing fell to percent well below the 85percent rate in April its recent peak. Utilization rates generally declined across all industries. Utilization in motor vehicle manufacturing fell to percent Employment The civilian unemployment rate rose in the second half of after remaining around a 15-year low for most of and the first half of By December the unemployment rate had risen to percent about where it had been in mid-1987 ( Chart ) From June to December the jobless rate for men rose percentage point while the rate for women rose percentage point. In the second half of the year the unemployment rate rose percentage points for blacks and percentage points for teenagers. For the entire year the civilian unemployment rate averaged percent Labor force growth slowed in particularly in the first half of the year. The labor force grew by about people in the Chart The Unemployment Rate The unemployment rate rose in late but was still low compared to much of the period since the early 1970s Percent of civilian labor force December % ^ ^ December % \ i i i I i i Source : Department of Labor first half about a quarter of the average gain experienced in the first halves of and Much of the slowdown in the first part of can be traced to a decline in the teenage labor force which fell by more than people. The slower labor force growth due at least in part to the softening economy contributed to the stability of the unemployment rate in the first half of the year and tempered the increases in the second half There was a net gain of about jobs in following a gain of over million jobs in The net gain for the year consisted of an increase of about million jobs in the first months of the year followed by a decrease of jobs in the second half. The number of service-producing jobs rose by million during the year but the number of jobs in the goods-producing sector fell by Temporary hiring to conduct the census accounted for some of the first-half gain and second-half decline Census hiring added about jobs to the first-half gain. The reduction in the census work force following completion of the census accounted for about percent of the second-half decline Although overall employment growth slowed in the slowdown was spread unevenly across industries and regions. Every in- dustry is affected by both general economic conditions and factors unique to its business. As a result during general upswings in economic activity some industries and regions experience shrinking employment and income. Likewise in downturns some continue to grow. Chart illustrates differences in regional employment growth during and Box summarizes the year 's industrial and regional developments Chart Regional Employment Growth Employment declines were concentrated in New England while employment grew fastest in the Mountain and Pacific regions New England Middle Atlantic South Atlantic Note : Growth from November to November Source : Department of Labor H % and over H % to % Q % to % D Less than % Q % to % Productivity Growth in labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector fell percent in Low or negative labor productivity growth is typical in an economic slowdown as firms tend to keep workers even when demand slows in order to avoid costly search and training when demand increases again Manufacturing productivity continued its recent trend of relatively strong growth compared with other sectors. Manufacturing productivity grew percent in compared with percent in Rising labor productivity in manufacturing helped to hold the growth of unit labor costs to percent after a 0.6-percent rise in Very slow growth of unit labor costs in manufacturing is one Box Sectoral and Regional Income and Employment During any phase of the business cycle some industries shrink or grow slowly while others expand rapidly * Differences in employment growth across regions depend on the particular mix of expanding and contracting industries in each region Much of the decline in employment in in both New England and the Middle Atlantic States can for example be traced to the contraction in the construction real estate and finance industries. Regions dependent on durable-goods manufacturing were hurt by declining sales of consumer durables such as automobiles. Total manufacturing employment fell by about over the year with more than percent of the decline coming from durable goods manufacturing industries Some regions had relatively strong employment gains in Employment in the Mountain region was bolstered by employment gains in service industries particularly recreation and tourism. Although the decline in construction has hurt the timber industry in the Pacific Northwest the region 's diversified industrial base especially in the production of aircraft and high-technology goods permitted relatively strong overall employment growth However the changing fortunes of most industries have effects that are spread out across all regions The contraction in the construction industry was felt nationwide as housing starts reached their lowest levels since Reflecting the sharp decline in the residential housing market jobs in construction and real estate declined in the second half of the year Sluggish orders and sales contributed to the slowdown in employment growth in wholesale and retail trade across all regions. In contrast all regions gained from the substantial growth in health services which accounted for nearly percent of the net job gain in the economy over the year. Softening business activity across the country was reflected in the fourth quarter decline in business services employment which provides support services such as data-processing and advertising indicator that underlying inflationary pressures did not rise in PRICES AND WAGES Compared with the expansions of the 1970s inflation remained relatively low and stable throughout most of the recent expansion which contributed greatly to its longevity. Consumer price inflation averaged only percent a year from the business cycle trough in November through December Core consumer price inflation averaged a higher but steadier percent over the same period ( Chart ) Much of the reduction in inflation from the late 1970s and early 1980s was due to the successful imposition and maintenance of a stable and credible monetary policy Chart Consumer Prices Overall consumer price inflation rose temporarily in However " core " inflation a measure that excludes food and energy prices remained under control and was declining at the end of the year Percent change from year earlier Average of All Items Excluding Food and Energy = % Source : Department of Labor Broad-based measures of inflation indicated that inflation was contained in The GNP fixed-weighted price index a measure that includes prices of all goods and services in the economy rather than just consumer goods and services was up percent in the same as in After rising substantially in the first quarter of inflation measured by this index was below the average in each of the last three quarters of the year Price developments in early resembled those of the first half of when a temporary rise in crude oil and food prices pushed consumer price inflation to percent. Consumer and producer prices were buffeted by the effects of unusually cold weather in December which substantially reduced available supplies of fresh fruit and vegetables and drove up the cost of petroleumbased fuels. Led by price increases in energy and food consumer price inflation rose to an annual rate of percent from December to March A more than 21-percent annual rate increase in apparel prices contributed to core consumer price inflation of percent in the first quarter By the middle of the year smaller food price increases and falling oil prices were reducing inflation. From March to June consumer prices rose at a 3.5-percent annual rate and producer prices for finished goods rose at a negligible 0.3-percent annual rate. Core inflation also retreated substantially to percent at an annual rate The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in early August and its impact on oil prices dominated price-level movements in the second half of Crude oil prices jumped from $ a barrel on August the day before the invasion to their peak of $ a barrel in the middle of October ( Chart ) Prices retreated below $ a barrel before ending the year at around $ a barrel. Oil prices fell rapidly to around $ a barrel in early following the beginning of Operation Desert Storm Chart Oil Prices Crude oil prices more than doubled from early summer to mid-October but fell thereafter Dollars per barrel J i Jan i Feb i Mar I Apr i May i Jun i Jul i Aug Note : West Texas Intermediate crude nearest month futures contract Source : New York Mercantile Exchange i Sep i Oct i Nov I Dec Jan Consumer and producer energy prices responded quickly to the August oil price shock. In the last quarter of prices of other goods and services that rely heavily on oil as fuel or as material input rose in response to rising energy costs. For example public transportation prices rose more than percent at an annual rate primarily because of rising airline fares. The surge in energy and energy-related prices contributed to overall consumer prices rising at an annual rate of percent in the second half of the year. The oil price decline since October reduced inflation in November and December and should continue to reduce consumer and producer price inflation in the early part of Excluding food and energy the consumer price increase of percent in the second half of was far more moderate than the overall increase in prices. In addition producer prices for goods before any processing excluding food and energy fell for the last months of the year suggesting that slowing economic activity was reducing upward pressure on prices Although price changes were affected primarily by changes in energy and to a lesser extent food prices some longer run inflation trends continued in Price increases for consumer services continued to rise faster than those for consumer goods. From to services prices rose percent at an annual rate while prices for consumer goods less food and energy rose percent During the services price index rose percent led by a 9.9percent rise in the price of medical care services Wage inflation moderated in an indication that the underlying inflation rate was under control and even declining. The growth in the employment cost index a measure that includes the cost of employer-paid benefits as well as wages and salaries began to fall in the last three quarters of after rising consistently throughout and the first quarter of ( Chart ) Continuing a trend from the last few years benefits increased at a faster pace than wages and salaries : percent compared with percent during Indicators point to moderating inflation in the future. The Commodity Research Bureau 's index of futures prices for raw commodities which fell percent during reached a peak in May and fell at an annual rate of percent through the rest of the year. A sustained decline of this size suggests continuing moderation of producer and consumer goods prices SUMMARY After growing sluggishly for the first part of the economy entered a recession in the latter part of the year. The jump in crude oil prices reduced spending on other products and declining business and consumer confidence contributed to reduced spending at the end of the year Interest rates were declining by the end of the year in response to a softer economy lower underlying inflation monetary policy easing and the new budget law Chart The Employment Cost Index After being relatively flat from the second half of growth in wages and salaries as well as total compensation fell in the last three quarters of Percent change from months earlier annual rate L Total Compensation 4i Wages and Salaries Only I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i i i I i Note : All private industry Source : Department of Labor The budget deficit as measured in the national income and product accounts increased as a percent of GNP from percent in fiscal to percent in fiscal After adjusting for the cyclical weakness in the economy the deficit declined slightly as a percent of GNP from fiscal to fiscal Housing and consumer spending were most affected by the slowdown. Stricter credit conditions also contributed to the slowdown The overall inflation rate as measured by the fixed-weighted price index for all goods produced in the economy rose temporarily in the first quarter of but was below ^ the average in each of the last three quarters of the year MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY OUTLOOK Monetary and fiscal policies exert a powerful influence on the economy and therefore can have profound effects on the prospects for achieving an early recovery from the current downturn and increasing long-term growth. The Administration strongly supports stable credible policies that provide the flexibility to mitigate the downturn while maintaining a long-term focus on the goal of strong noninflationary economic growth MONETARY POLICY Monetary policy should be credible systematic and consistent with the goal of mitigating the downturn and allowing the economy to move toward a higher level of sustainable growth with a low and stable inflation rate. The Federal Reserve faces several challenges in implementing monetary policy in In July the Federal Reserve set a preliminary target range of 2V2- to 6V2-percent growth for M2 during down half a percentage point from the range. This reduction is consistent with the longer term goal of gradually reducing the underlying rate of inflation. But with a weakening economy it is essential that money growth stay well within this range. Changes in velocity that appear long-term may require the Federal Reserve to reconsider its preliminary target range. The target range for M3 is set at 1to 5-percent growth reflecting the expectation that M3 growth will continue to be affected by the ongoing restructuring of thrift institutions In formulating monetary policy consideration must be given to the cyclical regularity that interest rates tend to fall as the demand for private credit falls in a weakening economy. This tendency is particularly important to recognize if the Federal funds rate continues to be the focus for short-run implementation of Federal Reserve policy because a decline in interest rates during a downturn may not be a sign of monetary easing particularly if the growth of money and credit has slowed. A restrictive monetary policy would jeopardize a solid recovery from the current slowdown and hamper prospects for long-run growth. By further reducing the discount rate and taking action to lower the Federal funds rate as money and credit growth slowed inflationary pressures eased and the downturn continued in early the Federal Reserve has taken action that will help mitigate the current recession Other challenges arise in the area of bank regulation. Through bank regulations and supervision the Federal Reserve and other bank regulators have an important influence over lending activity Regulators should continue prudent oversight of bank lending. It is important however that lending be available to creditworthy borrowers and that regulators not be so stringent that sound banks can not make sound loans to sound borrowers The restructuring of bank assets to meet the requirements of the Basle framework may present the Federal Reserve with additional policy challenges. In the longer term the movement away from short-term adjustable-rate loans ( like commercial and industrial loans ) to longer term fixed-rate loans such as many mortgages and mortgage-backed securities may increase the exposure of banks to sudden swings in short-term interest rates. Since banks must offer competitive rates to attract funds a quick rise in shortterm interest rates would tend to raise their costs relative to their income. These possibilities would adversely affect economic growth Bank regulators are currently studying ways to incorporate this interest rate risk into capital guidelines FISCAL POLICY The new budget law signed in November includes deficitreduction guidelines and budget process reforms that will have substantial beneficial effects on the economy in and the years beyond. The budget law is expected to reduce the deficit by almost one-half trillion dollars over the next years from what it otherwise would have been The Effects of Fiscal Policy Fiscal policy comprises the spending tax and borrowing activities of the Federal Government. Earlier in this chapter several different measures of the deficit were discussed. While changes in the deficit have important effects on the economy the composition of the underlying expenditure and tax changes can have extremely important effects as well Increases in Federal purchases have the potential to boost demand and stimulate the economy temporarily but eventually they put upward pressure on inflation and interest rates. That upward pressure will harm interest-sensitive activities in the economy such as investment and ultimately lower the economy 's productive capacity. When considering the composition of Federal spending investments should be pursued that promote long-run growth such as research and development and public infrastructure projects that pass stringent cost-benefit criteria The size and structure of Federal taxes and transfers also have significant effects on the economy. High marginal tax rates have been shown to discourage work effort saving and investment. Thus a guiding principle behind the landmark tax reforms of and was to lower tax rates significantly The effective tax rate the rate actually paid on earnings or investment income may differ from the more commonly quoted statutory tax rate. A prime example occurs in the case of capital gains Consider a growth stock purchased for $ in and sold in that pays no dividends. Over this period the average annual inflation rate was percent. Suppose that the stock had an average annual real return of percent. In the stock would sell for $ more than the purchase price. Tax payments would be percent of this capital gain and would be collected when the asset is sold rather than each year as the asset increases in value. This deferral of tax payments lowers the effective tax rate. A large portion of the increase in the value of the asset however is due to inflation and is not a real gain. In fact the after-tax real return on the asset is only percent well below the pretax real return of percent. The net effect of inflation and deferral leads to an effective tax rate of percent on the real capital gain much higher than the percent statutory tax rate The effects of fiscal policy on the economy also depend crucially on expectations for future spending and taxes as well as on their current levels. The new budget law for example reduces the budget deficit from what otherwise would be expected. Economic theory and empirical evidence indicate that expectations of deficit reduction in future years if the deficit reduction commitment is credible can lower interest rates as financial market participants observe that the government will be lowering its future demand in the credit market. That can mitigate a potential short-run contractionary effect. In other words expectations of lower interest rates in the future will lower long-term interest rates today. Lower longterm interest rates will reduce the cost of capital stimulating investment and economic growth relative to what would be predicted if expectations were ignored Projected Deficit Reduction : Calculating how much the new budget law and its enforcement provisions known as the Budget Enforcement Act are expected to cut the deficit requires an estimate of the preexisting baseline deficit. The baseline is calculated from a simulation of future expenditure and revenue patterns that assumes no intervening policy changes. The calculation depends for example on economic assumptions about GNP growth and inflation and demographic changes in the population. Any tax or spending changes that are already part of the law such as cost-of-living increases for entitlement recipients are incorporated in the baseline calculation. By calculating the deficit reduction against the preexisting baseline the size of the reduction is measured relative to what the deficit would have been had no changes in the law occurred and the underlying baseline assumptions materialized Obviously different economic assumptions will produce different baselines and also different future levels of the deficit. However different economic assumptions will have a relatively small effect on the estimated reduction in the deficit relative to the corresponding baselines The majority of the budget law 's deficit reduction comes from slowing the growth of expenditures. Discretionary spending which is spending whose levels the Congress sets each year is expected to account for roughly percent of the reduction from the baseline Much of this total is expected to come from reductions in defense outlays Slowing the growth of entitlement and mandatory spending programs which are statutory obligations such as medicare and agriculture programs is expected to account for roughly percent of the 5-year deficit reduction. The smaller deficit resulting from the combination of spending and tax changes relative to the baseline will also reduce interest payments on the debt by a significant amount over the next years The new budget law raises almost $ billion in additional tax revenue over the fiscal period. While marginal tax rates for the upper tail of the income distribution were reduced from to percent marginal tax rates in the extreme upper tail increased from to percent. The affluent will pay higher taxes as a consequence of a new phaseout of personal exemptions limitation of itemized deductions and new excise taxes levied on selected luxury items such as expensive furs jewelry and cars. About onequarter of the total revenue increase comes from excise tax increases on gasoline alcohol and tobacco The new budget law also provides significantly more assistance to the working poor by adding about $ billion to the earned income tax credit ( EITC ) over the next years. The EITC is a refundable tax credit given to low-wage taxpayers with children Chart shows the change in the projected NIPA and NIPA structural deficit for the next years. The NIPA structural deficit is expected to decline in each of the next years as the provisions of the new budget law are fully implemented. In contrast the NIPA deficit is expected to increase in as the automatic stabilizers cushion the effect of the downturn. After the NIPA deficit is also expected to fall steadily Budget Process Reform By reforming the budget process the new budget law has improved the credibility and stability of fiscal policy. These reforms significantly increase the strength of the previous budget law and give fiscal policy a longer term focus. The new law defines two main types of spending : mandatory and discretionary. Under the new law mandatory spending and tax legislation is limited by a " pay-as-you-go " test. Under this test any new mandatory spending legislation or proposed tax decreases for the next years must be offset by a corresponding decrease in other mandatory spending or by an increase in tax revenue Legally binding caps have been established on discretionary spending for each of the next years. For through caps are placed on three separate categories of discretionary spending : domestic defense and international. In and a single cap covers total discretionary spending. In each year the spending on Chart Reductions in the Federal Budget Deficit NIPA Basis With the new budget law the structural deficit is expected to decrease in each of the next years ; the actual deficit is expected to rise before falling Billions of dollars While the structural deficit declines.. ...automatic stabilizers cause the actual deficit to rise Fiscal Year Reduction in Actual NIPA Deficit from Previous Year Reduction in NIPA Structural Deficit from Previous Year Source : Department of Commerce different programs within a category can change but total spending for each category can not exceed the cap. Hence the caps impose a " flexible freeze " on spending. Moreover saving in one category can not be credited to another category. The discretionary caps will be adjusted for inflation and a limited set of technical factors Funding for the military operation in the Persian Gulf will not count against the defense discretionary spending caps Discretionary spending that exceeds the caps or mandatory spending or receipts legislation that violates the pay-as-you-go rule will trigger sequesters which are automatic across-the-board cuts in discretionary or mandatory spending. " End-of-session " sequesters would take effect days after the Congress adjourns at the end of the fiscal year. They apply to the category that violates the rule. If domestic discretionary spending violates its spending caps for example it is cut. If the pay-as-you-go rule is violated entitlement spending is reduced. An end-of-session sequester has already taken place for the fiscal budget because new spending legislation as a result of an unintentional drafting error violated the spending cap on international discretionary programs A " within session " sequester can be applied to discretionary spending during the fiscal year if supplemental appropriations leg- islation appropriations made for the fiscal year during the fiscal year violate the discretionary spending caps before the last quarter of the fiscal year. If supplemental legislation violates these caps during the fourth quarter a " look-back " sequester lowers the following year 's caps by the amount of the overrun. An example of how the three types of sequesters would work in the fiscal budget cycle is given in Chart Chart The Fiscal Budget Cycle Fiscal Jan Apr1 Jul Oct Jan Apr Feb4,1991 I The Administration submits I The Congress adjourns fiscal budget to the Congress Within days " end of It includes updated economic I session " sequester for forecasts meets discretionary I both discretionary and spending limits and abides by pay-as ~ you-go " spending the " pay-as-you-go " rule may take effect JuM Oct Jan A " look-back " sequester may reduce discretionary caps for fiscal A " within session " sequester on discretionary caps may take effect The Congress develops and passes concurrent budget resolution and appropriations bills Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Office of Management and Budget Under the new budget process discretionary funding that the President designates as being required to meet an emergency and that the Congress designates as an emergency by statute would not count against the discretionary caps. If the emergency funding affected mandatory spending it would not be counted for pay-asyou-go purposes. Because the President now has the authority to require that all items meet the enforcement provisions other than those the President designates an emergency the Congress can not avoid the discretionary caps or pay-as-you-go rule by passing emergency supplemental appropriations bills The budget law sets overall deficit targets for each year and allows the deficit targets to be adjusted in response to changes in short-run economic conditions in fiscal and If economic growth is lower than expected the deficit target is raised. If eco- nomic growth is higher than expected the deficit target is lowered Adjusting for changing economic conditions preserves the " automatic stabilizers " built into spending programs and the tax code When growth is low entitlement spending increases and tax revenues fall increasing the budget deficit but cushioning personal incomes and spending. The opposite happens when growth accelerates. In fiscal and the President can choose not to adjust the deficit targets Several additional reforms have been made in the budget process. Budget resolutions which are used by the Congress to place spending limits on its committees will now cover fiscal years That will make the long-term implications of budget legislation more apparent when members vote on the resolutions. Furthermore the Social Security trust fund is now protected by " firewalls " procedural rules in both the House and Senate that make it difficult to pass any resolution that would reduce the actuarial balance of the fund Federal Credit Reform Another important feature of the new budget law reforms the budgetary treatment of Federal credit programs. Government spending on credit activities is best measured by the subsidies embodied in Federal direct loans and loan guarantees. For years the budget did not record these expenses which reduced the scrutiny given to credit programs. The Federal Credit Reform Act of part of the budget law requires that the subsidy cost of Federal credit be treated in the same manner as other Federal spending in the budget process Additional steps were taken to ensure the financial soundness of federally sponsored privately funded businesses called government-sponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) The contingent liabilities incurred by GSEs have risen dramatically. Both the Treasury Department and the Congressional Budget Office are required to submit studies on the financial soundness of these institutions These studies will provide the background for legislation to be introduced by September that will ensure the fiscal health of GSEs ( see Chapter for more detail ) Budget Outlook for Fiscal and Fiscal The consolidated and NIPA deficits are expected to be higher in fiscal than they were in fiscal Automatic stabilizers are likely to add to the budget deficit in fiscal but they will help mitigate the downturn without altering the course of long-term structural deficit reductions. An increase in expected outlays of deposit insurance funds in fiscal also contributes to the higher projected consolidated budget deficit but as described earlier RTC and other deposit insurance outlays have a negligible net effect on capital markets. For fiscal the consolidated deficit is expected to be $ billion compared with $ billion in fiscal with deposit insurance outlays projected to rise by $ billion. On a NIPA basis which excludes spending for deposit insurance the deficit is expected to be $ billion in fiscal compared with $ billion in fiscal For fiscal both the consolidated and NIPA deficits are projected to improve compared with fiscal The consolidated deficit is expected to be $ billion and the NIPA deficit is expected to be $ billion. Much of this improvement is due to a return to more normal growth projected for fiscal The economic downturn followed by the projected upswing will obscure the tendency for the structural deficit to decline. The structural NIPA deficit is projected to fall by $ billion in fiscal and then by an additional $ billion in fiscal SUMMARY The Administration supports stable credible policies that provide the flexibility to mitigate the downturn while maintaining a long-term focus on the goal of strong economic growth and low and stable inflation An important characteristic of a credible and systematic monetary policy is a commitment to sustain the rate of growth of money and credit during a downturn. That commitment would allow interest rates to decline and mitigate the downturn The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of is a substantial and credible deficit reduction agreement that is expected to reduce the deficit by almost one-half trillion dollars over the next years and add to national saving and long-term growth Because of the downturn the automatic stabilizers are likely to add to the budget deficit in but they will help bring the economy to a quick recovery without altering the course of long-term structural deficit reductions THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK The Administration projects that the downturn in the economy is likely to continue into the early part of and that recovery is likely to begin by the middle of the year. After the recovery the economy is then expected to return to a strong growth path of around percent through the mid-1990s. In the long run projected reductions in labor force growth may lead to lower real GNP growth unless they are offset by increased immigration or greater labor force participation THE OUTLOOK FOR THE SHORT TERM Reductions in real consumer income during the last two quarters of low levels of consumer and business confidence and continued tight credit conditions all point to a further decline in real activity in the first quarter of this year There have been eight other recessions since World War II. The average recession lasted months two lasted months and one was only months. The typical recession has been associated with a 2.6-percent decline in real GNP from peak to trough although declines have been as high as percent and as low as percent Compared with the average of these previous recessions the current downturn is likely to be shallow and relatively short and the prospects for a recovery of economic growth by mid-1991 are good The economy continues to have low inventories relative to sales indicating that a prolonged period of inventory liquidation is not likely in the short term. More importantly in the early stages of previous downturns both inflation and interest rates were either high or rising. In for example the Federal Reserve had to follow a stringent monetary policy to reduce entrenched inflation expectations. In the current situation the core inflation rate is moderating and is far lower than in the and recessions partly because the Federal Reserve has followed a credible systematic policy in recent years. Moderating inflation coupled with Federal Reserve credibility in fighting inflation leaves room for the Federal Reserve 's policy to soften the downturn without raising expectations of higher inflation Additional developments in point to growth recovering in the second half of Lower long-term interest rates will begin to have positive effects on investment spending. The loosening of monetary policy that occurred in the fourth quarter of and early will also begin to affect consumer and business spending in the middle of Some analysts estimate that it takes at least five quarters for a change in the value of the dollar to have a substantial effect on exports and imports. Thus the lagged effects on exports of the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar are likely to be felt well into In addition real net exports are expected to improve because the Nation 's major trading partners are expected on average to experience stronger growth than the United States A final important ingredient to recovery is a successful resolution to the Persian Gulf crisis. Oil prices have already declined substantially which will remove a large drag on the economy. In addition successful resolution of the crisis will strengthen the economy by boosting consumer and business confidence The Administration expects real GNP to increase percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of ( Table ) This rate is higher than the 0.3-percent growth during because of the fourth-quarter decline in The sectors most likely to contribute to economic growth are those that are particularly sensitive to lower interest rates easier credit conditions and the lower dollar in For example residential construction consumer durables and business spending on new plant and equipment are likely to improve as the year progresses. Exports of manufactured goods and farm commodities are likely to rise. A return to higher export growth for manufacturing would also stimulate further spending on new plant and equipment needed to meet the rising export demand TABLE Economic Outlook for Forecast Item Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Personal consumption expenditures Nonresidential fixed investment Residential investment Federal purchases of goods and services State and local purchases of goods and services ! Real gross national product 6NP implicit price deflator Consumer price index Compensation per hour s Output per hour Fourth quarter level Unemployment rate ( percent ) Housing starts ( millions of units annual rate ) Preliminary For urban wage earners and clerical Nonfarm business all persons workers Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Note. Based on seasonally adjusted data Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Inflation in should be lower than in barring a resurgence of oil price rises or other price shocks. The economic slowdown in created excess capacity in many industries and eased tightness in labor markets which will contribute to downward pressure on underlying inflation during the year In growth is expected to be robust as the economy continues to rebound from its sluggish growth in and the downturn that began in late Business investment and construction activity are expected to be especially strong. The unemployment rate is projected to decline Forecast Uncertainties Economic forecasting is an imprecise science. Natural disasters and other unexpected developments can cause forecasts to go awry Changes in the policies upon which the forecasts are based can cause actual events to be substantially different from the forecast Ultimately economic forecasts are based largely on predictions about human behavior usually taking the previous patterns of behavior as a guide. But human behavior is complex difficult to predict and subject to change. People do not always respond the same way or with the same speed in what appear to be similar circumstances Forecasts made around turning points of the business cycle are even less precise than those made during extended expansions Moreover the conflict in the Persian Gulf creates uncertainty about future oil price developments In the longer term another important area of uncertainty arises from the possibility of rising protectionism and increasing trade frictions between countries. If the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is not completed successfully countries may begin to close their markets to protect their domestic industries. That would increase the risk of slower long-term growth for all countries. In addition an increase in the barriers to trade would lead to a decrease in U.S. exports which have been a key source of growth for the economy over the last few years. The downturn facing the United States and other countries around the world jeopardizes more open trading because governments and workers typically seek to maintain domestic employment levels by reducing imports during downturns. ( Chapter discusses the role open foreign markets play in economic growth. ) Table illustrates the uncertainties of economic forecasting by providing a range of short-term outcomes. The higher growth alternative is consistent with a sharper and faster rebound in economic activity than the Administration projection. The lower growth alternative is consistent with the behavior of real growth during an average postwar recession Since real growth inflation interest rates and employment affect Federal spending and receipts the projected budget deficit also varies across the three projections. A slow recovery with relatively high unemployment low income growth and higher interest rates will lower tax receipts and increase spending through automatic stabilizers leading to a higher deficit. On the other hand a faster more robust acceleration in income and employment growth could substantially cut the deficit from the Administration projection THE PROSPECTS FOR GROWTH IN THE LONGER TERM Short-term projections are heavily influenced by recent events Developments that temporarily raise or lower the overall level of demand can have a substantial effect on the near-term outlook for real growth and inflation. In the longer term the main determi- TABLE Alternative Projections and Their Impact on the Deficit Item Calendar year Calendar year Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real gross national product : Higher growth Administration Lower growth GNP implicit price deflator : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Percent Total unemployment rate : Higher growth Administration Lower Growth Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Billions of dollars ( Fiscal years ) Budget deficit : Higher growth Administration Lower growth Note. Deficit on a consolidated basis excluding deposit insurance outlays Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget nants of average growth are the factors that influence the overall supply of goods and services generated in the economy One way to focus on supply factors is to decompose real GNP growth into four components : ( ) labor force growth the growth in the number of people available for work each year ; ( ) the change in the share of the labor force that is employed or the employment rate ; ( ) the growth in the number of hours an employed person works each year represented as the growth in average weekly hours ; and ( ) labor productivity growth the growth in the amount of goods and services that can be produced with an hour of labor Table shows the contribution of various factors in expected average real GNP growth during the next years compared with previous periods Growth During the Next Years Economic growth is projected to average about percent a year during the next years ( see Table for year-by-year projections ) This projection assumes an average rise of percent a year in the labor force a lower growth rate than in the 1980s. Slower labor force growth results both from slight reductions in projected labor TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GNP [ Average annual percent change ] IV IV III III III III III IV to to Item to to GROWTH IN : _l _4 _4 _.l ) EQUALS- Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) PLUS : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business output ) LESS- Nonfarm business output as a share of real GNP o _1 ) EQUALS : Real GNP ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUS : Civilian labor force participation rate ) EQUALS : Civilian labor force ) PLUS- Civilian employment rate ) EQUALS- Civilian employment ) PLUS : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment l ) EQUALS : Nonfarm business employment ) PLUS- Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) Line six translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors or GNP which includes the output of farms and general government Note. Data may not add due to rounding Time periods for the first two columns are from business cycle peak to business cycle peak to avoid cyclical effects Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget force participation rates and from slower growth in the workingage population. In the postwar period growth in the working-age population averaged percent but it is predicted to rise at only a 0.9-percent rate over the next years. Labor force participation and population growth projections also depend on factors such as immigration. The labor force growth projections assume lower levels of immigration than in the 1980s. However the Immigration Act of which allows a substantial increase in immigration and emphasizes skill-based entry criteria may increase the size of the labor force which would lead to faster labor force growth than reflected in Table It could also increase productivity Decreases in the unemployment rate are expected to contribute less than percentage point on average each year to real GNP growth from to A fall in the unemployment rate in the period as the economy rebounds from the current slowdown contributes the most to GNP. As the economy nears full employment increases in employment make smaller contributions to growth Average weekly hours are expected to decline slightly and to have little effect on average real GNP growth during In and hours seem likely to recover somewhat from their cyclically low levels in In the latter part of the period the long-term downward trend in average weekly hours is expected to reassert itself TABLE Administration Economic Assumptions Item Percent change fo urth quarter to fourth quarter Real GNP Real compensation per hour * _.l Output per hour * Consumer price index a /tnnual level Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Preliminary Nonfarm business all persons For urban wage earners and clerical workers > resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget A key assumption underlying the average 2.6-percent growth rate is that labor productivity will average percent over the forecast horizon. After assuming the Administration 's progrowth initiatives are adopted underlying economic growth is expected to approach percent and labor productivity is projected to be percent. That is very close to the 1.7-percent average rate of productivity growth since It is below the 2.4-percent rise from to but higher than average productivity growth in the 1980s. This rise in labor productivity will be facilitated by the higher level of capital accumulation that results from lower Federal borrowing and lower real interest rates Inflation and interest rate projections are consistent with the longer term assumptions concerning monetary and fiscal policy These projections reflect a monetary policy aimed at gradually reducing the underlying inflation rate over the next years. In response to lower inflation and reduced Federal borrowing requirements interest rates both nominal and real are likely to decline Growth Beyond the Mid-1990s For the years beyond the mid-1990s demographic factors suggest that the average rate of real GNP growth will slow. Labor force growth for example is expected to decline substantially throughout the next years. Since the labor force has grown by percent a year. However from to labor force growth is projected to average about percent a year and is projected to decline percent a year from to That is consistent with a projected slowdown in population growth and a projected decline in the overall labor force participation rate Population growth ( the Census Bureau middle projection ) is projected to average just under percent a year from to less than half the rate of annual average population growth between and The overall labor force participation rate is projected to rise through about the last year the baby-boom generation is entirely within the range of working ages that have traditionally had the highest participation rates. As the population ages the overall participation rate would decline even without a fall in the participation rate of any single demographic group Overall labor force participation is projected to show little net growth between and and to decline after The projection of slowing real GNP growth over the very long term rests upon demographic projections that are largely extrapolations of current and past population growth and labor force behavior. Several factors would cause the simple extrapolations to understate the average rate of economic growth : an unexpected increase in fertility rates ; an increase in labor force participation rates for older Americans perhaps due to increasing longevity ; or an increased number of highly skilled immigrants. Nevertheless the simple extrapolations provide a benchmark against which longterm growth projections can be compared It is also important to note that although real GNP growth is likely to decline over the next years this does not suggest that productivity growth will decline. With real output per hour rising at percent a year the standard of living would more than double by Sound policies that create incentives for saving and investment and a better educated work force will help to ensure the maximum sustainable rise in the standard of living SUMMARY The downturn that began in the second half of is expected to continue into early with the economy recovering by mid-1991. While future oil prices remain uncertain oil prices in the range they reached following the successful beginning of Operation Desert Storm will reduce the drag on the economy caused by the oil shock in the latter half of Economic activity will be further strengthened by lower interest rates and the decline in the value of the dollar that occurred in Inflation is projected to moderate barring an unexpected rise in oil prices above their late levels In the longer term several factors have paved the way for increased private capital accumulation and faster productivity growth. The economy 's underlying medium-term growth potential is likely to be about percent a year. Inflation and nominal interest rates are projected to decline In the very long term the average rate of real GNP growth is likely to fall due to a slower growing labor force. If productivity growth holds up living standards will continue to increase CONCLUSION The economy which was already growing sluggishly for various reasons entered a recession in the latter part of The downturn was caused in large part by the economic effects of the oil shock following Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait Recovery is likely to begin by mid-1991 making the downturn relatively mild. In contrast to other slowdowns the economy entered this recession with low inventories thereby decreasing the likelihood of substantial further cuts in production. Unlike previous postwar recessions when inflation was rising in the current situation core inflation is relatively low and money growth has been slow thus there is room for flexibility in Federal Reserve policy to mitigate the downturn without raising inflation expectations. Declines in the exchange value of the dollar in and the monetary policy easing that occurred at the end of and early will also help to increase growth in Over the longer term the new multiyear enforceable budget law will lower the structural Federal deficit and therefore Federal borrowing requirements. Combined with a monetary policy aimed at maintaining strong economic growth while gradually reducing the underlying inflation rate both nominal and real interest rates are likely to decline. Credible monetary policy and growth-oriented fiscal policy will facilitate higher levels of capital accumulation raise labor productivity and enhance the economy 's growth potential CHAPTER Oil Price Shocks and Economic Policy IN THE SECOND HALF OF the world economy was hit with a sudden oil price increase reminiscent of the 1970s. From an average of about $ a barrel in June the price of oil rose to an average of $ in October before declining in November and December and again in January This oil price shock was triggered by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the U.S.-led response to this act of aggression averted an even larger and longer lasting oil price shock Because oil is used widely large and abrupt increases in its price have significant implications for the world economy and for both macroeconomic policy fiscal and monetary policy and policies concerned with energy and other markets. During the United States and the other major industrialized market economies used about million barrels of oil products each day. Other countries including less developed countries consumed an additional million barrels of these products. In the United States uncertainty about oil prices and the resolution of the Persian Gulf situation contributed to the erosion of consumer and business confidence evident at the end of It is widely expected that as the situation is resolved confidence will rise and oil prices will stabilize in a range not far from that prevailing before the price shock began But even then considerable uncertainty about future oil prices is likely to remain Perceptions about the effects of oil price shocks on the U.S. economy reflect in large part the extremely high inflation and unemployment rates recorded at the time of the oil price shocks of and At the time of the first oil price shock the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index soared to percent in followed by a rise of the unemployment rate to a postwar record high of percent in May Similar adverse effects occurred at the time of the second oil price shock. Inflation rose to percent in and the unemployment rate eventually reached percent a new postwar high in November Although the recent oil price shock increased inflation and unemployment there is no reason to believe that the deterioration of economic performance will be as large or as long lasting as the experience of the 1970s might suggest. Not only does it now appear that this shock will be less severe but the U.S. economy is now better able to adjust to any given change in oil prices. Compared with the 1970s more systematic macroeconomic policies have kept the underlying rate of inflation relatively low and relatively stable in recent years. The resulting credibility that inflation will be contained enables monetary policy to respond to the recent shock without causing a prolonged recession or a permanent increase in inflation. In addition a policy of deregulation has increased the flexibility of energy and other markets to respond to price shocks and the amount of oil used has decreased relative to the size of the economy With the benefit of hindsight it is clear that misguided macroeconomic policies in the period preceding the previous oil price shocks brought on high and rising underlying inflation. That made it unlikely that a more expansionary monetary policy would have been able to reduce the ensuing output declines without producing unduly large increases in prices. It is just as clear that misguided energy policies both those in place when the shocks hit and those instituted afterward significantly reduced the economy 's flexibility and thus its ability to temper the effects of the shocks. It was regulation and not events in the Middle East that forced U.S. consumers to wait in long lines to buy gasoline. Historical experience along with economic research on the oil price shocks of the 1970s has taught us much about designing macroeconomic and energy policies for a world subject to such shocks. Given the prospect of continuing uncertainty regarding future oil prices it is essential that our policies correctly reflect the meaning and importance of energy security let markets work to balance the forces of supply and demand and set out a credible long-term course for the future SIZE AND DURATION OF OIL PRICE SHOCKS Most price changes merit little attention from policymakers Indeed prices that adjust continually to reflect changing conditions are a sign of a healthy flexible economy. A price shock on the other hand is a large and unexpected change in the price of a commodity that can affect the economy as a whole. The most important price shocks to the U.S. economy during the past two decades have been changes in the price of oil. Because oil is consumed in significant amounts and is used intensively in the production of other goods and because the United States imports a large amount of oil oil price shocks can have large economy-wide repercussions RECENT OIL PRICE MOVEMENTS The recent increase in oil prices began in July when the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) began negotiations to reduce their supply of oil to the world market. The spot market price the price at which crude oil for near-term delivery is bought and sold rose from an average of about $ a barrel in June to almost $ at the end of July After Iraq invaded Kuwait on August the spot price rose quickly reaching about $ a barrel on August The spot price went as high as $ a barrel in mid-October and then generally declined through the end of Soon after the start of Operation Desert Storm in mid-January the spot price fell to about $ a barrel not far from its level just before Iraq invaded Kuwait Soon after Iraq 's invasion uncertainty concerning the timing of the resolution of the Gulf crisis increased uncertainty about future oil supplies which in turn increased the precautionary demand for oil inventories. Several countries began to increase their oil production in August and by November these additional supplies had completely offset the loss of million barrels in daily exports from Iraq and Kuwait. However these production increases left less standby crude supply and unused refining capacity to meet future contingencies. Changes in the spot price of oil reflect uncertainty about future supply conditions. However the price of oil expected to prevail further in the future has changed relatively little since the oil price shock began ; the price of oil to be delivered near the end of has typically differed by less than $ a barrel from its pre-invasion level It is clear that the proximate cause of the rapid oil price increase late in the summer of was Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait and its threat to Saudi Arabia. Had Iraq dominated both Kuwait and Saudi Arabia it would have controlled almost one-half of the world 's proven oil reserves. The international community responded to this aggression vigorously deploying multinational forces and initiating an embargo against Iraq. These responses to the Iraqi threats to both peace and economic security have averted even sharper and longer lasting increases in the price of oil and a greater deterioration of economic conditions COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS SHOCKS The oil price shock that began in differs significantly from the price shocks of the 1970s in several respects. Before the sharp increases oil prices had fallen for several decades relative to the prices of nonenergy goods and coal. That decline in real oil prices encouraged greater oil use and discouraged further exploration and investment in oil production By the early 1970s the rapidly growing oil demand brought on by robust growth of the world economy led to an increasingly tight world oil market. OPEC began to engineer a series of large price increases eventually tripling the world price of oil from to Oil prices remained relatively stable until when the second price shock often associated with the Iranian revolution and the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war began. By the end of oil prices had more than doubled Both of the earlier shocks followed several years of stable or slowly falling oil prices. In contrast oil prices were highly volatile before the recent oil shock. In the first half of oil prices fell dramatically plummeting by more than percent to about $ a barrel in July Between and oil prices fluctuated within the $ to $ range. During oil prices fell from a high of over $ in early January to a low of less than $ in late June Since the recent shock began in July world oil prices have continued to be far more volatile than they were in the initial stages of earlier shocks Another difference is the duration of the shocks. In both of the earlier oil shock periods oil prices increased steeply and fairly steadily over a period of more than years. In the recent episode oil prices rose substantially through mid-October generally fell through the end of and declined sharply after the successful start of Operation Desert Storm in mid-January SUMMARY Price shocks are large and unexpected changes in the price of a particular commodity important to the economy as a whole Oil price shocks are the most common and most significant price shocks The recent price shock differs significantly from the oil price shocks of the 1970s. In addition to being less severe it followed a period of volatile prices in contrast to the period of relatively stable prices that preceded each of the earlier shocks THE EFFECTS OF OIL PRICE SHOCKS The effect of a shock on the performance of the economy depends on many factors. In addition to the macroeconomic and energy policies pursued before and during an oil price shock the underlying structure of the economy determines how it is affected by a shock of a given magnitude and duration. In this section the effects are discussed in the context of policies that do not change in response to shocks and in particular of a monetary policy that does not adjust money and credit growth EFFECTS ON INFLATION Since oil products are used both directly and as inputs to the production of other goods and services increases in oil prices directly and indirectly raise the overall price level unless rapid offsetting wage and price declines occur elsewhere in the economy. Higher prices for oil immediately raise the price of gasoline heating oil and other petroleum products and thereby directly affect the general price level ( Box ) The larger the share of expenditures devoted to petroleum products the larger the direct contribution of oil price shocks to inflation. Indirect effects arise because prices for goods and services often reflect the costs of oil used in their production or distribution. The more oil intensive the economy 's production processes the larger the indirect contribution of oil price shocks to inflation By raising the overall level of prices an oil shock may eventually also lead to a higher level of nominal wages. That in turn may lead to further price increases which would amplify the increase in the aggregate price level caused by the oil shock. The United States is fortunate that its wage-setting arrangements do not rapidly transmit the higher inflation caused by an oil price shock into excessive increases in wages and salaries. Some have suggested that the centralized bargaining more commonly used in many European economies to set wages allows such an excessive reaction of wages to higher prices even when there have been no compensating productivity gains. The more gradual wage adjustments characteristic of the relatively decentralized labor markets in the United States tend to raise labor costs less when oil price shocks take place It is important to distinguish between continuing inflation and a once-and-for-all increase in the price level. An increase in oil prices raises overall prices to a higher level producing a bout of temporarily higher inflation while prices are moving toward this higher level. As prices finish adjusting to the oil price shock however this component of inflation disappears. The inflation rate then reverts toward the underlying rate of inflation which depends on the longrun growth rate of money and credit and of the economy 's productive capacity Oil intensity and more generally energy intensity are important indicators of the sensitivity of the general price level to an oil price shock : the greater the intensity the greater the effect of a price shock on the general price level. The energy intensity of the U.S economy measured as the ratio of primary energy use to real national output decreased by more than percent between and ( Chart ) At the same time the share of oil in total energy Xuse fell from percent to percent with an even larger decline from percent to percent outside the transportation sector Chart Energy Consumption per Dollar of GNP Energy intensity in the United States has fallen substantially since the oil price shock Thousand Btu per dollar of GNP I I I I I I I Source : Department of Energy I I The trend toward lower energy intensity in the United States which mirrors a similar trend in other major industrialized countries reflects two forces. First the efficiency of residential commercial industrial and transportation energy use has improved significantly since For example the average energy intensity of steel production fell by percent between and and the amount of energy used to heat square foot of residential space declined by percent. Many of these adjustments reflect a market economy 's response to higher relative prices of oil after the price shocks of and At the same time the mix of outputs in the economy as a whole has shifted away from energyintensive heavy industrial products such as steel toward less energy-intensive products and services Energy and oil intensity in the United States is somewhat higher than in several other large industrialized nations. In addition oil products are more highly taxed in these countries so that any given dollar increase in crude oil prices will produce a smaller percentage increase in the prices of gasoline and other oil products than in the United States. These differences suggest that oil price shocks will have a larger effect on inflation in the United States than in these other countries EFFECTS ON REAL GROWTH The major macroeconomic effects of an oil price shock stem from reduced demand for goods and services by consumers and businesses. This decline in real spending will lead to temporarily slower growth of real gross national product ( GNP ) and employment. The reduction in output may be large enough to cause a recession especially if the oil price shock occurs in a weak economy. However even if oil prices were to remain high these demand effects are temporary and eventually the economy would return to its longrun growth path Terms-of-Trade Effects Higher world oil prices mean that consumers must pay more to foreign suppliers for each barrel of imported oil leaving them less to spend on goods produced in the United States. Consumers who use relatively more oil to heat homes in colder climates for example or to commute longer distances will be relatively more affected by oil price increases. Hence consumer spending is likely to fall off more in regions of the country that use relatively more oil Spending in oil-producing regions in the United States on the other hand might rise as incomes increase especially if higher oil prices lead to more exploration and increased drilling. On balance however the overall effect on the economy is to reduce consumer spending The increase in the relative price of imports affects the terms-oftrade ; that is the terms at which U.S. goods are traded for imports At current U.S. oil-import levels of more than million barrels daily each $ increase in the per-barrel price of oil would if it persisted for a year shift about $ billion from the United States to foreign suppliers of oil. As a result of this increased expenditure for imported oil the Nation 's trade deficit is likely to rise Money and Credit Market Effects Another important channel through which demand is reduced is through the higher overall price level generated by the oil price shock. The higher price level results in reduced real supplies of money and credit nominal money or credit deflated by the price level unless nominal supplies are raised proportionately. Lower real supplies of money and credit cause a tightening in credit markets and thereby raise interest rates above what they would otherwise be. Empirical analysis indicates that the adverse effect on output and unemployment of an oil price shock that stems from the decline in the real volume of money and credit is quantitatively significant Of course this credit tightening effect does not take place in the absence of other factors that might affect interest rates. In the second half of for example the weakening economy and the new budget legislation started interest rates on a downward trajectory. But in general lower real money and credit growth rates that result from an oil shock would tend to keep interest rates higher than they otherwise would be Higher interest rates reduce household spending on consumer durables like automobiles and furniture which are often purchased on credit. The tightened money and credit market conditions are also likely to lead to reduced business investment spending for equipment factories and inventories. Residential construction may also be adversely affected by the rise in interest rates It is important to emphasize that both short- and long-term interest rates affect spending. Long-term interest rates are importantly affected by expectations about future short-term interest rates. The shorter and milder an oil price shock is expected to be the less expectations about future short-term interest rates would be likely to change. Consequently long-term interest rates would also be expected to change less. Thus spending that depends on long-term interest rates would not be affected as much by a price shock that is expected to be shorter and milder Confidence Effects Survey measures of consumer and business confidence dropped dramatically when the recent oil price shock began. That decline may have reflected not only lowered expectations of upcoming eco- nomic performance but also uncertainty about oil prices about economic conditions generally and about prospects for war. Such a loss of confidence typically leads consumers to postpone purchases of big-ticket items such as new homes furniture automobiles and other consumer durables. Heightened uncertainty also induces businesses to postpone investment in plant equipment and inventories The decline in consumer and business confidence in the second half of may have reflected the perception that the oil price shocks of the 1970s were primarily responsible for the substantial increases in inflation and unemployment rates that ensued. Although the oil price shocks of the 1970s did raise inflation and unemployment rates the misguided macroeconomic policies carried out around the time of the shocks contributed significantly to those increases. Consumers and businesses therefore may have overestimated the likely adverse economic effects of the recent oil price shock Overall Demand Effects The terms-of-trade credit tightening and confidence effects will reverberate through the economy. Slower consumer spending will lead to a larger cumulative effect on economy-wide spending and income as growth of output and employment and thus of income slow in response to the initial slowdown in spending. If the oil price shock is transitory as expected this process will be reversed when prices fall Structural changes and reforms since the 1970s have made both energy and other markets more flexible and therefore better able to respond to changes in energy prices. In addition the decline in oil intensity means that each dollar increase in the price of oil puts less upward pressure on costs and therefore on prices. Since the smaller increase in the price level reduces the real supplies of money and credit by a smaller amount there is less upward pressure on interest rates. And smaller interest rate increases in turn mean that spending declines less. For the same reason countries that have lower oil intensity may experience smaller interest rate increases and spending declines than countries with greater oil intensities. In addition the now-deregulated energy markets in the United States allow the economy to adjust more flexibly and rapidly to oil price increases as do energy futures markets which are discussed below Effects on Productive Capacity An oil price shock may temporarily reduce the economy 's capacity to supply goods and services until producers ' plant and equipment and workers ' skills realign to higher oil prices. The amount by which capacity is curtailed is influenced significantly by the flexibility and responsiveness of markets. Shifts in the demand for various goods and services as a result of an oil price increase alter the demand for workers in regions and industries that produce these goods and services. Job relocation involves costs and takes time. During the transition some additional unemployment may result After an oil price increase production processes are likely to be too reliant on oil and energy. Depending on how long businesses expect a new higher level of the relative price of oil to remain in effect they may switch to production processes that use less energy. They may also produce fewer energy-intensive goods and services sales of which will decline when higher energy costs are passed on to consumers. Thus it would be reasonable to expect a shift of plant and equipment and workers ' skills away from oil-intensive transportation and the sectors that rely heavily on transportation and toward less oil-intensive sectors. An oil price shock that is expected to be short-lived would not require substantial adjustments of this kind and associated frictional losses may be minimal ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECTS Economists generally agree that output and inflation respond to oil price shocks as described above. However there is more disagreement and uncertainty about the size of the effects. By examining a number of econometric models which reflect the experience with previous oil shocks quantitative ranges for the effects that reflect this uncertainty can be developed. The ranges of magnitudes reported here are based on a variety of models and reflect some but not all of the structural and expectations effects discussed above For example the analysis does not explicitly take into account the economy 's reduced energy intensity since the 1970s. Most models based on historical data reflect the past including past energy intensity and are thus quite likely to overestimate the effects of oil price shocks on today 's economy. In addition reduced regulation particularly of the energy sector now permits the economy to respond more freely to changing oil prices. Thus historical relationships may somewhat overstate the impact that an oil price shock would have today. Another factor that the analysis has not explicitly allowed for is the decline in consumer and business confidence that may result from an oil price shock a factor that has been important in the second half of A factor that the analysis does endeavor to incorporate is that both consumers and businesses base their actions on expectations of the future sometimes by using data from futures markets. This forward-looking behavior allows a quicker adjustment of output and prices to changing economic conditions. Moreover long-term interest rates may change in anticipation of upcoming conditions rather than lagging behind them. Of the econometric models examined those that incorporate forward-looking behavior suggest that output growth is likely to be curtailed less than other models predict. This difference in models is reflected in the ranges Consider for example the effects on the U.S. economy of an increase in the price of oil of percent from a level of $ that lasts for four quarters before returning to pre-shock levels. Smaller or shorter oil price shocks will have commensurately smaller effects while larger shocks will have more serious consequences Impact on Output Following the onset of an oil price shock output growth would be expected to slow as the factors described above suppress real demand growth. The diversion of more income to pay for imported oil reduces real consumer spending on U.S. goods and services. In addition the higher price level reduces the real supplies of money and credit thereby raising interest rates and reducing credit-sensitive expenditures compared with what they would otherwise be The spending declines and subsequent repercussions resulting from the four-quarter 50-percent oil price shock would be expected to reduce real GNP growth by about percentage point to IVfe percentage points on average over the four quarters that follow the onset of the shock. The decline in real output is also likely to slow employment growth. The unemployment rate would be expected to rise by an average of about one-half of percentage point over the same four-quarter period. In the year following the beginning of the shock higher imported oil prices would raise the trade deficit by about $ billion to $ billion There is less certainty about the quarter-by-quarter pattern of the effects on the economy than about the sizes of the four-quarter effects reported above. The output declines are likely to be largest in the quarters immediately following the onset of an oil price shock. The effects of the oil shock on real GNP growth are expected to diminish as time passes however. As the frictions associated with a shock dissipate the economy would be expected to resume growth along its longer run growth path. And as it recovers toward that path the economy is forecast to grow faster than it would otherwise. Thus after having its real growth initially suppressed the economy rebounds Impact on Inflation Such an oil price shock would also be expected to raise inflation but as with the output effects the change is temporary. As measured by the consumer price index the inflation rate is forecast to exceed what it would have been otherwise by about IVi percentage points to 2l/2 percentage points over the four quarters following the onset of the shock. The GNP implicit price deflator measures the prices of all the goods and services produced by the Nation. Inflation as measured by the GNP deflator would be less affected because petroleum products constitute a larger share of household expenditures than of total national production. This illustrates the point that the effects on prices and on the economy generally are related to oil intensity. The GNP deflator in the four quarters following the onset of the shock could be expected to be about threefourths of percentage point to IVfe percentage points higher than it would have been otherwise The temporarily higher inflation rate would be expected to reach its peak in the quarter after the shock begins and would taper off thereafter. Though inflation is raised on average during the four quarters following the beginning of the shock much of the increase takes place in the first two quarters. By the fourth quarter inflation would likely revert to near its underlying rate To the extent that oil prices fall the mirror image of these processes would be observed ; inflation would then be expected to be temporarily lower than otherwise. The temporarily changed pattern of inflation during and after the large sharp decline in oil prices in demonstrated how these effects operate. After having been relatively low and relatively steady at about percent for a few years inflation dropped sharply to about percent after oil prices plummeted in It then returned to near its earlier level after oil prices stopped their decline SUMMARY An abrupt increase in oil prices temporarily raises the inflation rate and lowers the real growth rate Oil price shocks lower employment and output by reducing the income consumers have to spend on goods produced in the United States and by reducing the real supplies of money and credit Structural changes in the energy sector have significantly increased the flexibility and reduced the vulnerability of the U.S economy to oil price shocks The energy intensity of most industrialized economies and oil 's share in total energy use have fallen significantly since the 1970s reducing their sensitivity to oil price shocks MACROECONOMIC POLICIES The Administration remains committed to the goal of strong economic growth. Keeping inflation low and stable is essential to achieving this goal. Although the recent oil price shock has reduced economic growth and raised inflation the proper design of macroeconomic policies can ensure that these effects will be temporary and that the economy will soon return to solid growth with lower inflation THE ADVANTAGES OF SYSTEMATIC POLICIES Systematic monetary and fiscal policies directed toward longterm goals are likely to lead to better economic performance than a sequence of discretionary reactions to economic news aimed at affecting near-term economic conditions. Businesses and households base their assessments of the future on their expectations of interest rates inflation tax rates and other important economic variables. Such forward-looking assessments are important factors in their plans and decisions. Frequent and unanticipated policy changes produce uncertainty in the private sector and reduce the ability of businesses and households to make informed long-term plans One of the most important advantages of systematic policies is that they lead to policy credibility the belief that policies will be adhered to consistently over the long run. Credibility permits policymakers to respond predictably to shocks of various kinds without creating undue concern that long-term expectations will change inappropriately Even though it might be quite complex a well-designed systematic policy is likely to lead to better economic performance than either discretionary policies or rigid policies. For example some argued in the 1960s and 1970s that the growth rate of the money supply should be held constant. While such a policy might have been appropriate at one time it is clearly too rigid because of shifts in the relationship between money and income in response to deregulation and innovation in the financial sector Adhering to a systematic policy may require changes in instruments such as the money supply growth rate or interest rates for example to address shocks such as sudden steep increases in oil prices and shifts in the relationship between the money supply and income. Under a systematic policy money and credit growth rates might change in the wake of an oil price shock or other major disturbances to ameliorate the adverse effects on unemployment and output. Once the price shock has passed through the economy the policy would readjust monetary and credit policy instruments in a way that would continue to guide the economy toward its longer run goals The response to the October stock market plunge illustrates how monetary policy can respond predictably and temporarily to a shock without unduly raising long-term inflation expectations. In the period following the decline in the stock market the Federal Reserve temporarily increased the availability of bank reserves. Because the Federal Reserve 's credibility had been enhanced by its having curbed inflation the public believed that this action was temporary and therefore it did not change its long-term inflation expectations. And when the Federal Reserve judged that this financial shock had passed through the system it adjusted the supply of bank reserves to a path consistent with progress toward its goal of price stability DESIGNING FISCAL AND MONETARY POLICIES Both fiscal policy and monetary policy have a role to play in mitigating the impact of a price shock and allowing the economy to return quickly to its long-run growth path. Changes in government spending or tax receipts which would occur automatically as the economy fluctuates alter the aggregate demand effect of a price shock. Similarly the Federal Reserve 's policy tools can influence money growth and interest rates to temper the shortfall in production and employment Fiscal Policy A well-designed fiscal policy will automatically respond to an oil price shock. To the extent that real GNP incomes and employment decline income tax revenues and other income-related tax payments will automatically fall and transfer payments provided by programs like unemployment insurance will automatically rise These " automatic stabilizers " will cushion the reduction in aftertax income and spending power and thereby help sustain spending and employment. Such automatic stabilizers mean that the deficit will automatically rise as tax receipts fall and government expenditures rise relative to what they would otherwise be The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of makes changes in the budget deficit reduction law that give these automatic stabilizers more flexibility to work effectively. The previous formulation of the deficit reduction law set nominal dollar deficit targets that could be suspended if economic growth was forecast to be less than percent for two consecutive quarters. Otherwise deficit targets did not change even if oil price or other shocks changed macroeconomic conditions. In this sense the old law actually put constraints on the operation of these automatic stabilizers. The revisions embodied in the new budget law require the deficit targets to be adjusted through fiscal in response to changes in economic conditions as reflected in annual forecasts made by the Administration The new budget legislation has other systematic and credible features : It sets caps on spending levels for the next years phases in spending and revenue changes over years to avoid causing a shock to aggregate demand and provides for more stringent en- forcement of the budget rules. The recent oil price shock does not require any alteration in this long-run plan for attaining fiscal balance It is appropriate for monetary policy to respond to this change in fiscal policy by permitting the decline in interest rates that would accompany the anticipated decline in future government borrowing brought on by the deficit reduction plan. Adjusting the instruments of monetary policy in this direction can encourage the private sector to increase spending especially on growth-enhancing investment projects enough to offset declines in employment and production that might otherwise arise from the shift in fiscal policy. The oil price shock does not alter the appropriateness of this monetary policy response Additional discretionary changes in fiscal policy designed to offset the temporary effects of the price shock would not be appropriate although tax reform is still needed to improve incentives for saving and investment. Discretionary changes in the instruments of fiscal policy such as changes in public spending require legislative approval which typically takes many months. It may well be that the effects of the recent oil price shock will not last as long as the gestation period for a discretionary fiscal policy response. As a result automatic fiscal policy responses are likely to be more effective than discretionary responses in addressing oil price increases and many other types of shocks Monetary Policy Monetary policy has a key role to play in ensuring that a onetime increase in oil prices is not converted into an increase in the underlying inflation rate via a wage-price spiral for example. The U.S. economy has benefited during the recent expansion from a monetary policy that has helped keep the underlying rate of inflation relatively low and relatively steady compared with the 1970s This move to prevent inflation from rising as economic growth quickened in has prevented a repetition of a key policy mistake of the 1970s : that is policy spurring the economy along a path of accelerating inflation. The credibility that this experience has built combined with the recent relatively low inflation rates gives the Federal Reserve more elbow room to allow inflation to rise temporarily when a price shock strikes without causing long-run inflation expectations to rise As long as the relationship between the M2 measure of the money supply and GNP remains stable the Federal Reserve can lead the economy toward lower inflation by gradually reducing the long-run growth of the money supply. Such a policy does not preclude allowing higher or lower growth rates of M2 over shorter periods as called for either by shocks to the relationship between the money supply and GNP or by other shocks Given the stability of the relationship between GNP and money keeping money supply growth from falling in the face of a downturn in GNP caused by an oil price shock is essential to preventing an unnecessarily large and prolonged decline in economic growth Depending on the size of the shock a temporary increase in money supply growth might be necessary to stabilize economy-wide spending and to help offset ,the decline in GNP that occurs when an oil price shock reduces real income and raises the general price level Maintaining money supply growth or increasing it somewhat may result in a temporary increase in nominal GNP growth. But eventually nominal GNP growth should return to a path consistent with low and stable inflation. Given credible monetary policy an increase in nominal GNP growth need not cause an increase in long-run inflation expectations. A one-time increase in the price of oil would warrant only a short-run increase in nominal GNP growth. The oil price shock itself will cause only a temporary increase in the inflation rate if nominal GNP growth reverts to a rate consistent with the trend toward low and stable inflation after the one-time adjustment attributable to the price shock LESSONS FROM PREVIOUS SHOCKS The experiences of the United States and other large industrialized countries during the previous oil price shocks show the crucial role that maintaining credible and systematic long-run fiscal and monetary policies play in allowing the economy to respond relatively smoothly Before the onset of each of the oil shocks of the 1970s there was considerable concern that the overly expansionary monetary and fiscal policies during the preceding years were building increasingly high rates of inflation into the major industrialized economies Thus the monetary policy authorities had relatively little credibility : There was little reason to believe that inflation would be restrained even before the oil price shock occurred Chart plots U.S. consumer price inflation during the 1970s with a focus on the periods before and after oil price shocks. The chart reveals the often overlooked fact that the inflation rate was rising and rising at a fairly rapid rate in the period preceding each of the oil price shocks of the 1970s After having been very low and stable until the mid-1960s inflation then rose steadily apart from its temporary suppression when price controls were in effect in the early 1970s. The oil shock of then put additional upward pressure on the inflation rate To prevent inflation and inflation expectations from spiraling further upward monetary policies were tightened generally. With little credibility there was little room for monetary policy to permit the price shocks to affect only the price level without giving Chart Inflation and Oil Shocks in the United States Inflation was high and rising before the two oil price shocks of the 1970s but was relatively low and steady before the shock CPI Percent change from year earlier x * " Q4to1974Q4 1977Q1 to1980Q1 1988Q3to1990Q3 Number of Quarters Before/After the Oil Price Shock Source : Department of Labor Q4 g7g Q1 Q3 firms and households the impression of continued accommodation and tolerance of higher inflation. An increase in money growth could not credibly be viewed as temporary As the contractionary effects of the oil price shock and restrictive policies took hold policy again returned to an overly accommodative stance. The deceleration in the growth of the money supply that accompanied the recession was followed by a reacceleration : ,The money supply grew at double-digit rates from through Fueled by faster growth in the money supply spending grew at rates incompatible with low inflation culminating in the high and rising inflation rates at the end of the 1970s These inflation rates resulted from growth in demand that continually outstripped growth in supply. So long as demand which was fueled primarily by excessively expansionary monetary policy grew more rapidly than the economy 's ability to supply goods and services prices rose. Similar boom-and-bust patterns were being repeated in other industrialized countries as well. Having excessively stimulated demand these countries found they had little credibility to ease policy temporarily in response to the second oil price shock without further raising inflation and expectations of it. Thus to prevent their already uncomfortably high inflation rates from accelerating many countries including the United States again tightened monetary policy when the oil price shock struck Japan a notable exception provides a useful comparison. Japan had high and rising inflation rates when the oil price shock occurred and inflation remained above percent in the period immediately after the onset of the shock ( Chart ) Like other countries Japan experienced a severe recession in because the oil shock hit when there was little policy credibility or room for adjustment of the instruments of policy. To remedy that situation the Japanese Government moved to a more systematic and credible monetary policy in the latter half of the 1970s. By reducing money growth the government lowered inflation and then kept it in check. This policy produced inflation that was low and falling by the time the second oil price shock hit Chart Inflation and Oil Shocks in Japan Inflation was high and rising and remained high in the first oil price shock but was low and remained low in the second oil price shock CPI Percent change from year earlier 1977Q1 to1980Q1 ^ .X ' * ' Number of Quarters Before/After Oil Price Shock 1973Q4 -j Q-J 1990Q3 Source : Department of Commerce The more credible systematic stance of monetary policy followed in Japan between the two oil price shocks made it possible for Japan to avoid much of the negative economic impact that other industrialized economies experienced during the second oil shock without generating fears that inflation and expectations of inflation would spiral upward. As a result inflation was not permanent- ly raised and output remained close to its longer run path. In fact by the definition of recession used in the United States Japan completely avoided a recession following the second oil shock SUMMARY Systematic monetary and fiscal policies allow for changes of the instruments of policy in response to oil price shocks without sacrificing long-term policy goals. For example automatic stabilizers allow for some temporary deficit increases as the economy weakens after an oil price shock without altering the long-run path to structural deficit reduction Macroeconomic policy responses to oil price shocks in the 1970s were constrained because past policy mistakes had engendered a lack of credibility. The United States entered the two oil price shocks of the 1970s with excessive monetary expansion causing high and rising inflation The relatively low and steady underlying inflation rate that preceded the oil price shock enables monetary policy to respond more appropriately without losing its credibility in controlling inflation SHORT-RUN ENERGY POLICY RESPONSE The principle of providing for flexible responses to changing short-run conditions while maintaining a clear and consistent focus on long-term objectives is an appropriate guide for energy sector policies as well as for monetary and fiscal policies. Given the high value of maintaining flexibility in the face of changing market conditions pressures to impose price control and allocation schemes and to limit trading in energy futures markets should be resisted Release of oil from government-controlled strategic reserves can under some conditions play a useful role in cushioning the impact of oil price shocks THE DANGERS OF REREGULATION Energy market regulation like regulation in other markets can reduce the efficiency of the economy. Incorrect price signals result in a misallocation of supplies among consumers and as both investment and innovation are affected over the longer term can reduce output and adversely affect both producers and consumers. In addition because regulation reduces flexibility regulated markets react poorly to price shocks and thus exacerbate their effects. The benefits of relying on markets rather than regulation in the energy sector can best be understood by reviewing how regulation raised the costs of the oil price shocks of the 1970s In the aftermath of the oil price shock domestic crude oil prices were held substantially below world market levels. As a result domestic prices for petroleum products which reflected an average of the prices of controlled domestic and uncontrolled imported crude oil were also below world market levels. Individual decisions regarding the use of oil products were based on these distorted prices even though each additional barrel of oil demanded was met through increased imports at the higher world price Greater use of oil and increased demand for oil imports was the inevitable result Although the process of oil price decontrol began before the oil price shock occurred the combination of the remaining price controls and a burdensome and complex allocation system had a particularly pernicious effect. While artificially low prices inflated demand the allocation system distributed available products in a way that magnified imbalances between demand and supply As a direct result consumers wasted many hours waiting in long gasoline lines Substantial deregulation of energy markets over the last years now allows markets to respond quickly and flexibly to changing conditions. In the second half of oil and natural gas markets freed from earlier price controls and restrictions generally functioned well ( Box ) In sharp contrast to the 1970s gasoline lines did not reappear. While the higher petroleum product prices that follow an oil price shock may be unwelcome to consumers and energy-using firms they are clearly preferable to the alternative of policy-induced shortages caused by misleading price signals and government-directed misallocation of oil supplies ENERGY FUTURES MARKETS AND SPECULATION In the wake of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait some commentators have blamed speculation in oil futures markets for oil price volatility and have suggested that the government limit futures market trading. Because futures markets play a central role in increasing energy market flexibility however a significant limitation on trading would impede rather than aid adjustment Futures markets provide a public forum in which commitments to deliver a standard amount of a commodity at a specified future date and location can be bought and sold. Trading in organized spot and futures markets serves two important functions : price discovery and risk-shifting. Price discovery is achieved by placing accurate information regarding the latest market activity in a centralized public forum. In this respect commodity markets are no different from stock markets. Risk-shifting or hedging is an activity undertaken by firms or individuals with a direct business interest in the production distribution or use of the commodity being traded. Producers of a commodity might wish to protect against a price decline by locking in a future commitment to deliver at a known price. Processors desiring to protect against a possible rise in product prices can hedge by buying future delivery commitments at a known price The prices that balance demand and supply of spot and future delivery commitments reflect current market expectations of nearterm and long-term prices. Chart shows that prices of oil for delivery at the end of have been far less volatile than prices for delivery in the near future. The relationship between spot and futures market prices observed since August has consistently reflected the expectation that the Gulf crisis would be relatively short-lived Chart Oil Spot Prices and Futures Prices Although the spot price of oil has fluctuated widely the futures market price of oil to be delivered in December changed relatively little between June and January Dollars per barrel Spot Price December Futures Price i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i June July August September October November December January Note : West Texas Intermediate Crude. Spot price is nearest month contract Source : New York Mercantile Exchange Opportunities for hedging provided by oil futures markets serve the public interest in two main ways. First hedging allows firms participating at only one stage of the oil business to remain viable in the volatile world oil markets of the late 1980s and early 1990s Second hedging has allowed buyers to be more aggressive in taking advantage of spot market opportunities. For example as oil prices fell sharply in the first half of oil companies accumulated unusually large private stocks. Their ability to hedge against a con- tinued decline in prices using oil futures markets allowed them to share the risks of holding these large stocks Speculative trades are transactions not motivated by a direct interest in business activities related to the commodity being traded A speculator goes " long " by purchasing the rights to future delivery of a commodity in the expectation that its price will rise as the specified delivery date approaches. If prices actually rise the speculator profits by selling this right ; if prices fall the speculator loses the difference between the price at which he is committed to take delivery and the actual price at the delivery date. A speculator goes " short " by selling a commitment to deliver the commodity at a future date hoping that prices will fall. " Long " speculators add to the demand for futures driving up futures prices. " Short " speculators by selling their promise to deliver in the future add to the supply and thus drive futures prices down Because the underlying motivation for an individual futures market transaction is impossible to determine the claim that speculation has caused higher oil prices can not be conclusively supported or refuted. The available evidence however suggests that speculation is more likely to have lowered prices than to have raised them in the aftermath of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait ( Box ) grated oil companies trade houses refiners marketers producers ena-ctsei 's and : ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ : ^ ^ ^ &mw m i $ fa % & ^ r m oil markets. Because all but the last category of participants may engage fa both risk-shifting and speculative trades it is inip ^ Me to mea&ire directly * ; : v > According to recent data from the Commodity Futures Trad ing Commission large in ml'marb ^ g&tii&rd ^ outstanding future delivery commitments in August and September l ^ ) 'VWto ^ ) TO ^ ' ' * * aA ^ % w ^ / ^ nh ^ f mi ^ tJ ^ ^ " Igaytf * ^ of these purely immediate aftermath markets in the was ' therefore 4tf reduce ' : y " '.T' ' " ; Following the rules of the New York Mercantile Exchange as soon as oil futures prices dropped $ the day after Operation Desert Storm began oil futures trading was automatically suspended for an hour. Under conditions such as these a trading suspension is appropriate because it gives the marketplace time to absorb unusual bursts in volume or information flows. However once in- formation has been widely disseminated there is no economic basis for stopping the market from expressing its evaluation of future conditions. Limits on futures trading that impede risk-shifting transactions would impose a real economic burden but they would not stop speculation. Closing futures markets would simply shift activity to offshore markets or to private unreported transactions thereby obstructing the price discovery process. Ironically the public at large having the least access to information would be most disadvantaged. In a fluid economic situation ignorance is hardly ever bliss STRATEGIC OIL RESERVES The strategic oil reserves of the United States and other countries are intended both to deter the use of the " oil weapon " by exporting nations and to cushion the effect of sizable temporary supply disruptions by augmenting the supply of oil. At the beginning of million barrels of oil equal to about days of U.S. imports at import rates were held in the U.S. strategic reserve Policies for the use of strategic reserves should aim to complement the production increases and consumption declines that naturally follow an adverse price shock not to substitute for them. Similarly strategic reserves should not be used to respond to oil price movements other than adverse price shocks since to do so would have the effect of substituting government storage of oil for private storage The magnitude of energy price movements is one important indicator of the seriousness of a disruption. Prices of petroleum products rose substantially from July to October but adjusted for inflation they remained well below historical peaks. Indeed the average inflation-adjusted retail price of gasoline in the fourth quarter of was lower than in most of the 1950s and in the first half of the 1980s In the present situation United States policy has emphasized the replacement of embargoed oil with additional production from other sources. Saudi Arabia Venezuela the United Arab Emirates the United States and other producers have in recent months increased production by an amount sufficient to offset fully the loss of supplies from Iraq and Kuwait. These production increases have eliminated the need for continued depletion of existing private and public stocks. Had the price impact of the supply disruption been immediately attenuated through the release of strategic reserves these production increases might not have occurred. Conservation of existing stocks can be especially attractive in situations where anxieties over the possibility of severe supply disruptions in the near future are a major influence on current prices Coordination among countries holding strategic reserves is important since the market for oil is a world market and a release of reserves by any one country will lower prices for consumers throughout the world. Coordination of releases can allay concerns that some countries will seek to benefit from releases made by others while withholding their own reserves. The International Energy Agency ( IEA ) is the primary mechanism for coordinating the use of strategic reserves. Such coordination was demonstrated in early January when IEA member governments agreed to make government-controlled stocks available to the marketplace if hostilities broke out in the Persian Gulf region. This program was begun following the start of Operation Desert Storm SUMMARY Price controls and government-directed allocation schemes significantly magnified the adverse effects of prior oil price shocks. Their reintroduction would be an inappropriate response to energy supply disruptions Closure of oil futures markets would impede risk-shifting and price discovery in oil markets with few if any offsetting benefits Strategic oil reserves can cushion the effects of temporary supply disruptions. Releases should be coordinated internationally and with other response measures LONGER TERM ENERGY POLICIES Primary reliance on markets to determine prices quantities and technology choices provides the foundation for sound longer term energy policies and thus for the Administration 's National Energy Strategy ( NES ) Such policies can sustain economic growth and blunt the effects of any future oil price shocks. However either for structural reasons or because of government-created barriers private markets can not always be expected to work efficiently. In those situations as the NES recognizes policy can be applied to promote efficient market operation For example reducing the extent to which the United States and its friends and allies obtain energy from insecure sources of supply offers national security and foreign policy benefits to which private market forces are unlikely to give adequate weight. Private markets may also not give adequate weight to environmental considerations. As the NES recognizes however policies concerned with energy security or environmental protection must be well-designed to avoid excessive costs and to ensure that economic growth can continue to be fostered through the availability of ample supplies of reasonably priced energy LONG-TERM TRENDS IN ENERGY PRICES AND USE Longer term energy policies must not be influenced by the widely held misconceptions that energy prices will almost certainly rise and that the United States is a profligate user of energy. The record of the past years shows that the real price of energy has Tio * risen steadily. Rather the real prices of crude oil oil products and electricity have fluctuated significantly with periods of falling as well as rising prices ( Chart ) Chart Real Energy Prices Real energy prices do not show a long-term upward trend dollars per million Btu equivalent Electricity Source : Department of Energy A review of the basic forces that will influence energy markets in the years ahead gives mixed signals regarding future price movements. Some factors point to a tightening market in the medium or long run. Oil analysts project that production in the United States and the Soviet Union currently the world 's largest oil producer will continue to decline. OPEC whose member states already account for about one-third of world production and about three-fourths of proven reserves is expected to supply a rising share of the world 's oil. At the same time world energy demand could begin to grow rapidly if the rates of increase in energy efficiency observed since are not maintained or if rapidly grow- ing energy use outside the major industrialized countries becomes a more important factor in the world market Other factors however suggest a future in which real oil prices rise slowly if at all. In recent years growth in the world 's proven oil reserves has far outstripped growth in oil production. Since when higher oil prices began to stimulate more exploration world oil reserves have risen by about percent while world crude oil production has increased by less than percent. At the production rate the world now has about a 45-year supply of proven reserves ; at this same production rate the world had less than a 30-year supply of proven reserves in Oil-exporting countries with large reserves recognize that high oil prices encourage greater use of other existing forms of energy and accelerate the development of new energy and end-use technologies. Economic and environmental considerations that have increased the use of natural gas as a substitute for oil should also help to keep oil prices low. The uncertain outlook for energy prices increases the value of policies that are flexible enough to serve national interests under a wide variety of energy market conditions The common belief that the United States is a wasteful energy user is also not supported by the data. International comparisons show that U.S. energy use trends do not differ markedly from those in other countries. Economy-wide energy intensity has declined in other major industrialized countries as in the United States since Moreover direct comparisons of energy use per unit of output in individual sectors show that energy intensities across countries have increasingly converged. Differences in natural resources population density industrial mix urban layout commuting distances and dwelling sizes appear to account for much of the variation in energy use patterns across countries ( Box ) ENERGY SECURITY A key goal of longer term energy policy is to reduce the vulnerability of the U.S. economy to energy price shocks and possible supply disruptions. Popular opinion aside our vulnerability to oil price shocks is not determined primarily by the level of our oil imports. In an increasingly integrated world economy America 's energy security can not be separated from that of its friends allies and trading partners. For one thing the price of oil bought and sold in the United States is determined on world markets by global supply and demand not by U.S. production and consumption. In addition the Nation 's ability to export goods and services depends on the health of foreign economies and exports now account for about one-eighth of GNP. Thus oil price shocks can have substantial indirect effects on the U.S. economy through their impacts on the economies of our major trading partners. For these and other Box International Comparisons of Energy Use Recent data how that the- avtoage new cat imrcbased in the United States achieve a levelof fuel economy Slightly tetter than the comparable Average level in Japan and idose to that in Germany * However ^ in the United Stated had passenger cars for every thoutand peope ^ compared to only ears per thousand people in West Germany and cars per thousand people in Japan * Moreover * in the same year the average ear trawled more than mites in the United States compared with in Germany and only in Japan * In part divergent patterns of vehicle ownership and use are attributable to large differences in retail gasoline prices German and Japanese retell prices were respectively $ and $ S4S a gallon in compared with a U S. price of $ OJ5 Higher foreign prices to a large extent reflect differences in taxes on gasoline : Combined Federal * State and local taxes of $ a gallon were far below German and Japanese taxes of $ and $ L60f respectively. However comparisons with Canada and Australia which also have high annual miles of travel per vehicle despite gasoline prices significantly above UJS levels suggest that low population density and longer commuting distances are major reasons for our additional travel A greater reliance on automobiles rather than the energy inefficiency of those automobiles is therefore the primary reason the United States uses so much oil in its transportation sector. Assuming that the efficiencies of on4he-road fleets equalize as older cars are replaced differences in transportation fuel use can only be narrowed further using policies that reduce UJS. car travel Energy use in residential heating provides another example of the importance of choosing an appropriate basis for comparisons. Correcting only for climate differences the United States used more heating energy per dwelling than other industrialized countries in ( although the gap between the United States and other countries narrowed substantially over the last yearsX However when the greater floor space in a typical American home is taken into account the United States was among the more efficient users of residential heating energy reasons modest changes in U.S. energy production consumption or imports are unlikely to have much impact on the Nation 's energy security The maintenance of strategic petroleum reserves and agreement among reserve-holding nations on credible policies for their coordinated use can provide both a deterrent to deliberate supply disruptions and an effective offset to disruptions that may occur. Energy security can also be significantly enhanced by expanding and diversifying the sources of oil and energy supplies available to the United States and its friends and allies. The United States as a leader in exploration and drilling technology can play an important role in identifying and developing new reserves. Efforts in this area should focus on natural gas as well as on oil since gas development that displaces oil consumption can enhance energy security and also provide environmental benefits. The removal of remaining barriers to the development of economically viable domestic oil and gas resources the increased use of coal nuclear and renewable energies and the exploitation of efficient energy conservation opportunities can also contribute to energy security Energy diversification efforts will involve some shift toward domestic energy sources. But it must be recognized that opportunities for increasing U.S. petroleum production are limited : By U.S production had declined by percent from its peak in Moreover a large-scale substitution of high-cost domestic energy for lowcost imported energy could significantly slow economic growth. It simply makes no sense to spend large sums to displace imported energy when supply diversification or strategic reserves can provide comparable energy security benefits at lower cost Even the total elimination of energy imports would not insulate the economy from oil price shocks. There would be no terms-oftrade effects under such circumstances but conditions on the world oil market would still be reflected in domestic prices. For example although the United Kingdom is not a net importer of oil its producers and consumers faced higher oil prices after Iraq invaded Kuwait. The only way to decouple domestic and world energy prices is to manage trade in energy products. Such a policy would have much higher long-run costs than those imposed by energy price fluctuations STRENGTHENING MARKET FORCES Federal actions can promote efficiency and competition in energy markets in several ways. The movement toward complete deregulation of wellhead prices for natural gas pursuant to the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act of is contributing substantially to the economy 's flexibility. Currently new gas pipelines require the approval of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ( FERC ) which also regulates rates charged for the transmission of gas. The pipeline approval process should focus on environmental and safety factors rather than on the extraneous considerations that enter into current FERC proceedings. Pipeline rates should be regulated only to prevent monopoly abuses and regulation should be implemented in a way that fosters economic efficiency Retail electricity rates are regulated at the State level and competition has traditionally played a minor role in electricity markets. In recent years however State regulators have begun to allow competition for the right to construct new generating facilities. The Federal Public Utility Holding Company Act which limits an electric utility 's participation in competition to build new capacity outside of its service area should be reformed to increase the role of market forces. Steps should also be taken to ensure that access to the high-voltage transmission network is not controlled in a manner that restricts competition State regulation of electric utilities has generally had the effect of tying profits to the amount of power sold thereby discouraging utilities from assisting their customers in pursuing cost-effective conservation opportunities. Some States have adopted integrated resource planning programs that allow utilities to promote undertake or subsidize conservation investments on their customers ' premises. Such programs can speed the diffusion of efficient new conservation technologies. By helping users reduce their demand for electricity these programs reduce the need for new generating plants Utility programs that subsidize conservation investments on customer premises must be carefully designed if they are to be both efficient and equitable. The price of electricity itself already provides customers with an incentive to conserve. They receive a return on their investments in conservation in the form of lower electricity bills. However in some areas the retail price of power is below the cost of production from new capacity. In such circumstances the conservation incentive provided by electricity prices is generally too low. Therefore a utility subsidy for customer conservation investments equal to the difference between the price of electricity and the cost of producing it can enhance economic efficiency. But providing a subsidy equal to the full cost of producing electricity from new capacity is both inefficient and inequitable. It is inefficient because conserving consumers are paid both the cost of the power saved ( through the subsidy ) and its price ( through lower electricity bills ) As a result consumers may be induced to make conservation investments that raise rather than lower the total utility and consumer cost of balancing demand and supply for electricity. It is inequitable because the utility must recoup the double payment to conserving customers by raising the rates charged to other customers Adverse environmental impacts are another social cost of power production and it is sometimes asserted that these impacts merit the provision of additional utility subsidies for customer conservation investments. However electricity prices already reflect utilities ' costs of compliance with environmental regulations. If society 's valuation of environmental effects rises the proper remedy is to tighten environmental regulation. That approach will reduce environmental impacts directly and also increase incentives for conservation by raising electricity prices Energy Research and Development Market forces also need to be strengthened in the area of research and development. Private firms are likely to underinvest in research that promises widespread benefits if the firm carrying out the research can not use patents or other means to prevent other firms from capturing most of those benefits. Government 's proper role is to support basic precompetitive research in the energy sector rather than to pick winners and losers. Premature government commitment to a selected technology can foreclose the development of other more attractive alternatives or of a diversified set of technologies suited to specific applications or regional markets The lack of a clear yardstick for measuring technological promise or valuing research progress presents a challenge for both the initial allocation of research resources and the assessment of ongoing programs. A policy that supported only technologies whose commercial viability was imminent might produce an impressive batting average without making any real contribution to technological advancement. Yet there must be some reliance on market signals to avoid permanent commitments to technological dead ends. One promising approach to balancing these two competing concerns is to rely on government-industry consortia in which industry supplies a major share of funding and plays a major role in setting the research agenda Energy Use Standards Some have suggested that the adoption of stringent energy use standards provides a low-cost approach to reducing energy use While efficiency standards can play a constructive role in certain circumstances their significant potential for causing economic harm must be recognized. Unlike regulatory reform energy use standards generally limit rather than expand flexibility and choice. Moreover the goal of energy policy is to enhance prospects for economic growth while meeting legitimate energy security and environmental concerns not to minimize energy use It is sometimes argued that energy-efficiency standards are justified because consumers do not purchase goods with the lowest combined purchase and energy costs. But claims that standards are a no-lose proposition often fail to account fully for all product attributes important to consumers. In choosing among various models of cars for example consumers value performance features as well as energy efficiency and cost. Indeed absent such preferences it is difficult to explain the popularity of optional powerful engines that increase the cost of cars while decreasing their energy efficiency. Without evidence that structural or government-created barriers exist and can not be addressed directly government regulation of energy efficiency should be viewed with skepticism SUMMARY The long-run outlook for energy prices is uncertain. Therefore long-run policies should be flexible enough to serve national interests under a wide variety of energy market conditions These considerations support continuation of the Nation 's successful policy of market reliance Energy security can best be pursued through the accumulation of strategic reserves and diversification of energy supplies. An excessive focus on minimizing energy imports can have significant adverse economic impacts Further regulatory reform at the Federal and State level can improve the operation of energy markets. Policy should strive to maximize flexibility and choice and to avoid the introduction of new distortions CONCLUSION The same policy principles are appropriate for macroeconomic policies and energy market policies. Systematic policies that permit predictable responses to changing short-run conditions while maintaining a clear and credible focus on long-run objectives should be pursued. Such policies will position the economy to meet the challenge presented by oil price shocks Well-designed policies can significantly reduce but not entirely eliminate the unfavorable effects of such shocks. Large and abrupt increases in oil prices can still adversely affect the economy. These oil price shocks present policymakers with the prospect of temporarily higher inflation and slower real growth rates Experience with the price shocks of the 1970s has led to policies better able to handle an oil price shock. Having produced a low and steady inflation rate and earned the credibility that comes from such performance the Federal Reserve has preserved the latitude to cushion the impact of oil price shocks without increasing inflation expectations. The removal of price and allocation regulations in energy markets allows market forces to guide products to their most valued uses while the decrease in the intensity of energy use has made the overall economy less sensitive to oil price shocks. Strategic petroleum reserves in the United States and other countries can now cushion the effect of large temporary supply disruptions by increasing the supply of oil. For these reasons the U.S. economy is now able to adapt more readily to an oil price shock than it was in the past CHAPTER Flexibility and Change in the Economy ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT strengths of the U.S. economy is its flexibility. Flexibility enhances the ability of a market economy to respond to change and thereby enhances the rewards to innovation. Strong demand for an innovative new product both rewards the innovator and is the signal that draws additional resources into production to meet the demand. An innovation that lowers cost drives down price signaling greater availability to potential consumers and causing them to increase consumption. In this way the U.S. economy enhances the private and social benefits of desirable changes such as technological improvements and thereby encourages such changes. This dynamism has generated the high standard of living that the United States and other freemarket economies enjoy and is one of the major reasons that people all over the globe are now moving to reform their economies to increase their reliance on free markets Flexibility also reduces the cost of adverse changes such as a sharp unexpected increase in the world price of oil. As discussed in the previous chapter such shocks may increase unemployment temporarily but a flexible economy adjusts to new circumstances effectively and can return rapidly to full employment THE PROCESS OF DYNAMIC CHANGE A clear picture of the dynamic nature of the U.S. economy can be produced by a simple visual inspection of a modern home which may contain a microwave oven a home computer a videocassette recorder ( VCR ) many Pharmaceuticals nonstick cookware and numerous other products that did not exist a few decades or even a few years ago. The introduction and diffusion of all of these products required innovation followed by the dedication of capital labor and other resources to new uses This reallocation of resources occurs without government planning. The government took no action to guarantee that between and thousands of video rental stores would open so that the owners of VCRs would have movies to rent. Individual entrepreneurs made the decision to risk their capital and their labor to undertake these new ventures. A comparison of the rate of intro- duction of new products and the growth of new industries in market economies and in nonmarket economies shows that the government is not nearly as good as the market at organizing the reallocation of resources that must accompany innovation. The ease with which resources can be shifted to the production of new goods and services raises the returns to innovation and thus encourages it The improvement in our lives provided by new products generally is not captured in statistics on real income growth. The increase from one year to the next in the number of cars computers video games VCRs or other products can be measured. But the qualitative leap in consumer welfare that occurs when a completely new product is introduced is extremely difficult to capture. Thus conventional measures of economic progress such as real income growth will always tend to understate the benefits of the innovation and change that are the hallmarks of a free market economy Such qualitative changes are very difficult to predict and government interference in market forces can suppress them without anyone even being aware of the loss. Thus a benefit to the economy of the significant deregulatory initiatives of the last years is the greater potential for innovation that enhanced flexibility provides Indeed the U.S. economy is arguably more flexible than other market economies which tend to be encumbered by greater government involvement in direct production of goods and services and by restrictions on labor market practices. The long-run growth rate of the U.S. economy is dependent on continued efforts both to eliminate government policies that inhibit flexibility and to resist pressures to reimpose unnecessary regulation on the economy SOURCES OF ECONOMIC CHANGE The forces driving change come from several sources. On the supply side changes in technology create entirely new products and eliminate the demand for others. For example the invention of the transistor and the development of the microprocessor made possible desktop computers VCRs facsimile machines compact disk players and a host of other products that never existed before while virtually destroying the vacuum tube industry. Innovation also increases productivity and thus lowers the cost of existing goods and services Population growth immigration and other demographic forces are also sources of supply-side change. Throughout its history the United States has absorbed wave after wave of immigrants integrating them into the economy and thereby increasing production Recently the economy has demonstrated its flexibility by accommodating a tremendous increase in the number of women working outside the home. Between and the labor force participa- tion of women increased from percent to almost percent and this huge influx of new workers was not accompanied by a fall in the relative earnings of women workers. In fact during the latter part of this period the earnings gap between female and male workers narrowed On the demand side changes in the demographic composition of the economy and changes in people 's tastes and preferences alter the demands for particular goods and services. The increasing fraction of the population that is elderly has greatly increased the demand for health care for example and the general movement toward suburban living and longer commutes has increased the demand for petroleum The international economy is another source of change in both supply and demand conditions. The end of World War II and the reduced industrial capacity that the war left in other countries created an enormous opportunity for exports and overseas investment for U.S. firms. More recently the growth in international travel has created an opportunity for domestic airframe manufacturers ; the leading domestic manufacturers now export more than half of their civilian aircraft production THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF THE U.S. ECONOMY The broad dimensions of historical change in the U.S. economy are illustrated by Chart which shows dramatic reallocations of resources within the U.S. economy over the last years. The growth of manufacturing and service industries and the relative decline of agriculture have required an impressive reallocation of capital labor and other resources. Yet government did not have to decide that workers should be moved from farms or factories into banks or hospitals. These movements were brought about by market forces driven in turn by changing demands demographics and the introduction of new technology Growing Manufacturing Productivity and the Service Sector Recent decades have seen a continuing shift in employment from goods-producing to service-producing industries. The goods-producing sector accounted for percent of nonfarm employment in percent in and percent in A similar shift of employment toward the service sector has taken place in other advanced economies. In for example the goods-producing sector accounted for percent of employment in the nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development which includes most of the industrialized market economies of the world By this figure had fallen to percent Over the 1980s the service-producing sector of the economy had a net increase of million jobs which exceeded the million net job increase in the overall economy. The two industries adding the Chart Labor Force Shares by Industry U.S. workers have moved out of agriculture first into manufacturing and then into services Percent Agriculture Q Manufacturing1 Q Transportation and Trade Other Services 1ncludes manufacturing mining and construction Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor most jobs were business services including advertising and computer and data-processing services and health services ( discussed below ) More than million net new jobs or percent of the net employment gain in the 1980s were in business or health services This growth in service-sector employment has absorbed labor resources freed by rising manufacturing productivity just as the growth in manufacturing employment absorbed resources released by rising productivity in agriculture in earlier decades. Manufacturing productivity increased at an average annual rate of percent from to This allowed manufacturing to maintain a roughly constant share of real gross national product ( GNP ) even though only about half of the million manufacturing jobs lost between and were regained by Within these broad sectoral movements many other changes occurred. During the last years increased demand for convenience was a major force for change. The growth in retail grocery stores during the decade reflected this trend as the concept of a " super " store with one-stop shopping for groceries drugs flowers hardware and other products took hold. Eating and drinking establishments enjoyed rapid growth partially because the increase of two- worker families raised the value of people 's time. On the supply side advances in computer technology led to rapid expansion of such industries as computer and data-processing services which alone added jobs during the last years Changing lifestyles and family structure have also led to a rapid increase in industries providing care to the old and the young. Industries providing residential nursing and personal care largely for the elderly and child day-care facilities added net new jobs from to Flexibility and Change in Labor Markets The constant reallocation of resources from shrinking industries to growing industries means that jobs are constantly being created and lost in the economy. This process of reallocation occurs without necessarily preventing the achievement of full employment Indeed the simultaneous creation and destruction of jobs continues whether the overall economy is in an expansionary period or a recession. During the two contractions between January and November for example total employment fell by million jobs. However this net decrease consisted of a loss of million manufacturing jobs partially offset by increased employment outside of manufacturing. Even within manufacturing jobs were both created and lost. It is estimated that in an average quarter during this period percent of all manufacturing jobs disappeared while percent were created Simultaneous employment gains and losses can be seen at the level of individual establishments. A recent study of data from Wisconsin for the period found that each year percent of all establishments experienced net employment gains with an average net gain of percent ; percent experienced net job losses with an average net loss of percent ; and the remaining percent maintained stable net employment levels The dynamic nature of the labor market is also evident in unemployment statistics. In November for example the jobless rate was percent and million workers were unemployed The following month both of these statistics were essentially unchanged. On the surface this lack of change might seem to indicate a static labor market. Yet out of the million unemployed in November million had left unemployment by December. About half of them had found jobs ; the other half had withdrawn from the labor force. In the same month roughly million previously employed workers became unemployed and million people entered or reentered the labor force and began looking for work This continual reallocation of workers requires that labor markets be flexible and that workers be mobile. Studies estimate that the average worker holds more than jobs in a lifetime. Survey data show that every year percent of all workers change occupa- tions. This number does not include the number of people who change jobs but remain in the same occupation. Only out of workers who change occupations does so because of layoffs. Most change occupations to earn higher pay or improve their working conditions Geographic mobility is an important aspect of labor market flexibility. The movement of workers out of agriculture and into manufacturing and services was accompanied by a major migration from rural to urban areas. Over the last two decades the percentage of the population residing in the Northeast and Midwest has declined from percent to percent reflecting a movement to the relatively fast-growing South and West The decline in the Northeast population share slowed during the 1980s as strong growth in financial services real estate and other industries produced gains in per capita income in both New England and the mid-Atlantic States. Overall about percent of the population moves to a different county each year and about percent moves to a different State. This mobility of people within and between regions is an important reflection of and contributor to the economy 's flexibility PRESERVING THE FLEXIBILITY OF THE ECONOMY The dynamic nature of the U.S. economy and the value of flexibility have important implications for economic policy. The incentives for firms to undertake innovation and investment are greatly affected by the overall macroeconomic environment by the structure of taxation and by legal rules governing the protection of intellectual property and product liability To maintain a flexible and innovative economy macroeconomic policy should seek to foster growth and predictability through credible and systematic monetary and fiscal policy. The tax structure should not erect barriers to saving investment or innovation Product liability rules should protect consumers from product-related harm in ways that do not unduly discourage the introduction of new products. ( These issues are discussed in more detail in Chapter of the Economic Report. ) The Benefits of Economic Deregulation Reduction in market flexibility is an important and often overlooked effect of regulation. When the Federal Government regulated airline routes and fares one effect was that fares were generally too high. But another effect which was not visible until the regulations were removed was that regulation prevented airlines from developing efficient route networks. After deregulation the airlines evolved " hub-and-spoke " systems to channel passengers into airports where they could be connected more efficiently to their ultimate destinations. As a result airlines operate more efficiently and most travelers today have a greater range of flight choices at lower real prices. Similarly telecommunications regulation had and continues to have adverse effects on innovation by restricting which firms may enter particular segments of the industry It is not coincidental or surprising that the adverse effects of regulation are often not perceived until after the regulation is removed By its very nature stifled change is difficult to detect. If unexploited technology is observed " sitting on the shelf " then one can investigate whether regulation is preventing its adoption. But it is impossible to know to what extent regulation by preventing change stifles the incentive even to develop new ways of doing things. It is therefore also impossible to know the extent of the lost opportunities There are inherent institutional reasons why government regulation tends to inhibit change. Regulation is a legal institution and legal processes rely heavily on precedent. This reliance creates a bias in favor of the old and against the new. In addition regulators face an extremely difficult problem : They are trying to make rules that constrain firms to act differently than they otherwise would Regulators must do this knowing that the firms will always have better information about their costs customers and technology Accomplishing the regulators ' goals in a static world in which technology and institutions do not change would be hard enough but it is harder still in a world of constant change in which the regulators will always lag behind the firms in understanding what is going on. For this reason regulators have an incentive to prevent regulated markets from changing too rapidly These institutional biases against change inherent in government regulation do not mean that regulation is never desirable Unregulated markets that generate serious pollution problems have serious failures in the availability of information or are inevitably served only by monopoly firms do not perform well. Regulation based on careful balancing of benefits and costs can sometimes improve performance in these markets. Such regulation will however almost always impose some reduced flexibility. In balancing the costs and benefits of government regulation these costs of reduced flexibility should not be forgotten even though they are subtle and difficult to quantify Government interference can also adversely affect the flexibility of labor markets. As discussed below some States have responded to concerns about our educational system by increasing certification requirements for teachers. Unnecessary certification requirements create an artificial barrier that prevents qualified teachers from moving from one State to another or moving into teaching from other professions. In the long run this barrier will increase the cost and decrease the effectiveness of education Adapting to Changes in Technology and Institutions Failure to adapt longstanding government policies to a changing economy can be extremely costly. Regulation of railroads began in the 1890s when they had a monopoly on the transportation of many goods. In the late 1970s long after railroads had lost much of their business to trucks regulation still treated them as monopolies and partial regulation continues today. The decline of railroads when trucking developed was perhaps inevitable but it was surely hastened by a regulatory regime that greatly limited the railroads ' ability to compete. Similarly regulation and other government policies in the banking and financial services sector have for decades failed to adapt to changing technology and market conditions and reform is badly needed ( Chapter ) Just as government regulation inhibits change in the affected markets regulation is itself resistant to change. Once any regulatory regime is established a constituency that benefits from it is created. No matter how out of date or counterproductive the regulatory regime becomes that constituency is likely to resist efforts to change or end it. Therefore it is to be expected that regulatory institutions will not adapt themselves well to changing circumstances a tendency that should be considered when evaluating the long-run net benefits of deregulation Lowering International Barriers to Trade and Investment In addition to being a driving force for change free international trade can facilitate domestic adjustment to change. U.S agricultural exports absorbed some of the increased output made possible by growth in agricultural productivity and thus cushioned the fall of agricultural employment. Further reductions in barriers to international agricultural trade would yield even greater benefits from high U.S. agricultural productivity The United States currently has a low rate of domestic saving by historical and international standards. The free flow of foreign capital into the United States has maintained domestic nonresidential investment ( and ultimately productivity growth ) at a level above that which domestic saving would support Thus international trade and investment flows provide an additional channel of flexibility to the economy. Administration efforts to reduce international barriers will further improve this flexibility ( Chapter ) Cushioning the Effects of Change Despite its benefits economic change can impose short-term costs. Workers with obsolete skills and firms facing declining demand or using outmoded technologies face declining incomes. It is good social and economic policy to cushion such blows and to facilitate the retraining or retooling necessary to move such re- sources into other uses. But the government should not try to prevent change itself in order to mitigate its consequences. Such efforts are ultimately futile ; they only serve to squander a portion of the beneficial effects of change and cumulatively to reduce the economy 's flexibility This mistake is apparent in the farm policies of the United States and to an even greater extent in those of Europe and Japan. Rapidly rising agricultural productivity combined with relatively slow growth in the demand for food and other agricultural products required that resources move out of the agricultural sector. The market signal for this needed reallocation is that farm incomes do not rise as fast as incomes in other sectors. Many aspects of farm policy have however attempted to squelch this signal by maintaining some farm prices and farm incomes at artificially high levels. Though farm policy has not ultimately succeeded in preventing a dramatic movement of labor out of agriculture it has significantly reduced the benefits of agricultural productivity growth. If government policies that interfere with efficient allocation of agricultural resources were eliminated both in the United States and abroad all nations would benefit from a more efficient worldwide agricultural sector Sometimes the economy must respond to changes that are inherently adverse. But if the initial shock is unavoidable the government only makes things worse by preventing the economy from adapting to it. A good example of this policy mistake is the energy policy of the 1970s. When the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries raised the world price of oil in and when the Iranian revolution and Iran-Iraq war raised it again in the result was unquestionably damaging to the U.S. economy ( Chapter ) The urge to try to soften this blow by regulating the price of oil is understandable but the result was the creation of artificial shortages and a delay in the adoption of energy-conserving technologies Integration with the world economy also generates the need for adjustments in labor markets. Increasing imports can lead to reduced employment in domestic industries generating demands for government protection from the forces of change. Such protection can come in many forms but the two most widespread are subsidies and trade barriers. The U.S. textile machine tool auto and other industries have received trade protection at various times Many European nations give enormous subsidies to their steel and shipbuilding sectors. Subsidies and trade protection for declining industries are often a source of trade disputes among nations but the strongest argument against protectionist policies is that they prevent the efficient movement of resources among sectors both within and across nations. The last decade has seen increasing awareness in many advanced economies that such policies are counterproduc- tive. In Sweden for example subsidies to declining industries equaled percent of manufacturing profits in but such subsidies have since been cut dramatically The economy as a whole benefits greatly if workers from industries subject to effective foreign competition are allowed to move to other sectors but these moves are often painful for the workers involved. The decline of particular industries also creates problems for particular localities or regions that are heavily dependent on them Existing policies appropriately seek to mitigate these human costs and to facilitate retraining and reemployment not to prevent labor market adjustments. The unemployment insurance system provides up to weeks of income protection and in some cases unemployed workers are eligible for extended benefits. A wide array of State and community-based programs for workers are provided through the Job Training Partnership Act. Such programs provide educational instruction job training counseling and other support services These programs can be designed to enhance flexibility. For example the transferability of unemployment benefits across States allows displaced workers to move to another State where opportunities may be better without immediately losing benefits. Some States have experimented with combinations of job search assistance job training and the provision of a lump sum benefit either at the time of reemployment or to finance the startup of enterprises Ultimately the most important thing that the government can do for workers in declining industries is to provide an environment conducive to the creation of new jobs elsewhere in the economy Thus these workers too are dependent upon government policy that fosters growth and maintains market flexibility SUMMARY The ability of the U.S. economy to change and evolve is one of its greatest strengths Flexibility encourages innovation and increases its benefits and raises living standards Government policies can maximize the flexibility of the economy by forgoing unnecessary regulation avoiding attempts to stymie the inevitable rise and fall of particular economic sectors and removing barriers to innovation EDUCATION REFORM FOR AN ADAPTABLE WORK FORCE A key determinant of the flexibility of the economy is the quality of its work force. Education raises skill levels that increase job performance and productivity. Well-educated workers have the basic skills necessary to adapt to the changing demands of a dynamic economy and are able to compete with their peers in other nations Unfortunately primary and secondary education in this country does an inadequate job of producing such workers. Parental involvement and student dedication especially to homework is essential to the success of any school system. But greater parental and student effort alone can not ensure success. Comprehensive reform of American elementary and secondary education is necessary The educational system should encourage innovation and promote excellence among teachers and students. It should strive to earn the same high reputation as the U.S. postsecondary educational system in which there is significant diversity and choice. It should provide the foundation that enables workers to adapt and respond to changing workplace technologies and economic conditions. And it should provide all high school graduates with the backgrounds necessary for advanced study or entering the work force Many school districts have outstanding educational systems and achieve these goals. And in every school district in the Nation there are talented and dedicated teachers and administrators as well as concerned parents who work hard to improve the educational system. Success requires a commitment to excellence from school administrators teachers and parents as well as from students themselves. However despite some successes too many State and local educational systems are notably inflexible and resistant to meaningful and effective change. Because they need not compete for students and are not held accountable for the quality of the education they provide many State and local education agencies in this country have become entrenched bureaucracies. As a result U.S. students often receive unacceptably poor educations. Parents often find they have little power to ensure that their children receive a sound education and many choose to send their children to private schools The primary fiscal responsibility for public education lies with State and local governments which determine the institutional framework for the operation of the educational system. Local school boards and State education agencies determine who may teach what schools students attend how long students are in class and even the general instructional methods that are adopted. The Federal Government has traditionally provided only a small fraction of total support for education at the elementary and secondary levels ; in it provided only percent of the funds spent on education for kindergarten through grade As well-intentioned as school boards and education agencies may be a system that is not required to compete for its students and is not judged by their performance is hard pressed to avoid the mediocrity and resist the insularity that comes with being the only " free " game in town. As a result although the United States spends more money per pupil than almost any other country in the world ( in U.S. per pupil expenditures were $ ) the return on this substantial investment is unacceptably low THE CURRENT STATE OF EDUCATION Evidence of the inadequacy of education in the United States can be found in the workplace and in the schools themselves Evidence from the Workplace Today 's high school graduate is often ill-prepared for the world of work. The National Assessment of Educational Progress which reported the results of a nationwide test of students conducted between and found that only percent of 17-year old students demonstrate the capacity to solve multistep problems and use basic algebra ; only percent have the ability to draw conclusions and infer relationships using scientific knowledge ; and only percent can synthesize and learn from specialized reading materials Firms are finding it increasingly necessary to develop remedial training programs in reading and mathematical skills ; they spend an estimated $ billion annually on such programs. Even institutions of higher learning are adapting their course offerings to reflect the poor preparation of many freshmen ; the fraction of colleges offering remedial instruction has increased from percent to more than percent since A second-rate educational system can not support a first-rate world-class economy. Workers unable to read and grasp complex concepts in mathematics and science can not hope to adapt to changing technologies in the workplace. Poor training in mathematics and science at the elementary and secondary levels also contributes to declining trends in college enrollment in these areas This pattern threatens the creative foundation needed to discover and introduce advances in technology Previous Reform Efforts In a commission appointed by the Secretary of Education issued the report A Nation at Risk which painted a bleak portrait of the quality of education in elementary and secondary schools in the United States. The report struck a responsive chord. Reacting to its recommendations and challenges State and local educational systems embarked on plans to introduce fundamental changes It is nearly a decade later and not much of consequence has changed. To be sure many bills were introduced in State legislatures in response to the report and many were passed. Forty-five States increased graduation requirements for core courses in subject areas such as mathematics sciences humanities and social sciences. Many States also made teacher certification requirements much stricter and in an effort to attract higher quality teachers increased salary levels significantly. Teachers ' salaries in public elementary and secondary schools increased by percent in real terms between and Expenditures per pupil have also increased percent in real terms since Despite the efforts in the 1980s there has been no noticeable change in the performance of the Nation 's schools. Though students are taking more mathematics science and reading courses test results show that no performance improvements have been made in these subject areas since the appearance of A Nation at Risk. The percentage of students graduating from high school remains unacceptably low falling from to percent since the report 's release International Comparisons U.S. high school students consistently perform far below their foreign counterparts especially in their knowledge of mathematics and science. In an assessment of learning in six major developed countries in U.S. students ranked last in mathematics and second to last in science. Even the best U.S. students do not compare favorably with foreign students. The International Assessment of Educational Progress found that a very select group of collegebound American students scored far below a less select group of Canadian students on a standardized test and no better than an even broader group of Hungarian students Other indicators are also very telling. U.S. students spend an average of only 3V2 hours a week on homework. That compares poorly with the hours a week on average that high school seniors spend watching television. Studies show that European students spend far less time watching television and more time studying Finally American students spend much less time in school than their foreign counterparts. Even though the American system of education is highly decentralized the 180-day school calendar is nearly national in scope. School calendars ranged from to days in pre-unification West Germany. In Japan schools are open days on average. Some argue against lengthening the school year on the ground that it is the quality not the quantity of in- struction that is at issue. Certainly merely lengthening the school year is not the panacea for the ailing U.S. school system but it is an issue deserving study and consideration by the States. Evidence suggests that in countries with longer school years more material is covered and at a much less hurried pace than in American classrooms. Thus even in U.S. school systems that attain high standards of excellence the quantity of educational material provided to students is not competitive by world standards TOWARD AN EFFECTIVE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM The Administration is fully committed to promoting excellence in the U.S. educational system and has undertaken significant initiatives to this end. In September the President convened a summit of cabinet officials and U.S. Governors to discuss the state of American education. Only the third such summit in American history it was the first ever on education. As a result of this historic meeting the President and the Governors agreed upon six clearly defined goals for the American educational system to reach by the year : All children in America will start school ready to learn ; The percentage of students graduating from high school will increase to at least percent ; Students will leave grades and having demonstrated competency in challenging subject matter including English mathematics science history and geography ; and every school in America will ensure that all students learn to use their minds well so they may be prepared for responsible citizenship further learning and productive employment in our modern economy ; U.S. students will be first in the world in science and mathematics achievement ; Every adult American will be literate and possess the knowledge and skills necessary to compete in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship ; and Every school in America will be free of drugs and violence and offer a disciplined environment conducive to learning The President outlined these goals in his State of the Union Address. In July the President issued The National Education Goals : A Report to the Nation 's Governors ^ and the President and the Governors established a National Education Goals Panel that also includes participation of the congressional leadership. The panel will recommend a measurement and assessment system that will provide the Nation with information on the progress being made in reaching these goals To help ensure that all American children start school ready to learn the Administration has significantly expanded the Head Start program. And to ensure that the national education goals are achieved the Administration will propose a new Educational Excellence Act. Initiatives in this important proposal would stimulate fundamental reform through promoting educational choice and alternative certification for teachers and principals promote local control and innovation by providing increased flexibility in funding in exchange for greater accountability reward schools that demonstrate improved achievement among students and provide incentives for innovative approaches to mathematics and science education Programs of Choice The U.S. public educational system must be opened to the invigorating and challenging forces of market competition by enabling teachers parents and students to choose their schools. Over time the schools that survive will be the most innovative and effective institutions those capable of responding to the changing educational needs of society Schools that must compete for students will work harder to deliver quality education. A school choice program can become the catalyst for greater diversity and help eliminate mediocrity in the educational system. An important step in this direction is the magnet school concept in which schools specialize in particular subject areas or interests such as science mathematics or the performing arts and students and their parents choose which school to attend The Administration has advocated adoption of choice programs in as many jurisdictions as possible across the country. There is no one " preferred " approach to educational choice. A statewide choice plan exists in Minnesota while a choice demonstration plan including both public and private schools has been launched in Milwaukee Wisconsin. In seven States adopted plans allowing various forms of choice. Before five other States had enacted interdistrict choice plans. The Administration 's new Center for Choice in Education has been established to provide information and assistance to anyone interested in learning about or implementing educational choice A key to the success of a choice-based program is granting individual public schools the freedom to innovate. Schools must be freed from the grip of bureaucracies distant from the classroom One popular version of this self-run school approach is to leave the governance of each school to a team composed of the principal teachers and parents. Such an arrangement creates a personal stake in the success of the school rather than reliance on a central bureaucracy. It also provides parents and teachers an effective voice in determining how a school should change to attract students in an open-choice educational system Accountability Unless teachers school administrators and elected or appointed officials are held accountable for the quality of the education they provide the success of open-choice programs and self-run schools will be limited. Merely adopting new approaches does not ensure success. Schools and teachers must be held accountable for what their students learn To this end State and local education agencies must work together to develop and publish objective measures of the output of the educational system. Meaningful performance measures are necessary for the success of school choice programs allowing parents and students to leave choice programs that are failing. Such performance measures include basic competency tests for graduation from high school ; annual tests to determine student progress ; changes in high school drop-out rates ; and high school transcripts that provide meaningful information on course content and student skills to parents employers and colleges At the Federal level the Department of Education is charged by law to " collect collate and from time to time report full and complete statistics on the condition of education in the United States. " The National Center for Educational Statistics ( NCES ) has developed a series of national measures of the output of the educational system. The NCES publishes an annual digest of education statistics and periodically publishes the National Assessment of Educational Progress. The NCES publishes an annual selection of indicators on the condition of education in the United States. The report confirms the dismal state of public education in this country. Each of these reports provides an ongoing basis for parents to test the success of education reform ; they are important tools for increasing accountability Alternative Teacher Certification Programs Each State sets up standards that determine who can teach in public elementary or secondary school systems. Differences in certification requirements across States produce substantial limitations on teachers ' job market options. Although many States have formal reciprocity agreements teachers still encounter significant barriers when they try to cross a State line. Until recently for example to win a permanent teaching position in a Rhode Island school system a person qualified to teach in Massachusetts was required to have a master 's degree and years of teaching experience three of them in Rhode Island. This particular limitation is being eased somewhat since the six New England States along with New York have agreed to accept the teaching credentials of applicants from other States in the region providing they complete extra education requirements within years Eliminating unnecessary barriers to entry into the teaching profession within each State is at least as important as eliminating the barriers between States. Most States currently require that an individual either graduate from a 4-year college as an education major or take a certain number of education courses before being allowed to teach. Talented individuals who decide to switch careers and become teachers find they have to complete either a traditional teacher preparation program or under fairly recent reforms in some States complete a graduate degree program in education While these requirements discourage many talented professionals seeking a career change from entering the teaching profession they do not ensure that the school system is getting high-quality teachers. In fact the poor academic performance of teachers in the subject areas they teach led many States to impose minimum grade requirements for education majors The solution to the problem of attracting talented teachers however is not to regulate the industry further but to open it up to the competitive process and to reduce certification requirements in ways that do not threaten but instead encourage excellence in teaching Currently States have implemented some form of alternative teacher certification program. Mainly small pilot programs these are based on the general principle that an individual with a bachelor 's degree in a specific field of study can be a successful teacher given some minimum level of training in education ( Box ) The minimum varies across States but all programs reflect the belief that the minimum needed to guarantee quality is far less than that currently required by traditional certification routes It is important to recognize that removing unnecessary barriers to teaching does not threaten the stature of the profession. First one already well-defined qualification for entry into the teaching profession the acquisition of a 4-year college degree will not change. Second what helps promote respect for the teaching profession is effective teaching not unnecessary certification requirements. The experience in Texas and in numerous other programs suggests that lowering the barriers to entering the teaching profession can improve the quality of primary and secondary education SUMMARY Public schools in the United States are failing to prepare students for either the world of work or higher education. This failure threatens the ability of the United States to maintain its leadership in the world economy Competition and accountability are essential if schools are to innovate and improve the quality of education Alternative certification programs can enhance the quality of education by removing unnecessary barriers to entry into the teaching profession Box * Texas Alternative Certification Program Starting with one school district in the Texas State school system has taken a national lead in introducing alterna * tive teacher certification programs. The program is currently operating in nearly percent of the State 's school systems and the number of teachers certified by the alternative route has grown from in the first year to in In a typical program a candidate with a bachelor 's degree takes to education courses learning basic classroom management along with disciplinary and evaluation skills. The candidate is then assigned to Ms or her own classroom for the year receiv * ing a first-year teacher 's salary and a year of experience on the career ladder. Throughout the internship year the candidate works closely with a mentor often meeting on a daily basis for support and problem-solving. In addition interns take other education courses throughout the year The alternative programs have been very successful in attracting highly qualified diverse interns. In 1990f percent of the interns were men and percent were minorities compared with traditional education programs where percent of the enrollees are men and percent are minorities. Interns are older than the traditional education major : percent are over and percent are over years of age Evaluations of the program thus far suggest it is working very well. On State certification exams interns do as well as or better than teachers who follow the traditional route * Studies show that teachers qualified by the alternative route are comparable in quality to teachers qualified through the traditional route AGRICULTURE : TECHNOLOGICAL SUCCESS AND THE NEED FOR MORE FLEXIBLE POLICIES The agricultural sector illustrates dramatically both the tremendous dynamism of the U.S. economy and the costs of government policy that tries to inhibit change. Technological progress and the increased integration of world markets have transformed the U.S farm sector leading to growing production of wheat corn meats and other products using a fraction of the labor force previously devoted to agriculture. At the same time a complex structure of Fed- eral farm policies has evolved that often inhibits the efficient use of agricultural resources. These programs impose significant costs on taxpayers consumers and the economy as a whole thereby lessening the potential benefits of agricultural progress TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH Technological innovation has been a driving force behind dramatic changes in both agricultural production and agriculture 's role in the economy. Many important technological changes in agriculture occurred in response to market signals. The initial great surges in farm mechanization for example came in response to the farm labor shortages associated with the Civil War. The widespread adoption of mechanization allowed fewer workers to cultivate more land and facilitated agriculture 's westward expansion The advent of tractors around the close of World War I not only increased each worker 's productivity but also freed land from the production of food for draft animals The demands on farm output associated with World War II coupled with increasingly limited opportunities to bring more land into production provided the impetus for a new wave of technological innovations that increased the productivity of each unit of land and livestock. Following World War II farmers increased crop yields greatly through the adoption of chemical fertilizers and pesticides irrigation and improved seed varieties such as hybrid corn Corn yields per acre for example more than tripled from to Improved livestock breeds artificial insemination and greater feeding efficiency enhanced the productivity of the livestock sector as well. The average dairy cow produced almost three times as much milk in as in In response to changing technology the use of agricultural labor in was about one-fifth of what it had been a half century before while the use of chemical inputs increased times. Agricultural productivity per unit of all production inputs increased about two and one-half times between the 1930s and 1980s. Government has had a long and important role in supporting and disseminating agricultural research but innovations also come to the farm sector because private entrepreneurs are able to profit from them What are the major implications of these dramatic changes in productivity ? First employment in farming fell rapidly as fewer and fewer farm workers were required to meet the food demands of the nonfarm sector. While this decrease means that farming has become much less representative of the American lifestyle less than percent of the American labor force is employed on the farm today compared with percent in it also means that labor was freed from agriculture to contribute to the growth of other sectors. Industries that emerged to support a more modern agriculture such as financial institutions farm equipment and fertilizer manufacturing and distribution and food processing were important new sources of employment Second agricultural supply expanded faster than agricultural demand. Accordingly real farm prices have trended downward in the United States since the Civil War. The decline in agricultural prices contributed to the fact that American consumers now spend only about percent of their disposable income on food near the lowest in the world and are among the best-nourished people in the world CONSUMER DEMAND AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE In addition to technology other factors have been important sources of agricultural change. Changing consumer tastes and preferences have affected the relative profitability of alternative crops and products and reshaped the composition of agricultural production. The health-motivated interest in low-fat foods for example has contributed to the rapid growth in the production of poultry meat since while the output of other livestock products has been roughly constant Product Changes Within Agriculture Consumer demand sometimes shifts in response to exposure to new agricultural products through international trade. Kiwi fruit for example entered the U.S. market relatively recently from New Zealand. Rapid consumer acceptance created the incentives for the development of a domestic industry and U.S. kiwi production grew from an estimated tons in to tons in Another demand-side factor with potentially large effects on the agricultural sector is the growing consumer concern with food safety and the environmental effects of chemical-intensive farm production techniques. Some trends in frontier research in biotechnology could help farmers respond to these consumer concerns Bioengineered crop varieties that are resistant to diseases and pests are now emerging as proven technologies. Their adoption could ultimately reduce the intensity with which chemical inputs are used and again change the nature of agricultural production and the surrounding infrastructure Interaction with World Markets One of the great benefits of productivity growth in U.S. agriculture has been the expansion of the supply of food and other agricultural products to countries all over the globe. Expanded trade along with the direct transfer of agricultural technology to producers in other countries has improved diets and living standards around the world. And as U.S. agriculture has become more important to the world trade has become more important to the economic performance of U.S. agriculture Agricultural exports increased sharply in the 1970s ; during that decade the value of exports increased from about percent to more than percent of farm cash receipts. In the 1980s total exports as a percent of production fell somewhat but remained very high for key commodities. Depending on the year anywhere from percent to percent of U.S. wheat production for example and percent to percent of soybeans were consumed in other countries The importance of exports to U.S. farm income combined with adverse world market conditions and rising international tensions over agricultural trade barriers in the mid-1980s encouraged the United States to put agriculture at the top of its list of priorities for the Uruguay Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade negotiations ( Chapter ) A successful conclusion to these trade talks aimed at lowering barriers to agricultural trade worldwide would help open foreign markets further to U.S. farm products. In return U.S. barriers to imports would come down as well bringing the benefits of increased competition in agricultural products to the U.S. marketplace TOWARD A MARKET-ORIENTED FARM POLICY The long-term decline in U.S. farm prices has been one of the great benefits of increasing productivity in agriculture. Farmers though fearing that lower prices would mean lower incomes have sought and secured a significant degree of government assistance in keeping the prices they receive from falling. Government agricultural policy which partly insulates farmers from market forces operates at the expense of consumers and taxpayers. The sharp escalation of farm program costs in the mid-1980s together with some of the adverse effects of inflexible farm programs highlighted the need for policy reforms The Costs of Failing to Accommodate Market Forces Government farm programs consist principally of two types of subsidies : direct payments financed by taxpayers ; and programs that hold farm prices above free-market levels paid for by consumers at the grocery store. At their peak in Federal subsidies of both types to U.S. producers of wheat rice feed grains sugar milk and beef were valued at almost $ billion that is an average of $ for each U.S. farm although many farms receive no subsidies One recent study estimated that economy-wide income would have been roughly $ billion higher in in the absence of these subsidies. In other words the benefits to consumers and taxpayers of al lowing the market to allocate agricultural resources would have outweighed the loss of farm subsidies to producers by $ billion It is also instructive to examine some of the problems caused by specific policy measures designed to counteract market signals. A key component of U.S. agricultural policy is the provision of price floors for major commodities. Prices of wheat feed grains soybeans rice and cotton are held above the floor by allowing farmers or sometimes other farm product suppliers to pledge their crops as collateral to the government in exchange for a loan Pledged crops are valued at the legislated support price. By putting their crop " under loan " when the market price is below the support price suppliers remove some portion of the current crop from the market which helps pull the market price back up toward the support price. Should the market price rise above the support price crops under loan may be redeemed from the government and offered to the market. If not redeemed by loan repayment the government acquires the crop collateral and the crop is said to have been " forfeited. " The prices of sugar milk and several other commodities are also maintained above legislated price floors. A combination of government purchases of dairy products including cheese butter and nonfat dry milk and restrictions on the quantities of these products that can be imported is used to support milk prices to dairy farmers for instance. ( The sugar support system is discussed in Chapter ) Under each of these programs farmers are guaranteed at least the support price regardless of supply and demand conditions A system of Federal regulations called " marketing orders " sets minimum prices for about percent of fluid milk sales ; other marketing orders place restrictions on the quality or the quantity sold of various fruits vegetables nuts and specialty crops. Milk orders reduce competition and studies have shown that they raise retail milk prices. Orders that merely enforce minimum grade size and maturity standards can also interfere with competition and can affect consumer choices and prices by removing some product from the market. The kiwi fruit order for example which began in after U.S. kiwi production had begun to expand puts size and grade requirements on kiwis grown in California. The farm legislation extends the same requirements to kiwi imports. These requirements may well inhibit competition in a market that did not even exist until imports created it Over time policymakers have learned that when support prices for export crops are set too high U.S. commodities accumulate in government warehouses while other countries benefit from the absence of U.S. competition. Foreign farmers expand production and their share of the export market at the expense of the United States. The high wheat support prices set in the farm legislation have often been cited as one reason for the sharp drop in U.S wheat exports and the large buildup in government-held stocks during the early to mid-1980s. Support prices for wheat and other exported commodities were lowered in legislation but policymakers have not had this same incentive to lower the price floors for commodities subject to competition from imports such as dairy products and sugar " Deficiency " payments are another major component of farm programs. They are paid to qualifying wheat feed grains rice and cotton producers and are based on a " target " price which is set higher than the support price for these crops. Each qualifying farmer receives a check from the government in an amount equal to the difference between the legislated target price and the market price or support price whichever is higher multiplied by qualifying production These deficiency payments are made in proportion to a farmer 's crop acreage. As a result the distribution of deficiency payments is dramatically skewed toward large often wealthy farmers. In for example more than percent of direct payments which include deficiency payments and a smaller amount of some other payment types went to fewer than percent of all farms. These farms averaged almost $ in payments almost $ in net cash farm incomes and more than $ in net farm worth Furthermore the incentive to overproduce provided by a target price set well above the market price requires offsetting measures to control program costs such as requiring farmers to take land out of production. Farmers thus have been required over the years to cede some of their production decisions to the government Farm Legislation In recent decades farm legislation has been written often but each law has retained the general structure of the original 1930s legislation. The legislation introduced important market-oriented reforms such as more flexible approaches to determining support prices for exported commodities. Support prices for most program commodities began to be based on a 5-year moving average of market prices rather than being set independently of price trends. U.S. farm exports performed considerably better after this change The most significant change of the farm legislation the Food Agriculture Conservation and Trade Act of in conjunction with the Budget Reconciliation Act is the " triple-base " provision which extends increased planting flexibility to farm program participants while reducing the acreage qualifying for deficiency payments. This planting flexibility provision ( explained in Box ) makes market prices more important to production decisions. It will thus help reverse the longstanding tendency of farmers to overproduce crops whose target prices are set above market prices Two particularly important outcomes are likely. First the production of existing and potentially profitable alternative crops that do not qualify for deficiency payments such as soybeans and other oilseeds can now expand. Second environmentally sound crop-rotation practices might be encouraged in some agricultural regions where substitute crops are available or are likely to be introduced Box * -l How the * frfple-Basef * Provision Works Every .y0 $ r the government assigns farmers an " acreage base * and a " payment yield " for each program crop such as com historically planted on the farm * Under the farm bill/a farmer could receive deficiency payments for producing corn o # ly if some portion of the corn acreage base was put into a conserving use and not planted to com * Deficiency payments ware not made on this idled or conserved acreage and the feimer could incur penalties for planting certain crops such as soybtaiis on it ; The f m legislation added to the /ieficiency payment acres and conservation acres a third mteg&ty $ w does not qualify for d&fwiemcy payments but th&t m&y te f ^ m ^ A to any zmpmmpt fruits and vegetable The Wlltet tidM> thirdcatego * ry ~ the flexible acres at i ^ itjenfcof tfeta ^ te ^ ^ By disallowing deficiency payments on this IS percent the flexibility provision reduces government outlay Farmers can however offset some of the lost subsidy by planting crops with the greatest market returns on the triple-base acreage. Therefore * the provision makes market signals ipgtore important to farm production decisions The flexibility provisions of the legislation also create considerable taxpayer savings as farm subsidies are eliminated on percent of the farm program acreage base. This change is projected to save about $ billion over years and is an important component of the overall deficit reduction package. However while reducing deficiency payments and increasing the importance of market prices in farm production decisions the farm legislation retains high and rigid price supports for dairy products and sugar and continues extensive government management of some markets such as peanuts. While the Administration applauds the move toward increased flexibility that the farm legislation represents continued efforts to reduce distortions created by farm policy are desirable SUMMARY A series of technological revolutions has dramatically increased the productivity of agriculture freeing labor from agriculture lowering the cost of farm products and enhancing the prosperity of the economy Productivity growth also facilitated a tremendous increase in agricultural exports linking the future of U.S. agriculture to the openness and growth of world agricultural markets U.S. agricultural policy as evidenced by farm legislation is gradually being changed so that agriculture is more able to respond to market signals but further reforms are necessary to reduce the distortions created by farm policy and the burden of farm support on consumers and taxpayers HEALTH CARE : DYNAMIC TECHNOLOGY AND CHANGING DEMOGRAPHICS Health care has been one of the fastest growing and most innovative sectors of the U.S. economy during the last three decades. Although many factors have contributed to the rapid pace of change the fundamental driving forces have been technological advances and shifts in the demographic makeup of the population. These forces along with the lack of market incentives for cost-conscious behavior have resulted in escalating costs and much concern about lack of access to health care for many Americans particularly the million people who lack health insurance coverage. While government programs finance care for many of the poor and elderly increasing government involvement in the health care financing system has aggravated the problems of cost and access RECENT TRENDS The most dramatic illustration of the growing importance of the health sector is its rising share of GNP. In health care accounted for percent of GNP ; its share rose to percent in To put those numbers in perspective total health care spending in was twice as large as Federal spending on defense and more than six times larger than the value of U.S. farm output The growing share of health care in the U.S. GNP can be traced to developments on both the supply and demand sides of the health care market. On the supply side technological advances have made possible a vast array of medical treatments unheard of even a decade ago. Developments in diagnostic equipment and pharmaceuticals for example have promoted earlier and more successful treatment of many diseases. Much of this technology however is costly. Therefore while technological advance has undoubtedly im proved the quality of treatment received it has simultaneously made that treatment more expensive On the demand side economic growth favors health care expenditures. As incomes rise people tend to attach more importance to trying to live longer and healthier lives. Most advanced economies have experienced increases in the share of resources devoted to health over time In addition to technological advances and economic growth health costs have increased because of the aging of the population Older individuals incur more health expenditures on average than the young or middle-aged. The percentage of Americans aged and older rose from percent in to a projected percent in representing an increase of million older Americans During this period life expectancy rose by more than years and infant mortality rates declined by percent. These statistics indicate that increases in the amount of resources devoted to health are not necessarily bad since to a large extent they represent an investment in health the changing preferences of a wealthier society and the extra cost of a longer lived population Table shows that the aging of the population will continue to exert a large influence on the health care system for several decades. Even without above-average increases in medical prices the rise in the elderly population means that the United States will pay much more for health care in the coming decades unless dramatic developments occur that reduce costs TABLE Aging of the U.S. Population Population ( millions of persons ) July Total Age and over Age and over as percent of total population I960 * Middle series projection January Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PERCEIVED PROBLEMS OF THE EXISTING SYSTEM Despite the beneficial effects of much spending on health care there is a general perception that the U.S. health care system should perform better than it does. Costs are seen to be out of control and millions of households do not have health insurance and are perceived to have inadequate access to care Rising Government Health Care Costs Health care costs paid by Federal State and local governments have exploded. The combined total spent by all levels of government on health care rose from $ billion in ( in dollars ) to $ billion in and is expected to continue to rise. These escalating costs place great stress on the ability of governments to fund current and future liabilities in health care Medicare the principal program for providing medical care to the elderly and disabled illustrates the changes in government spending on health. Medicare expenditures were $ billion ( in dollars ) in the first full year of the program and million people were enrolled. By the Federal Government was spending $ billion on medicare and million elderly and disabled Americans were enrolled. The enormous increase in outlays for medicare can be traced to the increase in the number of people covered by the program general increases in medical care expenses and the increased share of program costs borne by the Federal Government. For example the Federal Government originally shared equally with enrollees the cost of covered physician services but in recent years beneficiaries have paid only percent of the cost Even when all benefits and patient payments are included the Federal Government pays out $ for every $ spent by medicare patients Medicaid the program that funds health care for some of the poor illustrates the effect of changing demographics on both the type of care received and increasing government costs. Started in medicaid was initially designed as a joint Federal/State program to provide health care for women and children receiving welfare payments and the disabled. Medicaid eligibility has expanded in recent years but even today it is not designed to provide medical care for all poor Americans. Total medicaid expenditures in were only $ billion ( in dollars ) In the Federal Government financed percent of a total medicaid bill of $ billion The most significant trend in recent years has been the increase in medicaid spending on nursing-home care for the elderly. Spending on long-term care for the elderly accounted for about percent of all medicaid spending in As the number of elderly citizens continues to rise the costs of long-term care will also increase Health Care Price Inflation Rapid increases in the real price of health care have contributed to the overall rise in health care spending. From to the price index for medical care rose by percent twice as fast as the average for all goods and services though difficulties in measuring the inflation rate in technologically dynamic sectors suggest that the real difference in inflation rates was probably somewhat less Those rapid price increases combined with growth in the volume of services demanded raised total health care expenses The health care sector has responded to cost escalation in several innovative ways. One of the most significant changes is the growth in health maintenance organizations ( HMOs ) and preferred provider organizations ( PPOs ) HMOs charge a fixed annual fee for medical services rather than a separate fee for each service provided In a PPO a group of providers negotiates prices and patient volume with a large health care purchaser such as an insurance company or employer. Through their greater potential for supplying cost-effective care HMOs and PPOs provide competitive alternatives to traditional fee-for-service insurance policies. The rapid growth of HMOs and PPOs illustrates both the important role of competition and the ability of the health care sector to respond innovatively to the challenge of cost escalation The Medically Uninsured One of the most critical deficiencies of the U.S. health care delivery system is the large number of people who lack health insurance. Although estimates vary recent calculations place the number of uninsured Americans at around million. Because the very poor are usually covered by government programs such as medicaid many of the uninsured are employed workers or children and spouses of workers. They may lack insurance coverage because their employers can not afford to offer it they can not afford to purchase it on their own and they do not qualify for government-subsidized programs Many of the uninsured are not poor ; percent of uninsured Americans have incomes more than twice the official poverty level Many young healthy workers prefer not to purchase insurance when given a choice since the cost of a policy outweighs its perceived benefits. To a great extent the lack of access to health care or affordable insurance is due to the increase in health care costs during the last few decades Two policies enacted in will help to protect families particularly at risk from lack of insurance. Low and moderate income families will receive a tax credit covering part of the cost of purchasing medical insurance covering the whole family rather than just obtaining single coverage for the worker. In addition medicaid coverage was extended to all pregnant women and children up to age in families with incomes below percent of the poverty line. The Administration 's new infant mortality initiative and its proposed expansion of the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women Infants and Children along with a variety of initiatives emphasizing preventive care will further enhance the health of low-income families WHY HEALTH CARE MARKETS PERFORM POORLY Why is the health care sector able to perform so well in meeting certain demands yet unable to control costs or provide adequate services to all who need them ? The institutional structure of the U.S. health care delivery system and the poor incentives for cost control it provides are at least partially to blame Health Insurance and " Third-Party Payments " The most important institutional feature of the existing system is the prevalence of Federal or private insurance policies. People purchase insurance because they want to be protected from the costs of accidents fire or in the case of health insurance disease and sickness. But one consequence of insurance coverage is that those who are protected from harm by an insurance policy have less reason to take actions to reduce the probability that any harm will occur When harm does occur consumers covered by insurance face diminished incentives to minimize the cost of care since someone else pays the bills. The effect of insurance generally to diminish the incentive to minimize cost is called moral hazard ( Box ) In the context of health care insurance provides an incentive to increase the quantity of services consumed since the patient does not pay the full cost of additional services Federal and private insurance distorts consumer incentives to a large and increasing extent. In patients paid percent of the costs of their care out-of-pocket. By that percentage had fallen to percent. Increasingly health care expenses are paid by third-party payers primarily the government and insurance companies. Although ultimately the cost of care must be paid by recipients ( in the case of private insurers ) or taxpayers ( in the case of Federal insurance ) consumers of medical treatment who have insurance do not generally need to be concerned at the margin about either the cost of the services they receive or even whether those services are necessary or cost-effective. Consequently unlike most markets for goods and services medical care does not have built-in incentives to equate costs and benefits at the margin Health insurance differs from fire or auto insurance in the extent to which its structure creates incentive problems. Until recently health insurance has tended to cover more and more of the care received by patients. For example many policies have small deductibles so that patients do not have to pay for even routine care such as a physical exam or treatment for a sore throat. This type of " first-dollar coverage " as it is called is analogous to homeowners ' insurance that would pay not only for the damage caused Box 4-& Incentives in the Market for Health Insurance One of the most important issues that arise in examining the mounting cost of health care in the United States is the extent to which the widespread use of insurance distorts incentives to make cost-effective choices. In health care and other markets insurance coverage reduces the incentive to balance costs and benefits at the margin because the consumer does not pay the full cost of the treatment. This phenomenon called moral hazard is common to all insurance markets * Using health care as an example consider the situation confronting an insured consumer who visits a physician. If the insurance policy pays percent of the cost of treatment the price to the consumer of care costing $ is only $ Therefore the consumer would purchase the treatment even though he may value it at less than $ Alternatively if the consumer could prevent the need for treatment by spending $ he may not do so because his cost would exceed his savings of $ even though the true savings is $ * Thus insurance coverage creates a gap between the price paid by the consumer and the cost of providing care so that the choice made is inefficient * The health sector has responded to the moral hazard problem in several ways. The most direct response is to place restrictions on the care that is reimbursed by increasing the deductible. Larger deductibles force the consumer to pay the full price of treatment for relatively low-cost care at least until the deductible is reached. That is an effective way to encourage the consumer to make cost-conscious choices and thus reduce the overall cost of health care for the average consumer A second approach to reducing moral hazard is to encourage the physician to make efficient choices. That is one goal of health maintenance organizations and other capitated systems in which care providers are paid a fixed amount per policy regardless of the amount of care provided. The physician therefore has no incentive to provide excessive care. In fact providers in capitated systems may face incentives to save money by providing less than the needed amount of care. In HMOs however care decisions are most often made by salaried physicians who do not have a direct economic stake in the amount of care provided Professional standards and concern for the reputations of individual capitated systems further enhance the physician 's incentives to balance the costs and benefits of treatments by a house fire but also for a burnt pan caused by leaving the stove on too long. The analogy in auto insurance would be a policy that paid not only for damages resulting from moving accidents but also for paint chipped when a car is scraped in a parking lot by another car 's opening door. The cost of such policies would be much higher than typical home or auto policies Government Regulation Government regulations especially those that require insurers to provide specific benefits have a large effect on the cost of health insurance. Health insurance policies are regulated by the States and every State requires that insurance companies doing business in their State include certain benefits. That means that it is illegal for an insurance company to offer a bare-bones low-cost insurance policy to consumers who only want to insure against catastrophic accidents or illnesses. The States instead require that virtually all consumers purchase coverage for a package of treatments that varies from State to State. The required benefits can include maternity care alcoholism and drug abuse treatment mental health care chiropractors and assorted other treatments regardless of the consumer 's willingness to pay for such coverage These requirements raise the cost of health insurance and make it too expensive for many individuals and firms. As a result many individuals who would willingly purchase low-cost insurance against catastrophic illness are not allowed to do so. A recent study estimated that as many as one-fourth of the uninsured or more than million people lack health insurance because of the high cost of policies due to State regulations Another effect of government involvement in financing health costs occurs through the means-testing of the medicaid program. To target benefits at the poor income limitations are set to restrict eligibility. If earnings exceed the maximum allowed all benefits are taken away. ( Medicaid availability is also affected by participation in other means-tested programs particularly aid to families with dependent children. ) For low-income families this loss of medicaid eligibility can create a large penalty for employment since medical benefits potentially worth thousands of dollars as well as peace of mind can be lost if replacement health insurance is unavailable Employer-Based Insurance and Tax-Free Health Benefits One fundamental characteristic of the U.S. private health insurance system is that it is predominantly employer-based ; that is most Americans with health insurance obtain it through their employer. Providing insurance through employment is a natural mechanism for achieving the risk-sharing benefits of insurance Economies in administrative sales and purchase costs also enhance the desirability of employer-based group insurance By covering everyone in a large group insurers avoid the problem of " adverse selection " which occurs because those most likely to need expensive care such as the chronically ill are also the most likely to seek insurance. However these advantages pertain primarily to large employers. Small firms are less likely to offer insurance if they have employees particularly likely to need care and the economies in administrative expenses are much reduced for small groups. Firms with fewer than workers incur administrative costs of about to percent of total claims versus only percent for firms with or more employees Typically health insurance is not only organized in the workplace it is largely paid for by employers although much of the cost may be shifted back to workers in the form of wages lower than they would otherwise earn. On average employers pay about percent of the premium for single workers and percent of the cost of family coverage. This practice makes sense for firms and workers because the cost of employer-provided health insurance is tax-deductible for firms and workers do not pay income or payroll tax on these benefits The tax treatment of employer-provided insurance means that taxpayers subsidize the provision of health insurance to workers As a result incentives are not only distorted by the existence of insurance but individuals are also induced to carry more insurance than they would if they faced its true cost. Thus employees tend to demand both more health insurance and more health care than they would if they had to pay the full price. The increased demand for health care drives up the average price if there is no offsetting rise in the supply of care made available The financing and regulation of the health care sector thus combine to reduce significantly the flexibility of health care markets Fundamentally consumers do not have adequate incentives to avoid services that are too expensive and providers who are not cost-efficient are not disciplined by the market. Without these incentives markets can not function well. Health care reform designed to control the rate of cost increase and improve health care access must confront the problem of creating appropriate incentives for health care consumers and providers SUMMARY The health care sector grew rapidly during the last three decades due to advances in technology the aging of the U.S. population and increased government financing of health care expenses Many of the inefficiencies in health care are attributable to the dilution of market incentives and the reduction in market flexibility created by third-party payments and governmentmandated benefits Health care policy reform will not be successful unless it improves the incentives for health care consumers and providers to balance costs and benefits TELECOMMUNICATIONS : TECHNOLOGICAL AND REGULATORY INNOVATION The telecommunications industry like the health care industry has been undergoing particularly rapid change. As few as a dozen years ago it consisted almost entirely of regulated service providers and dominant equipment providers with substantial market power ; today much of the regulation has been removed and competition is vigorous in many of its component markets. Deregulation is a natural experiment that demonstrates the benefits of increased flexibility and the hidden costs of regulation. Because the crucial local telephone exchange segment of the industry will remain regulated for the foreseeable future careful thinking is required to design its regulation to minimize those hidden costs LESSONS FROM DEREGULATION Deregulation of telecommunications began with Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) and judicial decisions of the 1950s 1960s and 1970s. It continued with the breakup of American Telephone and Telegraph ( AT&T ) in the early 1980s the passage of The Cable Communications Policy Act of ( the Cable Act ) and further deregulatory decisions in the 1980s. These policy changes helped transform the telecommunications industry from a structure dominated by regulated monopolies into one in which several deregulated competitive sectors coexist with a remaining regulated monopoly component. Both the difficulty of bringing about this transition and the benefits that it has generated provide lessons about government regulation and market flexibility Adapting to Changing Circumstances The early history of the telecommunications sector was characterized by extensive competition. In the period following the expiration of Alexander Graham Bell 's original patents in and many new firms entered the telephone business eroding the monopoly held by AT&T which had evolved from Bell 's original company. By percent of installed telephones were controlled by non-Bell companies and most Bell operating subsidiaries faced some direct competition AT&T then adopted an explicit strategy of reducing competition through mergers and acquisitions and willingly accepting regulation both to exclude competitors legally and also to blunt public criticism of monopoly. By Bell 's market share had returned to percent and direct competition had been virtually eliminated With the passage of The Communications Act of the regulated monopoly structure of the telephone system was completed. In AT&T controlled percent of local and long-distance telephone revenues and its Western Electric manufacturing subsidiary provided almost all of Bell 's equipment needs Changing technology eventually made this monopoly regime unsustainable. As early as the 1950s other companies sought permission to sell types of telephone equipment that AT&T did not produce. The development of economical microwave transmission technology made competition for long-distance telephone service feasible and the FCC permitted a competitor to enter this market in a limited way in The completely regulated monopoly structure of the telecommunications industry might have made sense in but by the 1970s it clearly was incompatible with the new state of technology. Competition not regulated monopoly emerged as the appropriate policy for the equipment and long-distance components of the telephone industry The history of the cable television segment of the industry offers the same lesson. In the 1960s cable TV provided television to remote areas that could not receive standard broadcast signals Cable TV operators clearly had a monopoly over an important segment of the entertainment market in these areas and the widespread practice by State and local governments of regulating cable TV rates developed in this era. Later cable evolved in many areas into an alternative to " over-the-air " TV and it also faced increasing competition in the broader entertainment market from direct satellite broadcasts and widely available videocassette rentals. Regulation of cable TV rates persisted however until the Cable Act deregulated them except in areas with limited broadcast competition. Again policy had to change to recognize the change in the underlying industry conditions Thus in telephone equipment cable TV and long-distance telephone service a regulatory regime appropriate to a technology at one stage gave way slowly and reluctantly to new policy appropriate to new technological realities. Of course the evolution of telecommunications regulation is not over. Today local telephone service remains largely a regulated monopoly because it does not make economic sense for more than one company in an area to build a complete system of copper wires fiber optic cables and switches connecting all customers. That too could change if for example radio technology developed that was competitive with the wired system for nonmobile communications. More likely technological developments that can not yet be anticipated will change the nature of the industry in ways that will make the current regulatory structure obsolete Unanticipated Benefits of Deregulation Deregulation and the ensuing competition in the markets for telecommunications equipment and long-distance service facilitated development of products and services that did not exist before. The development of the facsimile ( fax ) machine in different versions offered by many different companies could not have occurred if telephone equipment had remained regulated. In addition to the fax an enormous variety of portable telephones answering machines and computers with built-in communication abilities have all emerged in the deregulated equipment market New services have also been introduced based both on new technologies and new arrangements that were either not permitted or not conceived of under regulation. Today cellular technology has taken mobile telephones from the realm of spy-movies and given them to million subscribers. Long-distance competition has reduced the cost and expanded the range of " " and " " number services available to businesses thereby increasing the flexibility with which they reach their customers and suppliers. Combined with deregulation of the surface freight industry the fax machine electronic data interchange and other new communications technologies are changing the way firms organize the distribution networks that connect their factories stores and customers. Some of these changes were anticipated when deregulation was contemplated but most were not MAINTAINING A DYNAMIC INDUSTRY The policy framework that will ultimately replace the old framework of near-total regulation is still emerging. Ahead are a number of policy choices that offer opportunities to increase the benefits of deregulation. The principle of designing government policy to foster flexibility is crucial in order to ensure that the United States has the most effective telecommunications infrastructure possible Maximizing the Scope for Competition In several markets in the telecommunications sector current policy inhibits competition. Cable TV operators are subject to competition from other media but in most cases State or local governments grant a franchise to a single cable operator in a given area preventing operators from competing with each other for customers. Local telephone companies are also prohibited by law from acting as cable operators. These restrictions reduce the power of competition to discipline cable prices and services and give cable operators inadequate incentives to adopt the latest technology The FCC and many States also continue to regulate AT&T 's longdistance rates despite the presence of competition in these markets. This vestige of an earlier era now serves primarily to inhibit competition Another area in which government policy could further recognize the potential for competition is in the management of the electromagnetic spectrum. The spectrum consists of the range of frequencies in which radio-based technologies such as broadcast television and radio cellular telephone and microwave transmissions operate. The range of frequencies with desirable technical properties is limited and therefore is a scarce resource that must be allocated efficiently The FCC allocates particular " bands " of frequency to specific uses and then assigns the right to operate in these bands to specific private parties. Assignment and allocation of spectrum bands require administrative hearings that can be very cumbersome and time-consuming. As a result competition among technologies and among different firms seeking to operate a given technology is greatly reduced Without the force of competition spectrum bands are not necessarily used in ways that generate the greatest social value. The invention of new technologies is stifled because of the inability to get access to the spectrum and there is an inadequate incentive to refine existing technologies to conserve the amount of spectrum used. If instead of assigning spectrum rights administratively the Federal Government auctioned them to the highest bidder and permitted their sale and reassignment the flexibility of the telecommunications sector would be greatly increased. In particular when portions of the spectrum previously reserved for government use are made available to the private sector they should be auctioned off without restrictions on resale. The resulting competition would likely lower prices and increase the diversity of available service offerings for over-the-air communications and broadcast media generally The government also limits competition by restricting the entry of the regulated local telephone companies into unregulated businesses Under the terms of the consent decree governing the breakup of AT&T local operating companies are not allowed to manufacture telephone equipment offer various information services or provide most long-distance service It might appear that keeping these particular firms out of these businesses would not have serious costs so long as other firms are free to enter. The government however has no way to determine who the most qualified or most advanced potential competitor might be. Further there are reasons to believe that the local telephone companies might have much to offer these other markets Experience developed in the construction or operation of the hardware and software for the telephone system itself could be very valuable in developing information services for sale to customers These and other potential " economies of scope " between the local exchange and other markets are limited or lost when the telephone companies are barred from related businesses. The lesson from easing previous restrictions is that increased competition produces additional benefits that can not be foreseen today These restrictions reflect a concern that local telephone companies would have unfair advantages in competing against others in markets that are somehow connected to the local exchange. For example the local telephone companies might try to hide some of the costs of their competitive activities within the regulated local exchange sector thereby transferring the costs to the local ratepayers. They might also exploit their knowledge of the technical details of the local network or even design the configuration of the network in ways that favor their product offerings in the related competitive businesses These are real concerns that must be addressed. If the local telephone companies are permitted to compete regulators will need to scrutinize their activities to prevent ratepayers from subsidizing the competitive businesses and to ensure that the regulated firms do not unfairly exploit their monopoly position. Monitoring of regulated firms competing in unregulated markets will be imperfect and it will not be a costless process. But regulators have developed better monitoring tools than they previously had and the alternative is the extreme option of banning firms from participating in related businesses without even attempting to make competition work The principle that the government should not decide what activities within an industry particular firms may perform also applies to the development ownership and syndication of programming for broadcast and cable television. Government restrictions on ownership carriage or syndication of programming inhibit competition reduce efficiency and are generally an ineffective means of addressing any problems of market power that may exist in these markets Regulatory Approaches that Encourage Innovation Traditionally monopolies are regulated by what is called cost-ofservice regulation. Regulators determine the total costs incurred by the monopolist in providing the regulated services and then set prices designed to recover those costs including a competitive rate of return on the capital invested in the regulated company. This method is intended to ensure that the company will not lose money but also that it will not be able to charge prices in excess of its costs The fundamental problem with this approach is that a firm subject to cost-of-service regulation has limited incentives to reduce its costs or improve its services. A reduction in costs will eventually be translated into a reduction in allowed revenues leaving the firm no better off. If improved products lead to a rise in profits prices will eventually be reduced by regulation to bring revenues and costs back into line. Again the benefit to the firm has been reduced. A firm presented with these incentives will not seek change and innovation as aggressively as one that is able to retain the profit from doing so Recently economists and regulators have become interested in developing forms of regulation that would prevent abuses of monopoly power while preserving incentives for innovation. These approaches are often referred to loosely as " incentive regulation. " All forms of incentive regulation are designed to preserve the overall or long-run relationship between prices and costs but to sever or limit that relationship in the short run or for specific investments In other words if a firm reduces its costs or improves its products it would be permitted to keep some of the profit that the innovation generates The key to maintaining the incentive to innovate is to tie the regulated firm 's price level to some overall or general indicator of costs rather than to actual costs incurred. For example prices could be allowed to rise each year by the rate of inflation minus a fixed percentage reflecting expected productivity improvements Alternatively the firm 's prices could be tied to a general index of costs in the industry. In these ways regulators could achieve a better balance between the desire to prevent monopoly profits from being earned and the goal of maintaining incentives for efficiency and innovation SUMMARY Telecommunications is a dynamic sector in which regulation must continually evolve to reflect changing conditions Deregulation has permitted innovation that could not have occurred under the previous regulatory regime To promote the continued dynamism of the industry public policy should seek to maximize the scope of competition and avoid preventing particular firms from competing in particular sectors Incentive regulation is an attractive policy innovation that has the potential to reduce the adverse effects of continued regulation on technological innovation DEFENSE INDUSTRIES : ADJUSTING TO THE END OF THE COLD WAR With the end of the cold war U.S. defense expenditures are scheduled to be reduced by substantial amounts in the next decade Although the current situation in the Persian Gulf creates some uncertainty about the immediate future the scheduled reductions would continue the recent trend that saw defense spending fall in real terms starting in One obvious impact of these spending decreases will be a substantial reduction in the size of the defense sector creating a challenge and opportunity for markets to adapt HISTORICAL EXPERIENCE The historical experience with fluctuations in defense expenditures shows that the U.S. economy has little difficulty responding to shifts in defense spending. As shown in Chart government expenditures on defense have varied considerably since the late 1930s. Industry responded quickly when defense needs increased most notably during wartime but also in more recent years. Defense purchases of durable goods for example increased more than percent from to Declines in spending also provided opportunities for demonstrating the economy 's flexibility. Even during the period of greatest reduction when defense spending fell from percent of GNP in to percent in the economy adjusted quickly. Although total output fell in and because of the dramatic decline in government spending consumption and private fixed investment rose as the United States made the transition to a peacetime economy A similar temporary decrease in real GNP occurred at the end of the Korean war. As defense spending dropped from percent of GNP in to percent in the economy fell into a recession that lasted months. In output grew percent even though defense spending continued falling to percent of GNP. As shown in Chart defense spending as a percentage of GNP was lower during the Vietnam war than during previous conflicts. Given this smaller role it is not surprising that the declines in defense spending as the war ended in the early 1970s had virtually no impact on growth This historical experience suggests that future defense cuts will not adversely affect the economy as a whole since the relative importance of defense in the U.S. economy has been declining since the early 1950s and even the increases of the early 1980s made only a small temporary bump in the downward trend. The relatively small role played by the defense sector in the U.S. economy helps to ensure that the transition to lower spending levels will be man Chart Defense Purchases as a Percent of GNP Projected declines in defense purchases are small by historical standards Percent Projected Calendar Year Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers ageable and that resources will be able to move to alternative uses with little impediment Under current budget plans defense spending in will be lower by percentage points of GNP than in Since the economy successfully adapted to more rapid reductions following World War II and the Korean war there is little reason to think that the present changes will be troublesome. The precise magnitudes of the spending cuts are uncertain and some of the decreases could be delayed or even reversed by changes in the world situation or an extended deployment in the Persian Gulf THE PROBLEM AND POTENTIAL OF DEFENSE CONVERSION The key problem with the transition of the defense sector to lower spending levels is that the impact is not broad-based but tends to affect drastically firms in only a few industries. The resources of these firms both the physical capital and the skilled labor are somewhat specialized for military production and so are reduced in value when defense cuts occur. The communities in which these firms are located will also be adversely affected as em- ployment is reduced. Although these disruptions may require some difficult adjustments defense cuts are an opportunity to allow market forces to redirect resources toward other productive uses Government policy should seek to ensure that the transition occurs as smoothly as possible. In that way the harm to communities will be minimized and unemployment effects will be reduced One possible additional concern with cuts in defense spending is their potential effect on the defense industrial base and U.S. technological superiority. In managing the proposed spending cuts the ability of the United States to continue to produce the equipment needed to fight future conflicts should be maintained. Furthermore the advantage the United States has in defense technology should be protected through continued investment in research although some of the priorities may be shifted. The defense technology base can also be protected by relaxing procurement regulations particularly those that restrict the transfer of defense technology to civilian uses Facilitating the Redeployment of Resources The Federal Government has programs in place that address the problems facing workers and communities affected by defense reductions. It is important to recall that even in times of expanding budgets some firms and workers lose contracts as purchases shift to different products or services. Therefore the problems caused by expected defense cutbacks can be viewed as a somewhat larger version of the typical shifts in demand that occur in a dynamic economic environment. The true " peace dividend " is not the amount of money saved in the Federal defense budget but rather the real resources that are made available as defense spending declines. The economy will benefit from the end of the cold war only if these resources are allowed to shift to new high-value uses. The reduction in overall government spending will also reduce interest rates and stimulate investment throughout the economy Sectoral shifts take place continuously in the U.S. economy so it is useful to ask whether anything about the defense industry merits special treatment. Because defense spending is exclusively a government endeavor some have argued that the government has a special obligation to protect those who are affected by declines in Federal defense spending. This argument suggests that government contracts are an entitlement and that any reduction in spending should be offset by compensation. Similar arguments have been made to support policies targeted toward assisting workers adversely affected by other changes in Federal policy It would be unwise to accord special treatment to workers or firms directly affected by changes in Federal spending. In addition to the practical difficulties of determining fairly who is actually affected such an approach effectively divides the work force into two groups one that receives both Federal support and funding and special privileges when that support is reduced and all other workers. To the extent that such a policy gave defense workers special benefits it would be extremely unfair to workers in other sectors This approach would also make it difficult and costly for the Federal Government to change spending patterns in response to changes in society 's needs and priorities. The existing rigidity in government spending patterns already makes it difficult to eliminate programs and policies that have outlived their usefulness For several reasons defense firms sometimes can not easily transfer their engineering and production capacity to civilian uses. Although many products have both military and civilian uses many others have characteristics unique to the military. For those firms producing products limited to military uses the transition to civilian production means dealing with an entirely different set of products. The emphasis in military procurement on producing a limited number of high-performance items with the latest technological advancements such as fighter aircraft does not typically encourage the development of organizational skills needed to produce highquality but not necessarily state-of-the-art products for civilian buyers at lower cost. Conversion to civilian production means responding to different customers with goals and constraints often much different from those of the government. Selling to civilian markets differs markedly from competing with only a few other firms for government contracts in a highly politicized environment Although the effects of defense spending cuts are likely to be felt in most sectors of the economy a few industries will be most affected. Producers of aircraft radio and TV communication equipment missiles and space vehicles and ships are expected to incur some of the largest employment losses. Job changes will probably be more evenly distributed among States because of the wide geographic dispersion of defense production. Many of these forecasts are tentative however because of uncertainty about the eventual magnitude of the cuts and which individual spending programs will be reduced or eliminated The most appropriate policy for dealing with the problems of defense cutbacks is to cushion the effect of change by providing the same assistance to affected defense workers that is available to all workers displaced by economic changes. Many such programs are available to workers who lose their jobs because of spending cuts The Job Training Partnership Act provides training opportunities for those workers whose skills are no longer in demand and the Employment and Training Administration of the Department of Labor also has numerous programs for addressing the needs of displaced workers. In addition the President 's Economic Adjustment Committee chaired by the Secretary of Defense and composed of Federal departments and agencies is explicitly charged with providing financial assistance and other support to communities affected by defense spending reductions. These existing programs should be sufficient to ease the transition for workers displaced by defense spending cuts of the size now likely to occur Effect of Reduced Recruiting on Civilian Labor Markets Changes in the Nation 's defense budget are also likely to reduce the military 's need for manpower. During the 1980s the four military services recruited and trained nearly million young men and women or about people each year. This number is expected to decline substantially in the decade ahead. Although the size of the reduction is difficult to forecast with certainty the services could reduce their annual recruiting by about inductees below the average of the 1980s. This number can certainly be absorbed easily in an economy that produced a net employment increase of million jobs during the 1980s and will reduce the impact of the lower rates of labor force growth expected during the next decade It is not widely known that the military services are one of the largest single providers of vocational training in the United States Each year trained veterans return to civilian life with skills that are highly valued by civilian employers. In the short term the economy will benefit from the release from military service of a large number of well-trained veterans. Over the long term the military services will continue to provide training and employment for hundreds of thousands of young people SUMMARY Proposed cuts in defense spending over the next few years start from a much smaller share of GNP and are modest in size relative to the demobilizations after World War II the Korean war and the Vietnam war The economy will adjust smoothly to reductions in defense spending but some workers and firms will need to adapt to new circumstances Programs are in place to help workers and communities adjust to reductions in defense employment CONCLUSION The ability of the U.S. economy both to generate and to accommodate change is remarkable ; the economy 's flexibility is one of its major assets. The high U.S. standard of living is due in large part to a flexible economy that encourages innovators to invest in finding new ways to do things and allows entrepreneurs to marshal the resources necessary to bring new products and processes to market The government affects the flexibility of the economy in many ways. Flexibility is enhanced by creating an environment conducive to investment and innovation by minimizing regulatory interference in markets by lowering barriers to international trade and investment and by providing a competitive and accountable educational system. The evolution of the agriculture health care and telecommunications sectors illustrates the potential for innovation but also demonstrates the harm of government policies that reduce flexibility. Reduced military spending will provide another opportunity to benefit from the economy 's ability to redirect resources to new uses Change generally creates both winners and losers and the U.S political system always allows the losers to argue for protection from the impersonal forces of the market. The true long-run costs of accommodating such demands for interference with market forces is almost always underestimated because the value of the opportunities lost when the economy 's ability to change and adapt is reduced can never be fully known. If it is decided that victims of change must be helped the assistance should not inhibit the economy 's natural evolution. Doing so would reduce the economy 's flexibility and thus throw away a significant portion of the possible benefits of change CHAPTER Innovation and Reform in the Financial Sector THE U.S. FINANCIAL SECTOR plays an integral role in ensuring a growing healthy and flexible economy. The institutions that make up the sector banks savings institutions finance companies securities firms insurance companies investment funds and others serve as intermediaries between savers and investors These institutions also provide transaction services help reduce risks and efficiently allocate capital to productive activities that generate economic growth The roles played by particular financial institutions and markets have changed substantially in recent decades and the markets for financial services have become more global. But apart from piecemeal reform the regulatory structure governing the financial sector dates from the 1930s. The Administration believes that the Federal deposit insurance system and the regulation of many financial institutions must be reformed and modernized and it has recently advanced a comprehensive proposal to this end which is discussed in this chapter Today nearly all economic activity depends on services provided by the financial sector. Every retail transaction involving the use of a check or credit card initiates a process that can require the transmission of information and funds across the country sometimes in seconds. Most businesses usually require daily services from financial institutions. American banks savings and loans ( S&Ls ) and credit unions currently hold more than $ trillion in deposits and along with other financial intermediaries extend hundreds of billions of dollars of new credit every year ( Table ) Americans invest in well-diversified portfolios of securities through mutual funds and save for their retirement through pension funds. Through the financial markets Americans invest in securities issued by companies seeking the capital needed to finance productive activities. Investment banks underwrite new issues of securities thus reducing the risks faced by the issuing companies By facilitating trade among investors securities exchanges and securities firms enhance the liquidity of financial markets and thus allow capital to flow to productive uses. On a typical day the ownership of billions of dollars worth of common stock in companies TABLE Credit Provided by Private Financial Intermediaries [ Billions of dollars ] Commercial Banks Insurance Companies Pension Funds Finance Companies Mutual Funds Other Savings Institutions Note. Credit flows are 3-year totals Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System changes hands through U.S. stock exchanges. An even larger dollar volume of trade takes place through brokers and dealers in the money market Insurance companies pool the risks of their customers and thus allow individuals and businesses to insure against fire and other casualties. By purchasing life insurance individuals can provide enhanced financial security for their loved ones. Over million Americans currently have life insurance with face values representing aggregate coverage in excess of $ trillion The various institutions in this sector have evolved as the need for their services has developed and as technological advances and innovations have allowed them to provide more sophisticated products and better service. Innovations such as the automated teller machine and telephone banking have changed the way business is transacted. Computer technology has increased the speed and reduced the cost of information processing. Entrepreneurs supported by advances in financial economics have produced a wide array of new financial products. Investors can purchase mutual funds whose values track market indexes. Firms exchange fixed and variable interest payments on debt in swap transactions. Money market mutual funds provide savers a means of investing in a diversified portfolio of short-term debt instruments With this rapid innovation the sector has also experienced considerable stress. In part the stress has been the result of increasing competition. Here as elsewhere competition is a positive force and should produce stronger more efficient institutions which in turn provide better services to consumers and businesses. Some of the stress however is due to the outmoded government regulatory environment within which financial institutions operate. As the financial sector has evolved technologically and as its competitive arena has expanded from the United States to the entire world existing regulation has at times unnecessarily constrained its effi cient operation. Comprehensive regulatory reform throughout the entire financial sector is accordingly a high priority Those who invest the capital needed for growth must have confidence in these financial institutions. Such confidence is warranted only if the financial sector is sound and vital. In the past when confidence in the financial sector has faltered so has the economy The President has long been committed to ensuring the integrity of the financial sector. As Vice President he chaired the Task Group on Regulation of Financial Services which in outlined the essential ingredients for comprehensive reform of the Federal financial regulatory system. Immediately upon taking office the President responded to the problems of the savings and loan industry. Enactment of the Administration 's recent comprehensive reform proposals will significantly revise the Federal Government 's role as insurer of deposits and regulator of the financial sector These proposed reforms are based on four principles. First a safety net for small savers should be maintained. Second the safety net should be designed to reward those financial institutions that manage their affairs prudently and to ensure that poorly managed institutions bear the cost of their mistakes. Third regulations should be flexible and allow financial institutions to respond to changes in global markets. Fourth rules should be applied consistently across all institutions engaged in the same activities DEVELOPMENT OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE UNITED STATES Financial institutions have always played a key role in economic growth entrepreneurial activity and industrial expansion in the United States. Before the Revolutionary War colonists depended primarily on English financial institutions although there were a few exceptions. Benjamin Franklin for example founded the first successful fire insurance company in America in After the war an American financial sector quickly developed. The first commercial bank opened in followed by the first securities exchange which would later become the New York Stock Exchange in the first life insurance company in and the first building and loan association in The U.S. financial sector has usually been both healthy and efficient. Major changes in regulatory or other policies have generally been made only in response to distress in the financial sector and have accordingly been infrequent. Thus a policy-oriented review will tend to focus on periods of financial distress BANKS AND SAVINGS AND LOANS With the exception of the First and Second Banks of the United States each of which existed for years all banks formed before were chartered by the States. Americans generally distrusted large and powerful banks and rural communities distrusted urban banks. That led State legislatures to pass laws strictly limiting the ability of their banks to branch a limitation that persists today in some States The development of a large number of geographically constrained banks made the U.S. banking system unique. Other countries generally have a limited number of banks many with branches throughout the country. About commercial banks currently operate in the United States compared with about in Japan in the United Kingdom in Canada and in Germany. The large number of banks in the United States does not necessarily imply a more competitive banking system. Banks ' activities are limited to particular geographic areas and the number of bank charters is limited so that bank charters may convey some local monopoly power The National Bank Act of instituted federally chartered banks. National banks were not allowed to branch until and then only by absorbing other banks. Provisions of the McFadden Act of and the Glass-Steagall Act of allowed national banks to follow the branching regulations of the State in which they operated but restricted banks from branching across State lines. The Bank Holding Company Act of restricted interstate banking by prohibiting bank holding companies from acquiring banks in a second State unless the State expressly authorized the acquisition by statute Before the mid-1800s banks showed little interest in providing financial services to households instead focusing almost exclusively on the needs of commercial and industrial customers. In the 1830s building and loan associations began to meet household demands for financial services. Establishing a practice followed later by S&Ls savings banks and credit unions these early thrifts typically accepted small deposits from individuals and pooled them to provide a source of housing and consumer finance. Early thrifts were chartered regulated and supervised by the State within which they operated Depositor Runs and Panics Banking is conducted on a fractional reserve basis ; that is banks and thrifts accept deposits and make investments and loans retaining reserves equal only to a fraction of their total deposits. Although depository institutions hold some securities many of their assets are the loans they have made. Some of these loans such as home mortgages are relatively easy to value and consequently can be purchased and sold in secondary markets. Others such as unsecured commercial loans are generally illiquid because they are not easily valued by potential buyers who are unfamiliar with the borrowers and their businesses. This information problem also makes it difficult to establish the overall value of an institution The lack of liquidity of many loans combined with fractional reserve banking creates the possibility of depositor runs on even solvent institutions. If depositors lose confidence in an institution whether justified or not and want to withdraw more cash than the institution holds in reserve the bank or thrift just can not deliver. Aware of these risks depositors are likely to withdraw their funds when they think other depositors are losing confidence. Such behavior produces depositor runs sudden massive withdrawals To cover withdrawal demands the institution may be forced to sell its outstanding loans and because purchasers may place a lower value on those loans than the institution owners of the otherwise solvent institution can lose their investment in the institution Throughout the 19th century and into the early 20th century depositor runs plagued banks. Often runs were isolated affecting only a single institution or a group of institutions. In some cases however depositor runs spread throughout the system causing panics that had profound consequences for the economy. As deposit balances shrank the money supply fell and banks had to curtail lending. Firms that could not borrow the funds they needed to operate had to shut down and lay off workers The banking panics of and are two examples. In the money supply fell percent real gross national product ( GNP ) fell percent and the civilian unemployment rate rose significantly. In the money supply fell percent real GNP fell more than percent and the unemployment rate tripled. Although other factors were also involved these banking panics are generally acknowledged to have generated .or contributed significantly to the economic downturns that ensued Lender of Last Resort In response to the demonstrated danger of banking panics the Federal Reserve System was created in Its primary objective was to use its powers to create currency and bank reserves to make the supply of currency responsive to economic activity and to prevent or deal with banking panics. The Federal Reserve served as a lender of last resort. A bank facing a depositor run would meet withdrawal demands by borrowing currency from the Federal Reserve. However the Federal Reserve 's ability to deal with panics was limited. It could only lend to banks that were members of the Federal Reserve System and it required eligible loans and securities as collateral when it lent THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND BANKING REFORM The 1920s were prosperous years for most Americans as the rewards of past industrial investments fueled rapid growth in living standards. At the same time banking grew increasingly competitive. Between and banks failed nearly percent of the more than banks that existed at the end of Urban banks consolidated in an attempt to attain sufficient size to meet the demands of their rapidly expanding commercial customers. Banks began to offer new services to keep customers and distinctions between banking and securities firms blurred When the " Roaring Twenties " ended with the stock market crash of many banks lost funds directly through their stock holdings and perhaps indirectly through losses on loans to stock market investors. As the developing recession deepened depositors lost confidence and a severe banking panic ensued. Instead of responding to the panic by easing constraints on money growth and thus minimizing the impact of the panic the Federal Reserve allowed the money supply to fall. That contributed to a severe contraction in bank lending which in turn reduced economic activity and led to further loan losses for banks This downward spiral resulted in the wholesale collapse of the financial system and the beginning of the Great Depression. During the years banks failed percent of the banks that had existed at the beginning of Total deposits in commercial banks fell percent. Real GNP declined percent from to the low point of the Depression. From to the unemployment rate soared from percent to nearly percent The Federal Government responded to the collapse of the banking system by enacting the Banking Acts of and These laws established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) to prevent depositor runs by insuring bank deposits. They also reduced competition among banks by prohibiting the payment of interest on demand deposits and by placing a ceiling on the interest rate that could be paid on time deposits. Finally they prohibited banks from participating in much of the securities industry. Continued constraints on entry into banking further limited competition These banking laws stabilized the banking industry ; there has not been a system-wide panic since their passage. Deposit insurance worked because the FDIC had no discretion. If a bank failed the FDIC paid off its insured depositors no questions asked. With this guarantee insured depositors had no reason to initiate a depositor run. The rate of bank failures also dropped dramatically. Only banks failed between and less than one-half the number of failures in any single year during the period Although the reforms helped to stabilize the economy they clearly entailed significant costs. Depositors no longer received interest on their checking accounts were limited in the interest they could receive on their savings accounts and because competition was reduced paid more for services received from securities firms Along with thousands of banks more than S&Ls failed during the Great Depression. Individuals withdrew their savings as they lost confidence in S&Ls or to deal with their own financial problems. S&Ls also had to contend with defaults on many of their home mortgages. To restore confidence in S&Ls the Federal Government in established the Federal Home Loan Banks which served as lenders to S&Ls and hence enhanced their liquidity Moreover just as the FDIC was established to insure deposits at commercial banks the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation ( FSLIC ) was established in to insure deposits at S&Ls The Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) was also established to insure lenders against the risk of default on mortgage loans Long-term fixed-rate mortgages which were to play a key role in the later S&L crisis first appeared during the Depression following the introduction of FHA mortgage insurance Two features of the banking reforms of the 1930s would contribute to problems many years later. The deposit interest rate ceiling would contribute to disruptive " credit crunches " in the 1960s and 1970s. As market interest rates rose above the deposit interest rate ceilings funds flowed out of banks and thrifts causing liquidity crises for the institutions and disrupting credit flows to business and mortgage lending. Moreover the price of deposit insurance did not reflect risk. Both features would contribute to the S&L crisis years later The regulatory response to the Great Depression also addressed problems in the financial markets. The Securities Act of was intended to protect investors who purchased newly issued securities. The Securities Exchange Act of was designed to protect investors that bought and sold existing securities against fraud and market manipulation SUMMARY Consumers and businesses rely on the financial sector for a wide variety of services which enhance living standards and the Nation 's economic vitality Federal and State laws greatly constrained banks from operating in more than one State and from branching within States Although some of these restrictions have been lifted many are still in place Federal banking regulations adopted to deal with the collapse of the banking system during the Great Depression have succeeded in eliminating the threat of bank runs and panics. But the laws also reduced competition among financial institutions and contributed to today 's problems in the industry THE 1970s : INFLATION HIGH INTEREST RATES AND NEW COMPETITION For nearly years after the Great Depression the financial sector experienced an era of relative profitability and little stress That began to change in the late 1960s and early 1970s with increases in the level and volatility of the rate of inflation the advent of the electronic age and new competition and the increasing internationalization of the world 's economies The average annual rate of inflation rose from less than percent in to about percent in to nearly percent in ; in that last period the rate was also very volatile ranging from about percent to almost percent. As the level and volatility of inflation increased so did the level and volatility of interest rates. Faced with higher levels of inflation lenders demanded higher interest rates since the dollars with which they would be repaid in the future would be able to purchase less than the dollars they were lending. These higher more volatile interest rates increased the general level of risk for all commercial and financial companies but the S&L industry was particularly hard hit RISE OF MONEY MARKET FUNDS Financial markets and institutions developed an array of new instruments to help businesses and individuals deal with the uncertainties of high and volatile interests rates. Adjustable-rate mortgages gave borrowers the option of paying lower average rates if they were willing to bear the risk that interest rates might increase. ( See Box for discussion of inflation-proof bonds and mortgages. ) Interest rate swap contracts allowed a borrower to obtain a fixed rate loan indirectly by first borrowing from a bank at a variable rate and then " swapping " its variable interest rate payments with a borrower that had borrowed at a fixed interest rate. Securities exchanges issued bond futures contracts which effectively allowed market participants to borrow or lend at specified interest rates at a future date Inflation and high interest rates also led to the development of a major new form of competition to banks and thrifts the money market mutual fund. When interest rates rose in the 1970s interest rate ceilings on bank and savings and loan deposits were significantly below the market interest rates being paid on short-term lowrisk debt instruments. Investors looking for interest rates higher than banks and thrifts could pay turned quickly to the new money market mutual funds which invested primarily in instruments Box 5-L ~ Inflation-Proof Bonds and Mortgages Bonds and mortgages typically specify constant payments over their entire maturity. Their interest rates are set high enough to compensate lenders for the expected inflationinduced erosion of the purchasing power of future payments * Inflation-proof assets are fundamentally different ; They preserve the purchasing power of interest payments and principal by changing them proportionately with a measure of the overall price level such as the consumer price index. Because inflation-proof assets eliminate the financial risks of unanticipated inflation and the need to compensate lenders for that risk their guaranteed real or inflation-adjusted interest rates are lower than those on typical assets Compared to payments on a 30-year * percentr fixed-interest-rate mortgage payments on a 4-percetrt real interest-rate inflation-proof mortgage would start more than one-third lower. Payments would rise at the same rate as the average price of the items in household budgets and move similarly to the rent would-be homeowners pay ( Adjustable-rate mortgages help reduce borrowing costs by shifting interest rate risk to borrowers but their payment levels are not designed to track income and price levels * } To the extent that a borrower 's real income falls over time payments on an inflation-proof mortgage would become more burdensome Inflation-proof bonds and mortgages are not common. These debt instruments have generally developed only in countries where inflation has been relatively high and variable * One reason is that when inflation is expected to be relatively low and stable the cost of introducing these instruments may appear to outweigh the benefits they offer. In that case borrowers and lenders seem to prefer the certainty of constant payments Recent clarifications of the regulatory and income tax status of inflation-proof bonds and mortgages have removed important obstacles to their use in the United States such as short-term government ( Treasury bills ) and corporate ( commercial paper ) debt securities. Low information processing costs made it profitable for money market funds to deal with even small investors. By bringing borrowers and lenders together albeit with help from the marketplace these funds played a role similar to the intermediary role banks and thrifts traditionally played The success of money market funds increased the demand for commercial paper by providing small investors with low-cost indi- rect means of accessing that market. Assisted by improved technology that reduced the cost of conveying information to financial markets corporations particularly large ones began to bypass banks and borrow directly in financial markets by issuing commercial paper. Nonbank finance companies began to increase their lending activities at about the same time. Thus banks were being bypassed on both the borrowing and the lending side of the business. Charts and illustrate these phenomena. Chart shows the growth of money market funds relative to total commercial bank deposits. Chart shows the increasing competition for business lending among banks finance companies and the commercial paper market The opportunity to invest savings conveniently and at low cost through mutual funds represented a substantial increase in competition for savings that had traditionally been deposited in banks and thrifts. In addition increased information processing capabilities as well as greater sophistication on the part of business managers led to a revolution in cash management techniques which reduced idle cash balances in business accounts. These competitive pressures resulted in the phasing out of interest rate ceilings on bank and thrift deposits by As banks and thrifts began to offer higher interest rates on deposits the growth of money market funds slowed but they remained strong competitors It is important to realize that while banks and thrifts struggled to meet new competition consumers of financial services benefited from the increased competition. Savers were able to earn higher rates of interest both from money market funds and once deposit interest rate ceilings were eliminated from banks and thrifts. Borrowers also benefited from the development of alternative sources of funds and increasing competition among lenders INTERNATIONALIZATION At the same time that the financial sector has experienced dramatic change on the domestic front it has also faced new challenges internationally. Many financial institutions now operate in a global marketplace and face worldwide competition. Industrial firms increasingly need assistance with international financial transactions from their bankers which requires banks to have a greater presence throughout the world In addition U.S. banks are facing greater competition from foreign banks at home while only a few U.S. banks are significantly increasing their business overseas. Chart illustrates the rapid growth in the total assets of U.S. offices of foreign banks. Foreign banks and the U.S. chartered banks they own have been particularly successful in penetrating the business lending market. Their share of U.S. business loans rose from percent in to Chart Deposits and Money Market Funds Money market funds which compete with bank deposits have grown significantly since their introduction Billions of dollars Note : Bank deposits are the sum of money stock measures of demand deposits other checkable deposits at commercial banks and time and savings accounts at commercial banks less deposits held by money market funds. GNP implicit price deflator is used to deflate nominal figures Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce Chart Composition of Loans to Businesses Loans by finance companies and nonfinancial commercial paper have become a significant source of commercial credit Billions of dollars Finance Company Loans to Business Commercial & Industrial Bank Loans Note : GNP implicit price deflator is used to deflate nominal figures Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce percent in June At the end of the foreign share of U.S banking assets was percent Chart Assets at U.S. Offices of Foreign Banks Foreign bank assets in the United States have increased rapidly since the late 1970s Billions of dollars Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Different countries impose different rules and regulations on their banks that affect their ability to compete with banks from other countries. In an effort to make capital requirements the minimum amount of owner 's equity required as a percentage of total bank assets more consistent worldwide the central bank governors of industrial nations endorsed the Basle framework for measuring capital adequacy and achieving minimal levels of capital based on credit risk. The minimum capital standards associated with the Basle framework are being phased in over a 2-year period that began December and will require some U.S banks either to shrink in size or to raise additional capital during that period These new capital standards focus on credit risk but need to be realigned to reflect other risks that banks may bear such as foreign exchange risk interest rate risk and equity position risk. Bank lending practices could continue to be distorted until capital standards are balanced to reflect these other risks. Such reorientation of the Basle framework to more accurately reflect the different types of risk is currently under active consideration SUMMARY Higher and more volatile rates of inflation in the 1970s led to higher and more volatile interest rates and increased stress in the financial sector Money market mutual funds began to compete with banks and thrifts for the savings of Americans. Initially banks and thrifts were constrained in their ability to compete by deposit interest rate ceilings and these money market funds grew rapidly The Basle framework established international capital standards based solely on credit risk. The Administration encourages efforts to realign these standards to more accurately reflect the different types of risk THE S&L CRISIS The increase in interest rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s had a profound effect on the savings and loan industry. The rate increase was as we have seen a major factor in the emergence of money market mutual funds as major competitors to S&Ls for the funds of savers. But higher interest rates had an additional effect on S&Ls : They produced large and widespread losses on mortgage portfolios These interest rate increases and resulting losses proved to have far-reaching consequences. About half of all S&Ls in business in no longer existed in ; more than had merged gone out of business or been placed under the control of government regulators. By the end of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation itself was deemed insolvent. While the ultimate cost of the S&L crisis will reflect many factors the Administration estimates that including costs incurred prior to the resolution of the crisis will cost between $ billion and $ billion The crisis has also led to fundamental changes in the way that S&Ls operate and in the regulations that guide them VULNERABILITY TO INTEREST RATE INCREASES For decades S&L assets consisted predominantly of fixed-rate mortgages that typically covered a term of to years. At the end of for example FSLIC-insured institutions held more than three-fourths of their assets in residential mortgages and in mortgage-backed securities which are bonds whose values parallel those of mortgages Although the assets of S&Ls consisted largely of fixed-rate mortgages their deposit liabilities were primarily short-term. When interest rates rose on other assets that households might hold such as Treasury bills deposit interest rates had to be increased compa- rably to enable S&Ls to retain the deposits that provided their funding. The costs to S&Ls increased even though revenues from outstanding mortgages remained fixed. This fundamental mismatch of short-term and thus adjustable-rate deposit liabilities and long-term fixed-rate mortgage assets left S&Ls vulnerable to interest rate increases In the two decades following World War II interest rates changed only modestly and relatively gradually. The rates S&Ls earned on outstanding mortgages tended to be above the interest rates they paid on deposits and similar to prevailing mortgage interest rates. In such circumstances the mismatch between shortterm deposits and long-term fixed-rate mortgages causes few problems Net Worth Imperiled Serious troubles for the S&Ls began in the second half of the 1960s. As the economy prospered and inflation began to increase interest rates on newly issued mortgages began to rise considerably above those on the mortgages S&Ls already held ( Chart ) Longterm interest rates then rose to much higher levels in the late 1970s and early 1980s as inflation rose to historically high rates and monetary policy was tightened to subdue that inflation Mortgages originated in prior years and still held by S&Ls now provided less interest income than newly issued mortgages. As Chart indicates in for example thrifts earned an average yield of 9XA percent on outstanding mortgages while the prevailing rate on newly issued mortgages was about % percent. Since the market value or price of a fixed-rate asset falls as the interest rate rises the sharp increase in mortgage interest rates slashed the value of the outstanding mortgages held by S&Ls A ^ -percentage point increase in mortgage rates would suggest a fall in the market or economic value of a typical outstanding mortgage of about percent. A typical S&L might hold percent of its assets in mortgages. Thus if the value of assets other than mortgages remained unchanged a 31A point increase in mortgage interest rates would imply a fall of about percent in the total value of the S&L 's assets. For an S&L that initially had capital equal in value to percent of assets such an increase in interest rates would result in the value of the S&L 's liabilities exceeding the value of its assets by percent as long as the value of the deposits and other liabilities remained constant. If the S&L owners were required to make good on all of their liabilities the increase in interest rates would have reduced the value of their capital from percent to negative percent of the original value of assets Regulators require S&Ls and other institutions with insured deposits to have net worth or capital that meets or exceeds a specified percentage of their liabilities which has often been in the Chart New Mortgage Interest Rates and Thrift Portfolio Yields In the late 1970s and early 1980s interest rates on new mortgages rose well above the average yield on mortgages in thrift institutions portfolios thereby sharply reducing the value of these portfolios Percent per annum " ~ Contract Interest Rate On Newly Originated Mortgages Mortgage Portfolio Average Yield I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Source : Department of the Treasury range of percent. The book-value measure regulators use to value assets liabilities and therefore the owner 's stake in the institution or net worth is imperfect for several reasons. It relies mainly on historical costs to value assets and liabilities and often does not capture changes in their economic value. Moreover it typically measures only the value of tangible assets. Thus the value of the institution 's charter ( right to operate ) and customer relationships ( goodwill ) may not be captured An institution is economically solvent when its economic net worth or capital the amount by which the market value of its assets ( both tangible and intangible ) exceeds the market value of its liabilities is positive. Thus a decline in the market value of assets larger than its economic capital pushes an institution into economic insolvency. The enormous capital losses implied by the interest rate increases shown in Chart and approximated above were almost certainly large enough to push a substantial portion of the S&L industry into economic insolvency even allowing for the value of unmeasured intangible assets. The book-value method did not reflect the fall in the value of mortgages held by S&Ls. In fact because mortgages could be carried at book value regardless of their market value this decline in value would not be immediately signaled by book-value accounting. Book-value accounting would reflect the economic losses associated with the fall in the value of mortgages gradually as interest expense on short-term liabilities increased relative to interest income on long-term assets Transactions with little economic significance can also be undertaken to affect the value of capital as calculated under book-value accounting. When interest rates fall the market values of assets such as fixed-rate mortgages rise relative to their book values. Financial institutions can sell these assets in the secondary market to realize those higher market values and thereby bolster their measured capital. On the other hand when increases in interest rates or default risks lower the market values of assets below their book values institutions can retain those assets on their books at book value Troubled institutions seeking to raise the accounting value of their capital can issue new debt the market value of which at issuance is also book value. The funds raised can then be used to buy back a larger book-value amount of the institution 's previously outstanding debt since the market value of that debt is below its book value due to the institution 's troubled condition. That " refinancing " makes the accounting value of capital rise since the book value of liabilities falls The decline in interest rates after could not ( and did not ) restore the industry 's health. Just as the rise in interest rates on new mortgages above rates on existing fixed-rate mortgages provided homeowners with an incentive to keep their mortgages longer the decline in mortgage rates provided an incentive for homeowners to refinance by taking out new lower interest rate mortgages and paying off their outstanding mortgages. In for example nearly half of the mortgages originated by thrift institutions were refinancings. By the fraction of mortgage debtors who had refinanced was more than double its level. Such refinancings reduced the costs to borrowers but also reduced the income of lenders Thus S&Ls did not gain as much when interest rates fell as they lost when interest rates rose Deposit Rate Deregulation and Lending Liberalization As noted earlier the elimination of interest rate ceilings allowed S&Ls to pay higher interest rates on deposits and thus slowed the flow of funds out of the thrifts. To reduce the thrifts ' problems associated with being heavily concentrated in long-term fixed-rate mortgages the Congress relaxed restrictions on the ability of federally chartered S&Ls to engage in consumer business and commercial real estate lending. Adjustable-rate home mortgages were also permitted. State-chartered S&Ls in some States were given greater freedom by their regulators to operate in nontraditional spheres These changes were designed to enhance the industry 's health by permitting S&Ls to compete more effectively for deposits to diversify across a broader set of assets and to reduce their exposure to interest rate risk. Though these changes were generally beneficial to S&Ls subsequent events showed the danger of giving new unfamiliar powers to weak or insolvent institutions Many blamed this deregulation and liberalization for causing the S&L crisis that emerged in the late 1980s. However S&Ls had suffered substantial economic losses before much of the significant deregulation of deposit interest rates and the loosening of lending restrictions in the 1980s. Many of the S&Ls that later failed were already economically insolvent before this deregulation and liberalization. In fact the deregulation and loosening arose largely in response to the severe problems S&Ls were having. As discussed later insolvent firms had especially great incentives to pursue the risky ventures newly open to them. Failing to provide appropriate supervision in the light of the S&Ls ' enhanced opportunities to make risky investments proved to be a costly mistake INSOLVENCY AND CLOSURE The combination of high interest rates and loss of deposits to money market funds created liquidity problems for many S&Ls which found it increasingly difficult to meet withdrawal demands These thrifts could have raised funds by selling existing mortgages ; however accounting principles would have required the thrifts to recognize the loss taken on mortgages sold. Doing so would have forced economically insolvent institutions into actual insolvency ( based on book-value measures of capital ) Thus if an S&L did not sell its mortgages it would have to be closed for not meeting depositor withdrawal demands. If it did sell its mortgages and recognize its economic losses it would have to be closed for not meeting its capital requirements Rather than force the closure of a substantial portion of the S&L industry the Congress authorized various actions by regulatory agencies to assist troubled institutions and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board the chief regulator of S&Ls changed the regulatory accounting procedures used to measure capital. However by allowing S&Ls to amortize their mortgage losses over several years instead of recognizing those losses immediately regulators did not eliminate the problem but merely postponed it. One study claims almost half of the insolvent thrift institutions at the end of had already been insolvent under the accounting measures that regulators had abandoned for years or more Another reaction to the inadequate levels of capital was also controversial. Given the increased risk of insolvency the Federal Home Loan Bank Board would have been justified in setting higher minimum capital ratios. Higher ratios would have protected the deposit insurance fund and the public against the increased interest rate risk. Instead the bank board lowered the minimum capital ratios required. In early minimum capital requirements were more than percent of liabilities. They were lowered in late and again in to percent of liabilities. A number of regulations were also adopted that further reduced the stringency of capital requirements Even when the regulatory accounting measures did indicate that minimum capital standards were being violated closure did not always occur. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board ran into resistance when S&L lobbying diluted and delayed legislation providing funds for FSLIC to close insolvent thrifts. In addition budgetary stringency did not provide sufficient examination and supervision staff and resources to keep pace with the unfolding crisis. In the Chairman of the Bank Board testified to the Congress that lack of funds prevented his agency from dealing with almost problem S&Ls Incentives of Undercapitalized Institutions The price that banks and thrifts pay for deposit insurance unlike the premiums paid for other types of insurance does not take into account the financial position or financial health of the individual institution that holds the insured deposits. The premium does not vary with the riskiness of the assets held by the institution and is the same whether the institution is financially sound or near collapse. Such fixed-price insurance gives bank and thrift owners an incentive to take risks since neither depositors nor the deposit insurer needs to be compensated for risk So long as an institution is well-capitalized its owners are unlikely to take imprudent risks since their own funds are at stake That changes as an institution becomes undercapitalized. No longer having significant ( or perhaps any ) equity owners have little to lose. If the S&L becomes insolvent the owners will eventually be forced to surrender ownership and any remaining assets of the S&L will be used to pay off depositors. In such cases some owners might decide that risky investments are worth a gamble for if the investments are profitable enough to return the institution to economic health the owners retain the net worth of the S&L. If the investment fails the deposit insurer will repay any losses on insured deposits. The closer an institution comes to insolvency the more rewards become one-sided : Heads the S&L owners win ; tails the deposit insurer loses Many economically insolvent institutions expanded at phenomenal rates doubling or tripling their assets every year in attempts to regain solvency. The worse off the thrift the higher the rate of return that is needed to return to economic health. That was a principal attraction of investing in risky ventures : the greater the possibility of high rewards the greater the possibility of recovery In fact it was inadequately capitalized S&Ls that ventured most heavily into higher risk investments Undertaking such a strategy required that funds be raised to invest. Federally guaranteed deposit insurance enabled undercapitalized but still operating S&Ls to retain and attract the funds required to invest in high risk ventures at nearly default-free interest rates. Whether economically solvent or not insured institutions could attract virtually unlimited funds by offering sufficiently high interest rates on their federally insured deposit accounts. The safety of the deposits was altered neither by undercapitalization nor by the riskiness of the investments they funded Estimates of the Cost Some gained and some lost from the S&L crisis but the cost to the public as a whole was large. The inflation-induced rise in interest rates that reduced the value of the S&Ls ' mortgages bestowed gains of equal value on their borrowers by reducing the real value of mortgage payments. Depositors also benefited as the level of deposit rates at all institutions were bid up by the attempts of insolvent thrifts to garner more funds If some investors acquired insolvent institutions from the government for " below-market " prices then wealth was also transferred from the public to those investors. And unfortunately there is the reality of ill-gotten gains. By the end of the Department of Justice had obtained nearly convictions in major fraud cases in connection with the S&L crisis The cost to the public of resolving the crisis will be spread over several years. Who bears that burden depends on how the Federal spending and tax programs are changed to absorb those costs. The Administration cost estimate of $ billion to $ billion ( including pre-1989 costs ) is considerably below the $ billion to $ billion estimates that others have reported. The huge difference is entirely illusory for these two estimates refer to different calculations of the same cost to the public. The former estimates how much it would cost to resolve the S&L crisis completely now. The latter estimates are obtained by adding up all the future repayments required on the bonds that must be issued to fund the current cost. Such an estimate would be akin to claiming that a 10percent 30-year $ home mortgage costs $ which in fact is the undiscounted sum of the repayments required by that mortgage RESOLVING THE S&L CRISIS The Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of ( FIRREA ) originally proposed by the President sought to minimize present costs of past difficulties and to prevent future crises. Though it did not finish the task of financial reform and rebuilding FIRREA achieved a number of important objectives. It preserved the integrity of the deposit insurance system by ensuring that depositors lost none of their federally insured funds ; set limits on the activities of inadequately capitalized institutions ; established and provided for funding the Resolution Trust Corporation so that it could quickly begin to reorganize economically insolvent institutions ; and established the Office of Thrift Supervision within the Department of the Treasury to replace the Federal Home Loan Bank Board as the chief regulator of S&Ls. It established the Savings Association Insurance Fund within the FDIC to replace the insolvent FSLIC. In addition the law strengthened criminal and civil sanctions for illegal activities involving financial institutions Perhaps most importantly FIRREA raised the minimum capital requirements for federally insured savings institutions so that S&Ls will have to meet capital requirements no less stringent than those for national banks. Capital at these levels will provide a legitimate and substantial buffer between thrifts and the deposit insurance fund. Further in December the Office of Thrift Supervision proposed that the capital requirement for a thrift reflect its exposure to interest rate risk. If implemented that requirement would give thrifts an incentive to reduce their interest rate risk exposure SUMMARY S&Ls have faced problems since interest rates began to rise in the mid-1960s. Contrary to what is often asserted their problems did not originate with deposit-rate deregulation or liberalized lending restrictions Meeting the more stringent capital requirements called for in FIRREA will provide the deposit insurance fund and the public with a buffer against future difficulties REFORM IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR The financial sector provides services that are essential for economic growth and thus it is important for this sector to operate effectively. Reform required to ensure that the financial system functions smoothly and efficiently is well under way. The Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of was only the first step in this program. The Federal Credit Reform Act of enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of will help the government make better use of the resources it puts into its Federal credit programs while comprehensive re- forms recently proposed by the Administration if enacted will substantially alter the role the Federal Government plays as regulator of depository institutions and insurer of their deposits CONTEXT FOR DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION REFORM Since the insurance program and many of the rules regulating banks and thrifts were drawn up during the Great Depression dramatic developments have changed the financial sector. Many of the conditions that created the problems of the 1930s no longer exist today. More efficient means of addressing those that still remain may now be available. Moreover any regulatory reform should allow the market to play its role in efficiently allocating resources The goal of reforming banks and thrifts should be to ensure that the financial system is efficient competitive and free from the danger of disruptive panics. The reforms of the 1930s succeeded in eliminating panics but the constraints those reforms created and under which banks and thrifts still operate hinder their efficiency and competitiveness in today 's environment As a general rule government intervention in the private sector may be appropriate when the market fails that is when competitive private markets do not exist or can not function well. A market failure alone however does not necessarily justify government action. Regulation should also pass cost-benefit tests and be carefully designed to provide strong incentives for efficiency. Otherwise the cure may end up being worse than the corresponding disease Reform of depository institutions must be considered in the proper context. The right to operate a depository institution comes with both benefits and costs. It is important to think about these costs and benefits both within the competitive framework of banking and in the broader context of the entire financial sector. Relative to nonbanking firms banks and thrifts have certain advantages : access to Federal deposit insurance to the payments system that provides rapid check clearing and to borrowing from the Federal Reserve. However they are also required by the Federal Reserve to hold reserves that do not pay interest and are constrained in their activities by laws and regulation If banks and thrifts faced no competition from outside banking vigorous competition within banking would result in any net benefit or cost being transferred to the consumers of financial services Thus a net benefit would accrue only to individual institutions with local monopoly power associated with a bank or thrift charter However banks and thrifts also compete with other members of the financial sector which requires that a delicate balance be maintained as the financial sector evolves. If the benefits and costs associated with the right to operate a depository institution result in a net benefit relative to nonbanking firms depository institutions will have an advantage relative to those firms making it difficult for the nonbanking firms to compete. However if the result is a net cost relative to nonbanking firms depository institutions will have difficulty competing The banking reforms of the 1930s may have initially tipped the scales in favor of depository institutions. They faced little competition for savings or intermediated lending from other institutions Moreover limitations on competition and restrictions on entry generally made banks and thrifts profitable but these limitations also allowed inefficient institutions to survive. They were less profitable than efficient providers of banking services but facing limited competition they could still continue to operate The proof is in the numbers. In any competitive industry one would normally expect to see new firms entering the industry and inefficient firms failing. In banking the failure rate was remarkably low for many years. Between and the annual failure rate of commercial and industrial enterprises was more than times higher than the failure rate for commercial banks. The low failure rate in banking is consistent with low levels of competition and the survival of inefficient institutions The evolution of the financial sector and reductions in impediments to competition in banking have greatly reduced if not eliminated any advantage banking institutions may have had in the past. In an increasingly competitive environment inefficient banks and thrifts will not survive. Many will be absorbed by better-managed institutions. Others will fail. Thus it should not be surprising to see an increase in the rate of consolidation and even failures as competition increases. Consolidation of banking or the potential failure of inefficient depository institutions should not be used as a justification to avoid comprehensive reform. Faced with continued competition from nonbank financial institutions an inefficient banking system will be neither safe nor sound in the long run ISSUES IN DEPOSIT INSURANCE REFORM President Franklin Roosevelt was one of many who initially opposed the creation of a Federal deposit insurance system for fear that it would encourage excessively risky bank operations. " The minute the Government starts to do that the Government runs into a probable loss " Roosevelt said. " We do not wish to make the United States Government liable for the mistakes and errors of individual banks and put a premium on unsound banking in the future/1 Roosevelt 's fears were unfounded in the years following enactment of the insurance program. With only limited competition banks and thrifts had little reason to pursue excessively risky strategies. Limited competition increased profitability and the value of holding a bank or thrift charter. Excessively risky strategies put this value at risk and therefore were not generally pursued As competition increased however profit opportunities for banks and thrifts eroded and the value of their charters decreased causing a gradual decline of the economic capital in depository institutions. High interest rates accelerated the decline of economic capital among S&Ls. For banks the erosion of economic capital has been more gradual and less severe. In fact most banks have substantial tangible capital and remain well-capitalized. Nonetheless losses in economic capital due to the deterioration of charter value combined with deposit insurance premiums that are insensitive to risk-taking have given weak banks increased incentives to take undue risks. With less to lose they are willing to take greater risks In most industries incentives to take excessive risks are kept in check by the market. The cost of capital for firms pursuing risky strategies increases. This mechanism operates weakly in banking since banks are largely financed through insured deposits. The government guarantee virtually eliminates any concern insured depositors might have about the actual operations of a bank or thrift Thus these investors in a bank or thrift offer no discipline to the managers. This lack of market discipline not only makes it easier for poorly managed institutions to operate it also makes business difficult for prudent managers who compete with poorly managed institutions for both loans and deposits Pros and Cons of a Federal Role in Deposit Insurance Deposit insurance is generally recognized as having been quite successful in eliminating banking panics and the credit contractions and recessions associated with such panics. However some have argued that the current problems in the banking and thrift industries reflect a fundamental danger in having the Federal Government extend a broad blanket of protection over deposits a danger that can only be eliminated by curtailing the government 's role These observers contend that well-organized political pressures to forbear in closing insolvent institutions to extend the insurance guarantee to uninsured depositors and to underprice coverage all undermine regulatory supervision. In the long run they argue the nature of our political process and its incentives for government policymakers are inconsistent with a sound insurance operation. In this view the recently exposed flaws in Federal deposit insurance policies are no accident. They reflect a basic bias in the political process Another argument made against Federal deposit insurance is that government regulation and supervision are inherently less effective than market forces in balancing risk with depositor protection. Although regulators may be competent dedicated and wellintentioned their incentives to monitor banking institutions carefully are unlikely to match the incentives for monitoring that the private sector is able to generate. Moreover private market participants are unlikely to be subject to political pressure that may result in costly delays or inaction Supporters of continued Federal involvement in deposit insurance argue that because the potential liabilities are so large only Federal insurance is credible. Depositors they say simply will not be so certain that the private market will be able to guarantee their deposits and that uncertainty can lead to the kind of bank panics that the Federal deposit insurance system has so successfully eliminated. It is also argued that a private deposit insurance system would not appropriately assess the risks to check clearing and interbank fund transfer systems and to the overall economy that might be associated with the forced closure of very large institutions These analysts also argue that the lack of market discipline inherent in deposit insurance can be adequately controlled while retaining the Federal guarantee. They believe that the deficiencies in the current system can be corrected by improving oversight and supervision by offsetting incentives to take undue risks with stronger penalties for excessive risk-taking by requiring banks and thrifts to hold more capital and by intervening sooner to minimize losses at failing institutions Many other nations also have deposit insurance systems but there are significant differences in form and some systems are even administered by the private sector ( Box ) Because many of the systems are relatively new and have not faced a severe test it is difficult to compare the efficacy of alternative systems Should Some Banks Be Considered Too Big to Fail ? Some observers argue that the Nation 's largest banks are too big to fail. A run by uninsured depositors on the largest banks would have consequences for the overall economy so severe that they outweigh all other considerations they argue. The principal concerns are systemic problems associated with the payments system and the possibility that such a run on a large institution may lead to runs by uninsured depositors on other large institutions. Hence if one of the largest banks were to become insolvent these observers would advocate protecting both insured and uninsured depositors while the owners would lose their investment in and control over the bank Box ^ ^ Alteiiative National Deposit Insurance Systems At least ! ^ | members of the Organization for Eco8 | p nomic Development have national deposit insurance sj ^ ^ ^ i | | lfew of them work exactly like the Federal Deposit Ins ^ ij ^ ^ ^ ^ l ^ ioration in the United States There are broad rotes of the systems who administers them the ; ; ^ i | ^ ^ coverage and 'membership and : ; : : : fanding ^ in ^ i ^ ^ ? fS ^ ' ' ' Deposit ipystems are administered in three differ * ent ways/ the FDIC * are officially sponsored and administered l ^ li ^ ^ ^ rnment. Generally other governmentsponsored &t $ jjg ^ systems do some regulation but they 4o iof tove the extensive supervisory and examination roleslif Ifie RDIC * There is wide variation in the degree of autonomy lasurance agencies have from the central bank and t ^ eaipry tor finance ministry. Privately administered insurance ; ar& about as common as government ^ sponsored systeittft-A few countries maintain systems that are jointly managed fe ^ ^ fip ^ blic and private sectors The majoriip of national deposit insurance systems have some fixed eefliifr ; : tif coverage for deposits * Most systems have a lower the United States. Some nations such as the United use a system in which only a fraction of systems implicitly provide coverage deposits is for u by encouraging mergers between healthy systems are funded in one of two National ways : premiums before any losses are incurred or assessment of members when a loss is incurred The example of the first method ; member banks trlbute a certain percentage of deposits to an each year. The United States has the highest major industrial country that charges premiums makes use of risk-based premiums de * signed to in the financial health of institutions. Some raeeive ' additional financing from central banks | a ^ ammesf or both and most have arrange * ments with governments to borrow funds when needed Others argue that no bank should be considered too big to fail They contend that such a policy weakens the market discipline applied by uninsured depositors and other creditors and thus encourages undue risk-taking by the biggest institutions. This argument implies that the total cost of " bailing out " a large institution on the brink of failure is hard to measure since in addition to the immediate cost of the bailout one must also consider the increase in the potential cost of future bailouts that become more likely as a result of the initial bailout. Opponents of a too-big-to-fail policy also argue that a policy of effectively extending insurance coverage to uninsured depositors of large institutions gives these institutions an unfair advantage over smaller institutions The too-big-to-fail dilemma comes down to a conflict between principle and practicality. If the cost of bailing out an insolvent institution is clearly exceeded by the likely costs to the overall economy of allowing it to fail then even if one agrees in principle that no institution should be considered too big to fail it would be impractical to allow the failure. The key to resolving this conflict is to minimize the costs of such failures. Potential costs associated with systemic risks to the payments system have been greatly reduced by recent improvements in the public and private payment systems. Contagious uninsured depositor runs are less likely if uninsured depositors have confidence in other large banks. Banking reform that provides for the accurate measurement of capital and prompt corrective action before institutions are on the brink of failure should significantly reduce the possibility that the public would lose confidence in several large institutions at the same time DEPOSIT INSURANCE REFORM : INDUCING MARKETBASED INCENTIVES Under the current system of deposit insurance incentives on the part of poorly capitalized banks and thrifts to take undue risks must be constrained by regulation. In essence examiners must question the decisions made by management. Prudent management from the bank or thrift owners ' perspective differs from prudent management from the regulators ' perspective. Regulators want to hold down costs to the insurance fund by minimizing the likelihood that the institution will fail. Institution owners want to maximize the value of their wealth For weak institutions particularly those on the verge of failure these divergent goals lead to clear conflict between regulators and management and require the imposition of tight and detailed regulatory constraints. The managers are trying to get funds out of the institutions and to the owners while regulators want to keep funds in the institution to reduce the cost of failure to the insurance fund. Managers inevitably have superior information and regulators thus face a task that is both difficult and critical The level of regulation and pressure on regulators might be reduced if the incentives of owners and the deposit insurer were more closely aligned. Before considering possible means to this end it is important to emphasize that a reduction in the regulation of depository institutions does not imply a reduction in their supervision. The distinction needs to be clear. Regulations specify what types of activities institutions can and can not engage in. Supervision entails observing what an institution does but intervening only when the actions taken expose the institution to undue risks that could threaten the solvency of the institution. Thus a healthy well-capitalized institution might be allowed great flexibility but would still be carefully supervised. In fact reduced regulation might on balance entail more not less supervision Limiting the Scope of Deposit Insurance Insured depositors have little incentive to monitor the managers of depository institutions. However uninsured depositors and nondeposit debtors of a bank or thrift do have incentives to monitor managers since their claims on an institution are at risk if the institution fails. The ability and incentive to withdraw funds as riskiness increases serves in turn to discipline managers. Thus one way to increase market discipline is to limit the scope of deposit insurance and thereby force banks and thrifts to rely more heavily on uninsured sources of funds. Limiting the amount of deposits insured would also limit any potential liability of taxpayers if an institution fails Currently deposit insurance covers up to $ per depositor at each institution. By using trust arrangements joint accounts and a variety of other arrangements however a depositor can easily insure many times this limit at a single institution. In addition a depositor can have insured accounts at any number of different institutions. Thus depositors can have considerably more than $ protected by the deposit insurance safety net Several ways of limiting insurance coverage have been suggested First the amount of coverage that a depositor can obtain at any one institution could be limited more effectively. This approach is broadly consistent with the notion that deposit insurance should protect only small depositors. It is also likely to reduce the aggregate amount of insured deposits and thus reduce potential taxpayer liability for failures and increase the use of noninsured sources of funds by banks and thrifts. Uninsured depositors or debtholders would exert beneficial discipline on management. An expanded version of this approach would limit the coverage that a depositor can obtain system-wide. This approach however would present some administrative problems since information on total deposits held by an individual in all insured institutions is not readily available Second institutions could be prohibited from offering interest rates on insured deposits that are significantly higher than market rates on comparable claims such as U.S. Treasury bills. Such a system would not constrain the use of insured deposits by well-cap- italized institutions but it would help prevent weak institutions from gambling for resurrection by using funds obtained by offering above-market rates on insured deposits. Compared with the first approach this approach would probably result in less reduction in the aggregate amount of insured deposits so potential taxpayer liability for failures would be higher and banks and thrifts would rely less on uninsured sources of funds A third approach would effectively require institutions to designate particular assets as collateral for insured deposits. Well-capitalized institutions might be allowed to use almost any type of asset as collateral. Poorly capitalized institutions would be required to use only relatively safe and easily marketed assets as collateral Such a system would not restrict well-capitalized institutions- but would constrain the types of risks poorly capitalized institutions could take using insured deposits It is important that any limitations on the scope of deposit insurance be implemented gradually. Such limitations may reduce the aggregate amount of deposits and thus the funds available for lending by banks and thrifts. Also to the extent insured deposits are replaced by uninsured deposits runs by uninsured depositors may become more likely. Historical experience with rapid reductions in deposits during the " credit crunches " of the 1960s and 1970s and during banking panics that took place before the introduction of Federal deposit insurance shows that rapid contractions in the aggregate amount of deposits can have severe implications for the economy Although alternative sources of funds for borrowers exist these sources can not be expected to grow at the rate that would be required to supplant such a sudden sharp reduction in lending. If banks and thrifts are given time to develop sources of funding other than insured deposits they may continue to compete effectively with a less comprehensive safety net. If that is the case then reducing the scope of deposit insurance coverage may have little effect on aggregate bank and thrift lending. Thus any such reform must be very careful to provide for a gradual phase-in Prompt Closure A second way to tap the forces of market discipline is to close institutions promptly when their capital levels fall to zero. That however is easier said than done. Even though prompt closure may be a goal inaccuracies in the measurement of capital will ultimately make it nearly impossible to know when an institution 's capital reaches exactly zero. Moreover since capital measurement is not an exact science banks and thrifts are very likely to challenge closure decisions involving measured capital levels that are close to zero. The process of prompt closure is more likely to succeed to the extent capital measurement is accurate The more extensive use of subordinated debt by banks and thrifts would also facilitate prompt closure of insolvent institutions. In the event of bankruptcy claims of subordinated debtholders are honored only after those of uninsured depositors general creditors and the deposit insurer. If an institution with subordinated debt were to fail the deposit insurer would pay off insured depositors or transfer them to another institution along with cash or assets to compensate the receiving institution for its new deposit liabilities The proceeds from the sale of the remaining assets would then be used to pay off the general creditors the uninsured depositors and the deposit insurer. After they were all paid anything left would go to the holders of subordinated debt Well-managed and well-capitalized banks and thrifts would be able to issue subordinated debt on reasonable terms but institutions that followed risky or careless strategies would only be able to issue such bonds at very high rates of interest. Thus the cost of these funds would be responsive to how well a bank or thrift was being managed. Since they would suffer losses before the deposit insurer subordinated debtholders would exert discipline on management that would be consistent with the protection of the deposit insurance fund. Moreover they would provide a countervailing force to offset political pressure on regulators to forbear. In essence holders of subordinated debt would represent a market force that would help ensure safety and soundness in the banking system by rewarding good management and penalizing poor management Private Reinsurance of Deposits A third way to induce market discipline is to set up a system in which the private sector would reinsure a fraction of deposits. The Administration has recommended that the FDIC adopt a demonstration project to determine the feasibility of privately reinsuring deposits. Such a system would introduce private monitoring of risks and market incentives into both the determination of deposit insurance premiums and closure decisions. Under such an arrangement private insurers would bid for the right to cover a pro rata fraction ( perhaps or percent ) of depositor losses for a given institution and the government insurance fund would cover the remainder The percentage of private deposit insurance could vary inversely with institution size so that the amount of deposits privately insured in any one institution would be of sufficient size to warrant careful monitoring by the private insurer but not so large as to limit severely the pool of firms that could provide insurance The government fund would set its premium for each institution after considering the premium rate charged by the private insurer and thereby benefit from the pricing analysis performed by the private market. The terms of the private insurance contract would allow readjustment of insurance premiums if the riskiness of the insured institution changed. When a private insurer altered its premium the Federal insurer could follow. To reduce the cost of providing insurance private reinsurers presumably would share information obtained in supervisory examinations Private reinsurance of deposits might be one way to capture many of the benefits claimed for private insurance. Independent sources of private capital would be at risk and thus market forces would be involved in both monitoring bank and thrift performance and setting premiums. Of course if private insurers are to have the appropriate incentives in assessing the risks inherent in insuring deposits they must expect to bear the full cost of any mistakes they might make in assessing the financial condition of the institutions they reinsure. Thus private deposit insurers would have to be required to be very well-capitalized Private insurers would also have incentives to develop accounting and control systems that would minimize the cost of deposit insurance. Market signals of growing problems at an institution also could be used to trigger government interventions up to and including closure A considerable benefit from this system would be the interaction between the private and public sector insurers. This interaction may facilitate the evolution of banking. As the private insurers gain experience in assessing and monitoring the risks faced by depository institutions they in conjunction with the government insurer might propose innovative new insurance products. These products might trade off premium rates with restrictions on banking activities closure policies or asset portfolio choices. For example an insured institution might commit to avoid certain risky practices in exchange for lower insurance premium rates. Instead of expending energy trying to circumvent regulations part of the private sector would have the incentive to try to design efficient regulatory schemes REMOVING REGULATORY OBSTACLES The high levels of inflation and resulting high interest rates that were the primary cause of the S&L crisis did not have a similar effect on banks. Because the loans they made were usually shortterm and had adjustable interest rates banks were not very exposed to interest rate risk and thus were not hurt significantly when rates rose. The recent downturn in the economy and in particular real estate has taken its toll on banks and has resulted in some failures. Moreover the rate of bank failures rose throughout the preceding economic expansion. Given increased competition in banking a rise in the failure rate is not surprising. But continued stress within the system indicates that it is time for a reevaluation of existing regulation of depository institutions Safety and Soundness Through Interstate Banking One of the most obvious ways to increase the safety and soundness of banks and thrifts is to allow them to spread their risks by diversifying their loan portfolios. However laws and regulations restricting interstate banking and branching inhibit this diversification The rationale behind restrictions on interstate banking is similar to the rationale against branch banking within States. Rural communities have traditionally opposed branching because they feared that urban branch banks would funnel deposits from rural into urban areas leaving rural areas with no sources of loans. Likewise States did not want national banks to ship deposits to neighboring States Restrictions on branching and interstate banking however have not kept deposits from flowing across community and even State borders. Although smaller community banks and thrifts do lend locally on average they find that they take in more deposits than they can lend profitably. Instead of making unprofitable loans locally these institutions lend some funds to larger institutions which in turn use these funds to finance loans elsewhere. Regardless of branching restrictions banks and thrifts only make loans that appear to be profitable. Likewise large institutions do not forgo profitable lending opportunities just because they are in small communities Geographic restrictions not only have failed to serve their intended purpose but they have occasionally hurt the local communities they were meant to protect. When local economies are hit by periodic economic downturns local banks and thrifts suffer loan losses which reduce their capital and consequently require them to contract their lending. If local banks or thrifts are the only sources for loans even for borrowers who are still in good financial condition this contraction in lending might exacerbate the local economic downturn. On the other hand a well-diversified bank or thrift could easily absorb loan losses in a single community and thus continue to be able to lend to creditworthy borrowers there Many of these geographic restrictions are gradually being eroded. At the end of all but four of the States allowed bank holding companies of other ( but not necessarily all ) States to acquire banks in their State. Most of these laws extend such opportunities after a specified date to banks from any State that offers reciprocal treatment. Important limitations on interstate branching still exist however. Although a holding company may own banks in several States each bank must be separately organized and capitalized. This limitation creates redundant costs and reduces the benefits of geographic diversification. To the extent that interstate branching restrictions still prevent banks and thrifts from diversifying efficiently they are obstacles to the efficiency profitability safety and soundness of the financial sector. Accordingly the Administration will propose legislation to allow interstate banking and branching Improving Efficiency in Financial Services It is impossible in the United States for consumers to obtain a full range of financial services from any single institution. Continuing Federal constraints bar depository institutions from offering certain financial services and prohibit nonbank financial service companies from offering deposit and checking services. A company that wants to raise money may go to its banker for a loan but has to go to an investment bank for help in issuing new equity Other industrialized countries have financial systems that are more integrated than that of the United States. Germany for example has more than " universal " banks which are allowed to offer a full range of banking and financial services. These institutions may accept deposits make consumer and commercial loans underwrite and trade securities and provide investment counseling. The United Kingdom also has a universal banking system Many British banks form subsidiaries for certain activities but bank solvency is usually assessed on a consolidated basis. In contrast to the U.S. banking system British and German banks are not required to use a holding company structure or " firewalls " between departments performing diverse functions. Under the Second Banking Directive of the European Community ( EC ) EC banks will be able to operate throughout the Community after which is expected to spread the practice of universal banking throughout Europe The Administration believes that to remain competitive in the world market for financial services U.S. financial firms must be able to affiliate in financial service holding companies and be allowed to offer a full menu of financial services. Potential synergistic relations among affiliates that might lead to more efficient delivery of financial services by eliminating redundant costs should not be constrained. However different financial affiliates in the same holding company should be separately capitalized and their financial ties should be sufficiently segregated so that any problems that might arise in one affiliate do not spill over into the others. In particular depository affiliates must be structured so that depositors and the deposit insurance fund are insulated from risks taken by other affiliates of the holding company. In constructing such legal firewalls it is important that the synergistic benefits of offering full product lines are not lost in the process Commercial firms offer a potentially large source of new capital and innovative ideas to a restructured financial services industry Commercial firms are already allowed to affiliate with savings and loans. It has been argued that potential synergies and efficiencies can be gained from combining commercial firms with other financial institutions For example banking relies heavily on information processing Competitive banks and thrifts in the future will inevitably depend on advanced information processing technology. The affiliation of depository institutions with firms with expertise in information processing would likely lead to improvements in the information processing technology upon which banks rely. More advanced automated teller machines increased use of optical scanners in check processing and closer monitoring of information related to outstanding loans are just a few of many potential advances Historically commercial affiliation with banks has been resisted for two primary reasons : fear that economic power would become too concentrated and concern that financial problems in the commercial firm could jeopardize the safety and soundness of the bank These concerns have been heightened by the recognition that banking regulators could not be expected to monitor effectively the activities of commercial firms While these concerns are legitimate a total prohibition of affiliation between commercial firms and banks is not warranted. The Administration proposes to allow commercial firms to affiliate with banks. Concerns regarding commercial affiliation would be addressed by constructing legal firewalls and by monitoring and regulating the transactions between the commercial firm and the bank In particular the bank 'and the commercial company would be barred from engaging in financial dealings that could be construed as indirectly providing the commercial company benefits arising from the bank 's access to Federal deposit insurance FEDERAL CREDIT PROGRAMS The Federal Government is the country 's largest supplier or guarantor of credit. By it had $ billion in outstanding direct loans $ billion in outstanding guarantees of loans made by private lenders and $ billion in outstanding loans or guarantees made by government-sponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) privately funded businesses that make or repackage and sell loans in specific markets. Measured in net terms ( loans minus repayments ) Federal loans and guarantees accounted for percent of all funds raised in the United States in fiscal The bulk of Federal credit supports housing while smaller amounts are directed toward agriculture business and education The vehicles for providing Federal credit have changed substantially in the last decade. Federal loan guarantees and GSE credit market activities increased over the 1980s while direct Federal lending fell substantially. As recently as $ billion in new direct loans were made ; by the end of the volume of direct loans had declined percent The Need for Federal Credit Reform Important reforms in the Federal Government 's direct role in credit markets occurred in Before the reforms the deficit or surplus figures in the Federal budget never recorded the true costs of Federal credit programs. Because credit budgeting was based on cash flows a direct loan was treated just like an expenditure even though a loan that did not default unlike an expenditure would be repaid in subsequent years. These repayments were then recorded as collections when they were received Loan guarantees an alternative way to provide credit assistance did not appear to cost the government anything at the time the guarantee was made. Since no initial outlays were associated with a guarantee it was not reflected in the budget unless the borrower defaulted and then only in the year of the default. This treatment of credit programs in budget accounting along with increasing pressure to reduce the Federal deficit partially explains the shift in emphasis from direct to guaranteed loans since the mid-1980s As long ago as the President 's Commission on Budget Concepts recognized that the budget did not adequately measure the costs of Federal credit activity. The Commission recommended that the budget include only the subsidy cost of direct loans rather than their disbursements and subsequent repayments. Thus if the full costs of a loan including expected default and administrative costs as well as the government 's interest costs were expected to be completely repaid the loan would be recorded as an expenditure of zero. However because it was believed that financial techniques were not able to measure subsidies accurately this recommendation was never fully implemented and was soon abandoned entire- ly Because the budget has not explicitly reflected the subsidies associated with loan programs at the time credit is extended few attempts have been made to compare the costs and benefits of Federal credit programs with each other or with other programs. There are some warning signs however that these programs may have problems. In the government added a significant amount of capital to and restructured the bankrupt Farm Credit System. Student loan defaults reached percent in fiscal and Veterans Administration loan defaults have more than tripled from fiscal to fiscal In the General Accounting Office ( GAO ) reported that Federal Housing Administration losses were five times higher than their fiscal financial statements had estimated Previous Federal accounting and administrative practices may have hindered effective oversight of credit programs. Some agencies rolled over their debt paying off delinquent loans by issuing new loans. Other loans were kept on the books long after the borrower had defaulted. Some Federal lenders were audited only infrequently. Until a recent GAO audit for example FHA books had not had a complete outside audit for years The Federal Credit Reform Act of The Federal Credit Reform Act of which the Administration strongly supported is intended to measure more accurately the costs of Federal credit programs make the budgetary treatment of credit programs equivalent to that of other Federal spending match benefits to the needs of borrowers and improve resource allocation among credit programs and between credit and other spending programs. Under the new law subsidy costs are separated from the unsubsidized cash flows of Federal credit programs and for the first time the subsidies and only the subsidies are included in the budget Beginning in the government will maintain three types of accounts for each Federal credit program : liquidating program and financing accounts. The liquidating account will display cash flows for loans obligated or guarantees committed before fiscal and thus will not be subject to reformed budgetary treatment. The program account will display the subsidy costs and administrative expenses of new loans and guarantees and the nonbudgetary financing account will record the cash flows associated with this new credit. Separate financing accounts will be maintained for direct loans and loan guarantees. The costs of new loans and guarantees measured in the program accounts will be included in the budget The Credit Reform Act will place the costs of credit programs on equal footing with direct expenditures. That will help policymakers make the best use of Federal resources. In addition this reform will help Federal agencies operate credit programs on a more fiscally prudent basis Reforms of Government-Sponsored Enterprises Other new legislation passed in began the process of reforming GSEs. The activities of GSEs are often closely related to other Federal credit programs. For example a large GSE the Student Loan Marketing Association or " Sallie Mae/ ' purchases federally guaranteed student loans from private lenders and sells new securities based on these loans. By converting private contracts into securities available to the general public and by providing subsidies GSEs increase the amount of capital available to finance investment in the relevant markets particularly housing and education though they also presumably displace some private financing that would otherwise be available. In some cases GSEs have also played an important role in bringing new financial instruments to the market GSEs benefit from their special relationship with the government. Although debt securities of the GSEs and their securitized loans receive no explicit government guarantee their Federal charter and other privileges lead to a perception that the government would come to their rescue in time of trouble. The government has not discouraged this perception and has reinforced it by its response to the financial troubles of the Farm Credit System. This implicit guarantee allows GSEs to borrow at low interest rates near those of Treasury securities. In addition some GSEs are exempt from the Federal corporate income tax most are exempt from State and local income taxes and most do not have to register with the Securities and Exchange Commission There are certain parallels between GSEs and the thrift industry. At the end of GSE liabilities were roughly the same size as savings and loan deposits. GSEs and thrifts benefit from implicit or explicit government guarantees of their liabilities which allow them to borrow substantial amounts with only a very small base of equity. GSEs have some of the lowest capital ratios of any domestic financial intermediaries. Like thrifts GSEs are legally required to serve the credit needs of particular markets and they are unable to diversify their investments among different sectors of the economy Despite these similarities GSEs thus far have shown few signs of trouble perhaps because most were not as exposed as S&Ls were to losses caused by increases in interest rates. Nevertheless the Administration recognizing that GSEs have the potential for problems has taken several steps to ensure that they remain financially sound. In May the Department of the Treasury proposed four principles to govern GSEs : They should maintain adequate capital ; they should be sound enough to achieve the equivalent of an AAA bond rating in the absence of any implicit guarantee ; the government should eliminate any potential conflicts of interest in GSE regulation ; and GSEs should disclose the economic value of their relationship to the Federal Government The Budget Enforcement Act of takes additional steps to ensure the financial soundness of GSEs. The Treasury Department is required to submit a study along with proposed legislation by April This study will provide an objective assessment of the financial soundness of GSEs the adequacy of the existing regulatory structure the financial exposure of the Federal Government and the effects of GSEs on Treasury borrowing. The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) is also required to present a report by the same date. The CBO study will focus on many of the same issues and report on alternative regulatory and oversight mechanisms for GSEs. By September the committees of jurisdiction must report legislation in the House of Representatives to ensure the financial soundness of GSEs and to minimize the possibility that a GSE might require future government assistance. The Senate will then do the same. Finally the President 's annual budget message must include an analysis of the financial condition of GSEs and the financial risks to the government posed by GSEs SUMMARY Legislative reform that recognizes the rapidly changing nature of the financial sector is essential to ensure a sound and safe financial system Comprehensive reform of financial institutions is needed to increase the flexibility and competitiveness of the financial system A financial sector that is inefficient and inflexible can not meet the overall needs of the economy. Financial institutions must be free to exploit synergies and economies of scale and scope where they exist Regulatory reform should be adaptable to future changes in the economic environment. Market forces should be harnessed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the financial system The November budget law substantially reforms the budgeting for Federal credit programs altering the treatment of direct and guaranteed loans and taking steps to reduce the potential risks to taxpayers from GSEs CONCLUSION The financial sector is faced with a number of challenges that have arisen in recent years as the economic environment has changed. The unexpectedly high inflation in the 1970s and the resulting rise in interest rates represented a significant shock to the financial system ; together these factors were the primary underlying cause of the S&L crisis. Reform of the S&L industry has been initiated with the FIRREA law The recent budget agreement included important provisions to ensure that Federal credit programs use their resources more efficiently. The Treasury Department is preparing a proposal to ensure that GSEs remain financially sound The financial sector has made essential contributions to economic growth and development throughout the history of the Nation To allow the sector to continue to thrive and to play a vital role in future economic growth significant reform of the regulatory struc- ture governing the financial sector is necessary. The Department of the Treasury 's recently released study of Federal deposit insurance and regulatory reform discusses these issues in detail. The Administration 's legislative proposals reflect the findings of that study and the policy principles outlined in this report and discussed in this chapter Comprehensive reform requires the reform of deposit insurance and the removal of regulatory obstacles that hamper the flexibility efficiency profitability and safety of banks and thrifts. Deposit insurance should be structured to increase market discipline which leads to prudent management of banks and thrifts. The Administration proposes to remove obstacles to interstate banking and branching that effectively make banks and thrifts less safe by constraining their ability to diversify their loan portfolios and sources of deposits. Constraints on combinations of various types of financial service firms hamper efficiency by necessitating parallel facilities that create redundant costs. These constraints reduce the flexibility and competitiveness of U.S. institutions in the global arena and should also be eliminated CHAPTER Economies in Transition Around the World THE REMARKABLE WORLDWIDE MOVEMENT toward reliance on competitive market forces continued during Fundamental reforms were put in place in several Eastern European countries. Dramatic economic and philosophical transformations were also under way in many nations in the Western Hemisphere Many countries were embracing democracy discarding their centrally controlled or state-dominated economies and moving toward systems in which private ownership of property predominates and most resources are allocated through markets. The pace of change has been great but events in also demonstrated that the task of transforming failed economies is formidable. This chapter focuses on the transformation process as it is unfolding in Eastern Europe and Latin America The transitions under way in Eastern Europe reflect the failure of command systems to provide either political freedom or a decent standard of living. The massive historical experiment conducted throughout the 20th century that contrasted market-oriented and centrally planned economies has ended with the economic failure of communism. A little over three decades ago Nikita Khrushchev then Premier of the Soviet Union boasted " We will bury you/ ' in reference to the alleged superior economic performance of the Soviet Union. Today although accurate comparisons are difficult recent estimates of per capita gross national product ( GNP ) in the Soviet Union have been as low as $ less than one-tenth of per capita GNP in the United States. The contrast between the two systems in Germany is even more stark. Starting from the same point at the end of World War II and sharing a common culture East and West Germany went two different ways. West Germany achieved one of the highest standards of living in the world while East Germany became an industrial wasteland with rundown outmoded factories and a poisoned environment Renewed respect for democracy and market forces is also sweeping the Western Hemisphere. A " quiet revolution " in the way that Latin American policymakers seek solutions to their countries ' complex problems has taken hold. Almost every country in the region has begun to move away from policies pursued for decades that discouraged trade and gave government an extensive role in the economy. Instead they are turning toward economies less controlled by government and more reliant on market forces. The President has recognized the tremendous opportunity presented by these changes with his Enterprise for the Americas Initiative which is aimed at expanding trade investment and growth in the hemisphere as well as with his commitment to conclude a freetrade agreement with Mexico Change also has become apparent in other regions. Nations as diverse as New Zealand Benin and Mongolia engaged in debates about far-reaching market-oriented reforms. Several African countries have adopted programs that encourage private markets and reduce government management of the economy. A push for privatization in the mid-to-late 1980s reversed the trend toward increased state control of the economy in Western Europe with the United Kingdom and France leading the way. The success of the newly industrializing economies of Asia Hong Kong Singapore South Korea and Taiwan has offered strong evidence of the gains from outward-looking policies that reward entrepreneurship These worldwide changes promise to settle intellectual debates that have persisted for decades. During the 1960s and 1970s the " convergence hypothesis " held that the capitalist and communist systems would eventually evolve toward each other with the final result a hybrid of the two systems. In Latin America it was argued that policies that insulated the economy from world markets and expanded the role of government would promote quick industrialization. It is now unmistakably clear that these hypotheses have been rejected. The developed market economies are clearly not evolving toward socialism and the leaders in Eastern Europe and Latin America are not trying to find a hybrid " third way. " These leaders instead push for market-oriented economies with individual choice and private property rights as the foundations of progress and prosperity It is impossible to predict the speed or even the eventual outcome of the reforms now under way. The collapse of communist and military dictatorships presents enormous opportunities to improve living standards for hundreds of millions of people but those opportunities come with no guarantees of quick success. As command systems collapse they must be replaced with systems that provide appropriate incentives to producers and consumers. Fundamental reform needs time to work and dislocations are inevitable Economic change can be difficult even in well-developed market economies as was discussed in Chapter Change is even more difficult when it is dramatic and revolutionary. In emerging democracies economic transformation must make its way within the context of policy debates that accompany the expansion of political freedom. These debates may slow the reform effort at times or even create backlash against the reforming government but they impart legitimacy to the new economic system. If governments are to build and sustain popular support for market-oriented reform there must be widespread understanding of how much there is to gain and realistic expectations about the difficulty of the task ahead. In the longer run history strongly suggests that decentralization of economic power in a free-market economy will support both prosperity and democracy FORCES FOR CHANGE The pressure for market-oriented change was reflected clearly in developments in Eastern Europe and Latin America during and In Eastern Europe closed with Poland and Yugoslavia planning ambitious adjustment programs that were put in place in early and that quickly reduced high inflation rates stabilized foreign exchange rates and eliminated shortages. East and West Germany were unified on October less than a year after the fall of the Berlin Wall in November By the end of both Czechoslovakia and Hungary had announced plans to accelerate their reform efforts. In Latin America Chile 's new democratic government took office in March committed to continuing the country 's program of economic reform. Mexico 's current government accelerated reforms that were begun in the mid-1980s while Argentina Peru Venezuela and a number of other countries initiated significant market-oriented reforms The fall of the Berlin Wall and the events that followed raised hopes and expectations around the world. More than anything else the undying and universal desire for political freedom motivates the tremendous upheaval in Eastern Europe and the ongoing struggle for democracy in Latin America. But the denial of economic freedom also crystallized discontent. The yearning for economic freedom has been evident in the vibrant underground economies of South America where enormous amounts of effort are devoted to avoiding onerous regulations and licensing requirements. The simple freedom to make choices in everyday life has a value beyond its positive effects on living standards THE FAILURE OF ECONOMIC POLICIES A fundamental motivation for change in Eastern Europe and Latin America was the failure of their economies to perform adequately. The economic policies followed in these countries failed because they were unable to provide adequate incentives for producers to supply efficiently the goods and services that consumers wanted to buy. In a well-functioning market economy producers must make goods that consumers want ; otherwise their products go unsold and their businesses fail. Producers also have an incentive to produce those goods efficiently that is at the lowest possible cost for a given quality because they can keep the savings gained by reducing costs. If demand increases prices rise encouraging producers to produce more and consumers to consume less. If demand falls the process happens in reverse. In smoothly functioning markets the price moves to equate at the margin the value consumers place on the goods they purchase with the value of the resources used to produce them. This process repeated for countless goods and services ensures that the economy 's scarce resources are used efficiently to satisfy consumer needs and desires Interference in the operation of the market breaks this crucial link between producer cost and consumer value. In Eastern Europe and Latin America widespread use of price controls reliance on inefficient public enterprises extensive barriers to competition with the rest of the world and government regulation of production and investment have all obstructed the normal operation of markets The lack of enforceable property rights whether through legal restrictions in Eastern Europe or through inadequate protection in Latin America severely limited incentives for entrepreneurs In Eastern Europe production levels were until recently decreed by central plans. Consequently there was no reason to expect that the output produced met the wants or needs of the population Surpluses and shortages occurred regularly but managers had little incentive to adjust their production as long as quotas were met. Government investment choices caused chronic underproduction of consumer goods leading to widespread rationing and long lines at shops. Incentives to innovate were almost completely absent except in the defense sector. But the command economies proved unable to transfer their high levels of defense technology into improvements for consumers Production and investment controls were less extensive in Latin America than in communist regimes but government intrusion into economic decisions was still pervasive. As in Eastern Europe inefficient public monopolies were common and public funds were channeled into favored industries regardless of the economic consequences. High tariffs and nontariff barriers protected inefficient enterprises. The proliferation of government-owned firms combined the natural inefficiency of monopoly with the waste and misallocation too frequently found in public enterprises Price controls and subsidies have been common in both regions Where prices were set administratively they were usually poor guides to the efficient allocation of resources. Price controls on agricultural products have kept food prices down but reduced output Subsidies in Latin America and Eastern Europe have distorted pro- duction and consumption decisions leading to shortages and bottlenecks The prevalence of inefficient public enterprises and unsuccessful attempts to limit subsidies and other expenditures have contributed to large fiscal and external trade imbalances for many Latin American and Eastern European nations. Many of these countries lack a broad-based efficient tax collection system and face limits on the public 's willingness to hold government debt. Borrowing abroad has proven to be no answer : In the absence of sound policies large external debts can result in capital flight and discourage foreign investment where it is desperately needed. Large deficits therefore lead to pressures for excessive money creation eventually causing rampant inflation in most countries Some economies in both regions were also weakened by the burden of high military spending. Although estimates are imprecise perhaps as much as a fifth of the Soviet Union 's output may have been allocated to the defense sector in recent years. This massive effort moreover was ultimately ineffective as free world governments matched or exceeded Soviet capabilities throughout the 1980s REPERCUSSIONS OF ECONOMIC POLICY FAILURES The impact of these policies on living standards was devastating Per capita income in Poland is now estimated by the World Bank to be about $ compared with an average of $ in the major industrial countries. In Argentina and Peru real per capita incomes in were virtually unchanged from levels. Mexican real per capita income grew during most of that period but nonetheless declined after the debt crisis. Meanwhile the newly industrializing economies of Asia followed an export-oriented strategy and real per capita income grew at an average rate of nearly percent a year between and Although some of these Asian governments directed private activity using taxes subsidies and other means such interference was far less extensive than in many other developing countries private entrepreneurship was encouraged and world prices generally guided decisionmaking Over time the weaknesses of the political and economic systems of Eastern Europe and Latin America and the contrasting success of market-oriented economies became readily apparent. Once momentum for fundamental change began to build ideas flowed easily across national borders. The information technology revolution allowed ideas to spread more quickly than ever ( for example most East Germans could receive West German television before the Berlin Wall fell ) and created pressure for change that overwhelmed the communist governments of Eastern Europe EARLY ATTEMPTS AT REFORM As the economic problems in Latin America and Eastern Europe worsened piecemeal reforms were attempted but these efforts were doomed to failure. Many Eastern European countries experimented with reforms that coupled economic decentralization with partial price decontrol. The premise was that with reduced central control state-owned firms would be run as if they were operating in well-functioning markets. Although aggregate planning goals were still announced individual enterprises could set their own planning targets and were made responsible for output decisions and trade in raw materials and other inputs. In addition the system of price controls was made more flexible and some smallscale private enterprise was allowed These early reforms went furthest in Hungary during the 1980s where they helped create a sector of small-scale private businesses They were also attempted to varying degrees in Yugoslavia beginning in the 1950s in Czechoslovakia during and in the Soviet Union beginning in The People 's Republic of China initiated a more comprehensive reshaping of its economy beginning in which also incorporated decentralization relaxation of price controls development of a small private sector significant tax reforms and the partial reopening of the economy to international trade ( Box ) Early reform efforts by Latin American countries typically followed their debt crises of the early 1980s. These reforms concentrated on restoring the confidence of domestic and foreign investors by reducing inflation and the fiscal deficit and improving the trade balance. Argentina and Brazil for example both confronted extremely burdensome external debts recessions and high inflation rates. In response they adjusted their currency exchange rates to make their goods more competitive in world markets and initiated various plans to curb the escalation of wages and prices In both Eastern Europe and Latin America these early efforts failed to produce the desired results in large part because they did not adequately restore or put in place the foundations of well-functioning market economies. Private property rights were generally absent in Eastern Europe severely limiting profit incentives and discouraging entrepreneurship and state-owned monopolies were retained. In Latin America efforts to reduce trade imbalances were not coupled with policies to remove barriers to competition in domestic markets to break up state-owned monopolies or to improve efficiency by privatizing public enterprises. Fiscal deficits continued to run out of control and to generate inflation because enterprises owned and managed by the government had no incentives to control costs and there was capital flight from many countries Bex ~ L Economic Reform in China The People 's Republic of China initiated a comprehensive reshaping of its economy beginning in Reforms began in the agricultural sector and were later extended to the industrial sector. Direct planning controls were relaxed economic decisionmaking was decentralized more private activity was permitted and more prices were allowed to be set in markets. In addition there was a move to open the Chinese economy to world markets. The practice of ordering all firms to remit most of their profits to the state was gradually replaced with a broad-based system of taxes on profit. Low marginal tax rates were used to encourage investment and provide incentives for management and workers to take efficiency4mproving measures Chinese reform produced important successes. Agricultural output grew at an annual rate of percent from to before slowing compared with an annual growth rate of percent from to The share of state enterprises in total production fell from percent to percent between and reflecting the greater dynamism and growth of private enterprises. The share of goods subject to mandatory planning and state-fixed prices fell from two-thirds to one-third by Remaining price controls however reduced the impact of the reforms by distorting the input and production decisions of firms. In some cases local authorities hindered the implementation of reforms. Furthermore the tragic events in Tiananmen Square in June and the ensuing political crackdown led to a slowdown in the pace of reform. In some areas central control was reasserted and the reforms rolled back SUMMARY The trend toward market-based economies stems in part from clear historical evidence that government-dominated economies simply do not work well. Even where markets exist extensive government interference discourages private initiative and can cripple the economy Early attempts at economic reform focused either on decentralizing economic decisionmaking or on macroeconomic stabilization ; they foundered largely because they did not include the positive incentives that come from private ownership and competition PRINCIPLES FOR ECONOMIC REFORM There is no established policy package for reform no universal blueprint exists so each country must design its own transition to a healthy market economy. A growing consensus has emerged however on a number of principles necessary for successful reform : establishing sound fiscal and monetary policies removing domestic price controls opening the economy to international market forces creating property rights and private property promoting domestic competition and reforming and limiting the role of government No modern economy has completed a successful reform implementing all these principles at once. It has been difficult enough for countries to succeed in implementing one or two of them when others were already in place. Latin American countries began their transitions with more of the elements of a market economy than the countries of Eastern Europe. In both regions the pace of events has raised expectations that the transformation can occur quickly and easily but the sheer magnitude of the task indicates that perseverance and patience are required MACROECONOMIC REFORMS Three of these principles establishing sound fiscal and monetary policies removing domestic price controls and opening the economy to international market forces are often described as macroeconomic reforms because they apply to the entire economy They are central to creating the conditions for economic stability They are also essential to successful structural reform in both Eastern Europe and Latin America. In Poland and Yugoslavia macroeconomic reform has succeeded quite rapidly in reducing inflation to lower levels. But implementing these macroeconomic principles is not by itself adequate to produce a healthy market economy Indeed without structural reform to introduce a competitive private sector into the economy macroeconomic reforms will not succeed in restoring sustained growth Macroeconomic reforms can produce rapid output growth when the basic structure of a market economy is in place. That is what happened when the West German economy was rebuilt after World War II ( Box ) The West German program coupled price decontrol and monetary reform. It succeeded almost immediately in increasing economic activity leading the way to the postwar German " economic miracle/ ' Establishing Sound Monetary and Fiscal Policies Any successful reform effort must involve sound monetary and fiscal policies. Otherwise producers and consumers lack a firm basis for planning there is no hope of fostering long-term invest- Erhard Reforms he German economy lay in mm 0f * iM ; hird its level belli ? p ^ uction and trade patterns increased by capital forawtion i ^ pfcion was aggravated pricing controls and uncertainty taefc crowds traveled to the from farmers ; an extensive black replaced currency in many Host currency and tank ac ~ to but debts were In addition price controls were monetaiy pslw w ^ adopted were prodded for in * ^ ^ TI ^ ^ ^ ^ -T-. ^ * ^ rrc ^ them Ludwig Erhard astaWMi ^ sound and stable macroeconomic conditions. Consumer prices increased of but inflation annual rate of just over percent ifeat had b ^ n hoarded or sold only to'tfe ; : ! * ^ generaEy available * Keal industrial production increased percent in the second half of " IMS ^ ^ ^ ^ ' ^ m ^ ^ ^ tl percent annually between aiii ; : ^ M ^ ^ also grew rapidly But the reform was not painless : unemployment rose from percent in the first half of to more than percent in the rrfbtm could not have produced such ixnpres * sive results if West Germany after the war had not had key It had the legal framework necestotact businesses and highly fiscal pdid ^ in place since helped set the stage for the reforms to sue * ceed. In addition the Marshall Plan and private aid from " abroad were critical during the initial reconstruction phase By the early 1950s however foreign aid had diminished ; robust economic growth worldwide and the Korean war stimulated demand for German exports and fueled economic growth ment and economic restructuring in the extremely uncertain climate created by high and volatile inflation One lesson from countries that have successfully ended hyperinflation including West Germany after the war is that strong fiscal discipline is critical to ensure price stability. Otherwise fiscal deficits arise that increase the pressure to print money. Fiscal success of course requires tight controls on government spending and credit policies. In particular the government must limit the subsidies it gives to consumers and to loss-making state enterprises State enterprises must face so-called " hard budget constraints " ; the government must not cover the losses they may incur. Fiscal discipline will then allow the implementation of a monetary policy aimed at preventing excessive money creation and providing a steady supply of credit to the economy Achieving price stability requires establishing effective mechanisms for controlling the growth of money and credit. As a first step this requires central banking reform particularly in Eastern European countries. It is widely agreed that the central bank should have a high degree of independence from the central government so that it can resist political pressures to finance government spending with money creation and can pursue the objective of price stability. Independence could prove particularly important during the transition period when uncertainty and inflation pressures may require a strong anti-inflation stance with tough limits on money growth In addition controlling the growth of money and credit requires a sound banking system as discussed below. Central banks play an important role in monitoring the banking system and in serving as lenders of last resort. Establishing and controlling the total supply of credit to the banking sector will help to ensure that state enterprises face a hard budget constraint. Adequate supervisory capabilities also must be developed early. The collapse of the Chilean financial system in the late 1970s for example had its origins in inadequate supervision of external borrowing and domestic lending by Chilean banks The tax system should be designed to raise revenues so that the printing press is not used to finance necessary government spending Such a tax system should limit distortions to prices and economic incentives. Establishing a broad tax base allows marginal tax rates to be reduced. Tax revenue in Latin America is often generated from only a few sources such as tariffs and can be highly distortionary. An exception is Colombia which has one of the most advanced income tax systems in the developing world with a broadbased value-added tax and sophisticated adjustments for the effects of inflation. Other countries such as Bolivia Chile and Jamaica are now experimenting with broad-based income taxes value-added taxes or excise taxes In Eastern Europe fundamental administrative mechanisms for collecting taxes are largely absent or primitive. The old regime received revenue through its ownership of enterprises and was able to transfer funds through simple accounting entries. As economic decisionmaking was decentralized and private firms increased in importance government revenues deteriorated. Tax and collection systems will need to be established that can generate reliable sources of revenue for the government as the old sources of funding diminish In economies that have suppressed inflation and allocated goods through rationing the stock of domestic monetary assets outstanding is often unsustainably large. Where such a " monetary overhang " is present macroeconomic stabilization requires that it be reduced. If consumers and producers hold large cash balances decontrolling prices could lead to an inflationary surge in demand. The government could reduce the monetary overhang by selling real assets such as housing or financial assets such as government bonds. This approach is not confiscatory may help establish the government 's credibility and creates markets. The privatization of real assets is a high priority but it may be difficult to sell these assets quickly as discussed below. The sale of government bonds at market interest rates helps to establish a bond market which in turn gives the monetary authorities an instrument to control the money supply Bonds must be serviced and so using bond issues to resolve the monetary overhang could worsen the fiscal deficit. During the transition bond issues may need to pay high real interest rates which would lead to higher interest payments on national debt. That in turn could cause lenders to be concerned about the government 's ability to service its debt. If a government chooses to sell bonds to deal with the monetary overhang it is critical to adopt monetary and fiscal polices that are both credible and strong Because buyers must be assured that government bonds will be serviced in full governments should consider using whatever assets they have to support these bonds. Countries could use their available resources such as copper gold or future oil revenues to back bonds wholly or in part. Such bonds would be tradable and legal mechanisms would be developed to assure the public that the assets would be available to service the debt Currency reform is an alternative approach to reducing the monetary overhang ; this was the approach postwar Germany used successfully. In a currency reform the central government replaces existing monetary assets with new assets usually of lesser value. A confiscatory currency reform is a tax on holders of currency and other financial assets. Such a tax will provide few benefits unless it is part of a comprehensive economic reform package. Repeated currency reforms can disrupt economic activity reduce the government 's credibility and contribute to a loss of confidence and capital night Removing Domestic Price Controls In economies with extensive price controls prices bear no relationship to economic value defined either by domestic costs or by international prices. By comparison in market economies production and investment decisions are decentralized and flexible market prices guide economic activity. However concerns about sharp price increases particularly for staples such as bread lead some to suggest delaying price reform at least until after measures have been taken to deal with the monetary overhang. The problem with delaying price reform is that output will decline as the command system is dismantled unless the old system is quickly replaced with an incentive system based on accurate prices to encourage efficient production. Economies in transition thus need early and comprehensive price decontrol Wages are a key price that must be liberalized. In a well-functioning market economy wages are free to adjust so that valuable skills are rewarded and workers are encouraged to shift to occupations and regions where they are most productive. Until enterprises are operating under market incentives however they have little reason to set wages appropriately or to restrain their costs Consequently to avoid a wage-price spiral during the transition period temporary and limited restrictions on wage increases in state enterprises may be desirable. Once firms face market constraints all wage limitations should be eliminated to allow wages to move to their appropriate levels Financial markets also should be liberalized so that savers receive an adequate return and investors face correct incentives when making investment choices. As a first step at least interest rates should be positive after adjusting for expected inflation. Government intervention in financial markets particularly in Latin America often led to negative real interest rates and was a major contributor to poor investment decisions and capital flight Opening the Economy to International Market Forces Another key principle of macroeconomic reform is to open the economy to international market forces by establishing currency convertibility and liberalizing trade. Currency convertibility has more than one definition but here it refers to the ability to trade the country 's currency at market exchange rates for foreign currency ( and goods ) either at home or abroad. To say that a currency is convertible does not mean that trade is free. Western industrial countries with convertible currencies retain tariffs and other barriers to trade. Thus the benefits to a reform program from convertibility of the currency should be thought of as part of the larger process of eliminating restrictions on international transactions The transformation to a market economy can not be successful unless a country 's currency is a credible medium of exchange and convertible within its borders. In the Soviet Union today certain cities and republics restrict ruble purchases by nonresidents and erect trade barriers against each other. Certain deposit accounts are not convertible for currency. The January Soviet currency reform further reduced confidence in the ruble. These costly distortions are reflections of the fundamental failure of existing economic policies Convertibility for international trade and other current account transactions along with other measures to liberalize trade is a critical early reform. It increases the range of goods that can be purchased by consumers and producers. It may also expand domestic production by increasing the availability of imported inputs and capital goods. Further convertibility moves domestic prices toward market-determined world prices guiding domestic enterprises toward efficient production and investment decisions Opening the economy to international market forces also helps create a competitive environment in two important ways. First it helps expose firms to the discipline of the international market That is particularly important in smaller countries where the efficient operating scale of firms in some industries is large relative to the size of the domestic market. Without foreign competition state enterprises in these countries may face little domestic competition at the start of a reform effort allowing them to remain viable by raising prices at the expense of consumers. External convertibility and trade liberalization therefore are also pro-competitive policies that can enhance productivity Second opening the economy to international forces allows new domestic firms to overcome domestic barriers to competition. For example reducing tariffs on vehicle imports allows small-scale private transporters to compete by importing trucks from abroad A potential problem with early convertibility is that firms likely to be viable in the long run might experience severe financial difficulties during the transition from controlled to world prices. The balance of payments also could deteriorate until the supply side of the economy responds to the new market incentives and exports rise. Both of these problems could be addressed by converting existing trade barriers into temporary tariffs sometimes called the tariffication approach. This approach has several advantages : It replaces a potentially complex array of existing trade distortions with a single gap between domestic and world prices makes the degree of protection more transparent and sets the stage for eventual tariff reduction With the support of the World Bank a number of Latin American countries have made important progress in opening trade as part of their reform efforts. Bolivia and Mexico in particular replaced quotas and nontariff barriers with reduced uniform tariffs In a number of countries more competitive exchange rates and the elimination of export barriers contributed to a significant increase in nontraditional exports. Argentina and Peru have eased exchange restrictions that had led to black markets for foreign exchange in recent years Many economists support focusing initially on convertibility for trade and other current account transactions while temporarily delaying convertibility for international capital flows. They argue that remaining market distortions or a lack of confidence in the economic future of the country could lead to capital flight. But capital account convertibility must not be delayed too long. External convertibility on capital transactions may be important in providing venture and working capital to private firms during the transition. It also facilitates the import of foreign know-how One historically important example in which the import of foreign technology was the centerpiece of a reform effort followed the Meiji restoration in Japan in Spurred by a desire to emulate the economic success of the West Japan within a remarkably short period of time overhauled its central government changed what was being taught in its schools and shifted the energies of its people toward commerce. The linchpins of the Japanese transition were the concentration on importing foreign technology and technical assistance the development of a transportation infrastructure conducive to commerce and trade and the privatization of government production facilities. Entire factories were imported along with technical advisers who operated the machinery until Japanese workers and managers were capable of doing it on their own Full convertibility for international capital flows may be delayed without obstructing the reform process when other measures to attract foreign investment are in place. Hungary adopted a foreign investment law that guarantees repatriation of profits. As a result it seems to have taken the lead in Eastern Europe in attracting foreign capital. As discussed further below the creation of Enterprise Funds for Hungary Poland and Czechoslovakia reflects the Administration 's emphasis on ensuring that adequate financing is provided to newly emerging private sectors When a reforming government decides to make its currency convertible for some set of international transactions it must also choose between fixing the exchange rate or allowing it to move freely to its new equilibrium level. Authorities may choose to fix the exchange rate as part of a comprehensive stabilization package If backed up by a credible noninflationary monetary policy a fixed exchange rate may help reduce inflation expectations and thereby ease the transition to price stability. Choosing an appropriate level for the fixed rate is not easy however. The higher the fixed value of domestic currency relative to foreign currency the cheaper are foreign goods relative to domestic goods. Thus while a high exchange rate reduces initial pressure on inflation by holding down the prices of imported goods a low exchange rate enhances the competitiveness of domestic firms in world markets and reduces the likelihood of large trade deficits. Letting the exchange rate move freely to a new equilibrium allows the market to balance these opposing forces STRUCTURAL REFORMS In addition to the principles discussed above comprehensive reform requires structural measures. Private property and privatization should be institutionalized domestic competition must be promoted and the role of government must be reformed and limited. Most reforming countries of Eastern Europe have been slow to adopt these principles which are central to the development of markets. Latin America already has private property rights and private firms but many nations in the region could benefit greatly by promoting domestic competition accelerating privatization and continuing to redefine the role of the public sector Property Rights and Private Property A successful transition to a market economy requires that private property rights be firmly established and that a legal system be developed to define and protect these rights. In addition productive assets must be put into private hands through the process of privatization. Otherwise producers have no incentive to respond to prices and to take risks and the reform effort will fail to generate increased supplies of products consumers want to buy Private property and property rights are most notably absent in the command economies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union where economic activity was based on the idea that almost all property belonged to the state. Although small-scale entrepreneurial activity was tolerated in some Eastern European countries in recent years most control over the allocation of resources remained in the hands of the government. The public debate about private property in the Soviet Union has also been a political debate about commitment to change following years of indoctrination about the evils of profit and capitalist enterprise. During Lenin 's New Economic Policy of the 1920s reforms encouraged private producers especially farmers to expand production. Many farmers successfully raised output and prospered only to have that very success considered criminal during the Stalinist purges and collectivization drives of the late 1920s and 1930s. As a result the most successful farmers and entrepreneurs were punished by expropriation of their property exile to labor camps and in many cases execution In Latin America the institution of property rights has long been established but has not always been well respected. Government nationalization of industries sometimes through expropriation is one aspect of a legacy of not respecting property rights More recently inefficient and slow legal systems have discouraged private entrepreneurship Privatization of state enterprises is an urgent albeit complex task. The task is more difficult by several orders of magnitude than the privatizations that have occurred in developed market economies over the last years. In Eastern Europe for example the government owns most of the land buildings and machinery There are enormous benefits to transferring ownership to the private sector even though local citizens generally have little savings to invest financial markets are not sufficiently developed to provide credit and the widespread sale of domestic equity to foreigners raises political concerns. An added consideration is the widespread belief that those who profited under the old regime and who therefore are among the few who can afford to make large equity investments do not deserve to benefit from those activities Privatization requires expertise in accounting financial markets and the law. In most cases the books of large government enterprises bear no relation to economic reality. That may make it easier for insiders to purchase these firms at very favorable prices and realize large gains. Concerns about such " sweetheart deals " have slowed privatization in both Eastern Europe and Latin America. Perhaps not surprisingly in Eastern Europe the " spontaneous " or decentralized privatization of small enterprises and the development of new private firms has far outpaced government efforts to privatize large-scale enterprises In nearly all Latin American countries the process of privatization has recently accelerated. A number of countries have privatized enterprises as part of debt-for-equity programs. In Argentina and Mexico completed privatization of a number of large state firms and announced others and other countries such as Chile and Costa Rica also stepped up their privatization efforts Throughout the region however some of the largest enterprises remain in government hands and will be difficult to privatize or restructure partly because of resistance from labor unions One question is the order in which to privatize enterprises. The Polish reform plan up to this point has been based on the " conventional " view that companies with positive net worth should be pri- vatized first. Enterprises that are money losers have high debt burdens or are expected to need significant internal restructuring before they become viable are to be privatized later after the restructuring takes hold. By contrast the reform plan in Yugoslavia is focused on privatizing loss-making industries first presumably because this approach would reduce the subsidies the government must pay There are several possible methods of privatizing enterprises that can be used in conjunction with each other. Enterprises can be sold to workers or to the highest bidder or deals can be individually negotiated and then presented to the government for approval Another method is to distribute vouchers to the general public that allow citizens to purchase portions of firms at favorable rates either directly or through investing in holding companies that accept management responsibility. The favorable equity implications of widespread domestic ownership has inspired Czechoslovakia to consider this latter approach. Poland is favoring a " menu " approach : In some cases a combination of methods could be used in a single privatization while in other cases the enterprise may choose among the legally allowed options A crucial element of the reform agenda must be the creation of a private housing market In much of Eastern Europe the decay of the housing stock and a desperate lack of available housing creates real impediments to the free movement of workers. In many instances workers can not move to areas where there are jobs because there is no housing for them and their families. Creation of a private housing market could be an important first step toward both improving labor mobility and raising living standards. Housing should be privatized and builders and investors allowed to purchase land for construction. Property also must be transferable so that existing and new housing can be efficiently allocated Promoting Domestic Competition Another principle for a successful transition involves a range of measures to create not only private but also competitive industries Desocializing without also demonopolizing confers little benefit. Actions to promote competitive domestic market structures include restructuring existing firms facilitating the entry or establishment of new firms and putting in place an antitrust policy to promote competitive domestic markets. In addition as noted above competition can also come from abroad Competition is generally enhanced if existing state-owned enterprises are split into smaller viable firms before privatization. Unrelated or unprofitable activities can be jettisoned and monopolies can be split into separate competing firms. The restructuring of viable firms may also involve adoption of new technologies and the reallocation of labor and capital to new uses. Accounting and finan- cial techniques must be brought to bear to ensure that firms are operating on a sound financial basis Private sector activity can also be encouraged by the sale of assets of state enterprises to the private sector. Consider the challenge of creating transportation industries such as trucking. In most command economies firms produce many of their own inputs including transportation services. Thus most trucks are owned by large state enterprises that have little incentive to compete with each other. If a state enterprise is divided into several viable firms and its trucks are sold outright their purchase by entrepreneurs could aid the development of a private distribution system Barriers to the creation of new firms must be removed. In Eastern Europe there has been rapid growth of new firms over the past year but the public sector continues to dominate. These new firms are usually small and often are at a disadvantage in competing with the state enterprises for inputs and credit but they have proved very successful where the efficient scale of firms is small or where entrepreneurship is important Policies to protect competition also are required. While it is natural and desirable to want to sweep away many regulations as vestiges of the government-dominated systems that reforming countries have rejected laws are needed to ensure that creation of a private sector does not merely replace a public monopoly with a private one. A basic antitrust law aimed at preventing cartel behavior by firms producing the same product and mergers that create monopoly is essential During the transition basic banking and credit market functions must be developed quickly. In command economies banks mainly serve a bookkeeping role allocating credit as directed by the central government plan. Retail banking as understood in market economies barely exists. The use of checking accounts is limited and check clearing can take weeks. An important early role for the central banks of Eastern Europe can be to help create and then monitor a payments system. The economies of Eastern Europe also will need a competitive banking system that provides access to credit for new and restructured firms Well-developed financial markets serve other roles as well. They allow risks to be shifted to those who are most willing to bear them. They allow firms to diversify and hedge and to mobilize private savings. Yet many of the existing banks have distorted balance sheets from years of financing state enterprises without concern for creditworthiness. Reform requires a tremendous amount of expertise ; systems and methods of credit evaluation and ways to manage risk must be introduced. Technical assistance from abroad will be useful in creating efficient banks Reforming and Limiting the Role of Government A successful transition to a market economy in Eastern Europe requires a complete overhaul in the role of the government to reorient it toward the tasks appropriate to a market economy. In Latin America reduced government involvement in the economy would free resources for private use allowing the private sector to grow and prosper reward investors and raise funds for investment. Some tasks such as putting a sensible tax system in place as discussed earlier are formidable. Important new functions for reforming governments range from collection of meaningful economic data to environmental regulation The government must also develop a social safety net. As economic restructuring takes place many workers will lose their jobs because inefficient enterprises are likely to be shut down or to fail to become viable under private management. Although these dislocations are a prerequisite for building a more productive economy the hardships that fall on workers and their families can and should be cushioned. Unemployment compensation and worker retraining are effective approaches to dealing with these problems and they can also help to minimize worker resistance to reforms Many features of a well-designed targeted social safety net such as unemployment insurance are also important to encourage workers to incur risks and change jobs in response to labor market signals Labor mobility is critical if contraction of the state sector is to free workers for private sector activities Governments should facilitate the establishment of a sound education system that can produce a work force able to build and operate a modern market economy. One advantage held by some of the Eastern European countries such as Hungary and Poland is the relatively high level of education of their workers. With educated well-trained labor forces one of the essential requirements for a growth economy is in place. Sound training in business and economics is also required. It is important that the policymakers and populace understand the economic rationale for market-based reform for without popular support reform programs will not succeed SUMMARY Certain fundamental principles formulating sound monetary and fiscal policies removing domestic price controls opening the economy to international market forces ensuring property rights and private property creating competition and reforming and limiting the role of government are essential for a successful transition to a healthy market economy Numerous countries have attempted the difficult task of implementing one or more of these principles. But no modern economy has implemented all principles at one time Latin America starts with more of the elements of a market economy in place than does Eastern Europe. In both regions however healthy market economies require both macroeconomic and structural reforms Macroeconomic reforms provide a stable economic backdrop for the planning decisions of investors and entrepreneurs. Such reforms allow prices wages and interest rates to respond to domestic and world market forces which helps to assure that the economy 's resources are allocated productively and in accordance with peoples ' wants It is essential that economic reform elicit competitive privatesector activity. Structural reforms contribute by firmly establishing private property rights putting productive assets into private hands and promoting competitive behavior through for example antitrust laws IMPLEMENTING ECONOMIC REFORMS The preceding discussion of economic principles to guide the transition to a market-oriented economy highlights the complexity and difficulty of the reform effort. What methods should be chosen ? Which principles should be emphasized first ? How rapidly should the reforms be implemented ? These choices are difficult enough from a technical viewpoint. They are made even more difficult by the need of new democratic governments to build popular support for reform The temptation to underestimate the difficulty of the task ahead must be resisted. The legacy of state control will take time to overcome. Even successful reform will require a difficult transition period as workers and other resources are reallocated to productive uses based on market-determined prices. In Eastern Europe in particular after or more years of job security unemployment even if modest by Western standards may be quite frightening. If unrealistic expectations are generated by the promised benefits of market reform support for the necessary changes could collapse It is important to realize however that the welfare of citizens in the Eastern European economies can be dramatically improved even if output declines for a period of time. Under the old regime these economies often reported rapid output growth but output was frequently mismeasured through the use of nonmarket prices that overstated the value of shoddy goods. More important higher production did not necessarily improve living standards because the goods produced were not the ones that consumers wanted. If these countries have early success at producing the goods and services that individuals really want actual well-being would no doubt rise far more than official statistics would show THE NEED FOR COMPREHENSIVE REFORM The linkages and complementarity among many of the reform principles suggest that ideally they should be implemented simultaneously. Administratively however it is infeasible to do everything at once. Some changes are also clearly preconditions for others. For example a legal infrastructure supporting both private ownership and the transfer of property rights is absolutely necessary to the process of privatization and the stimulation of private investment The most important characteristic of a successful reform program is that it be comprehensive and rapidly implemented. A command economy can not be meshed with a market economy. Consequently implementing half of a reform program achieves much less than half of the benefit of comprehensive reform. Half measures lead instead to confusion and falling output because productive individual incentives have not yet replaced the command system. Since a slow pace of reform will only prolong the pain of the transition and aggravate the inevitable disruptions the reforms should be implemented as rapidly as possible There is general agreement that reforming countries must address first any existing problems of high inflation and severe balance of payments deficits. Without initial measures to reduce the uncertainty of the investment and production climate attempts at privatization and price reform are unlikely to elicit the desired increases in private-sector investment and output. In short the ability of the government to articulate and carry out a credible macroeconomic program provides an essential backdrop for private sector activity. Enterprise restructuring and privatization must however follow soon after Reforms such as privatization price reform and trade liberalization clearly go hand in hand. Privatization of monopolistic state enterprises for example could simply result in private monopolies that produce less and at higher prices than firms in a competitive setting unless such entities are first dismantled or exposed to foreign competition. Trade liberalization and domestic price reform are closely related because world prices are usually the best guide to most internal price relationships. Domestic price reforms go hand in hand with privatization because managers can not be expected to make sound investment production or employment decisions without rational price guides. In fact it may not be possible to judge accurately the viability of many state enterprises until they have operated under market conditions with accurate price signals. Financial market reforms must also be under way and pri- vate sector financial institutions in place with a functioning payments system before investment decisions can be effectively transferred from government to private control EXAMPLE : REFORMING POLISH AGRICULTURE The challenge of restructuring the Polish agricultural-food system illustrates the need for comprehensive reform. This sector begins with a solid base on which to build : Despite earlier collectivization efforts privately owned farms accounted for percent of land in agriculture and a similar percentage of output even before reforms began. Production is already diversified and considerable export potential exists but numerous structural impediments associated with the centrally planned economy must be removed to improve the sector 's performance First although most farms are considered " private " the lack of a well-functioning land-transfer system still hinders the consolidation of these small uneconomic units ( on average about acres ) into more efficient operations. Until recently most land was transferred to the State Land Fund for reallocation with political factors dictating who was allowed to purchase it Second the lack of competition in the sectors providing agricultural production infrastructure such as the farm input and processing sectors means that the incentives for efficient farm production decisions are missing. The input sector remains state-controlled : continuing inefficiencies and monopoly activity keep farm input prices excessively high supplies for private farms inadequate and input quality very poor. Until recently farm inputs were provided only to farms that agreed to sell their output to state enterprises. That made it very difficult for a private marketing system to develop even after private activity was authorized in the procurement sector and output prices were deregulated Food processing facilities are outmoded due to the lack of competition. Many facilities operate far below capacity and without concern for either the quality of the commodities processed or the foods produced. State slaughter facilities for example purchase pigs only according to weight without taking into account fat content or other quality factors of potential concern to consumers This system induces farmers to fatten pigs excessively and gives consumers meat containing large amounts of waste Third inadequate capital markets and domination of foreign trade by state enterprises hinder the growth of private sector activity throughout the food distribution system. Modernizing existing plants requires capital and therefore capital markets and banks that lend long-term investment capital. Private enterprises must also have access to modern production inputs at reasonable prices For example setting up private meat shops was hindered by the lack of refrigerators which only state retailers could import ! Until access to international markets is achieved and transportation networks are demonopolized private distribution processing and retail ventures can only expand slowly Fourth freer trade of farm products is necessary to remove distortions in farm prices and to induce increases in farm output Access to foreign markets for Poland 's potential farm exports is as important as access to imported farm inputs such as fertilizer Lifting wheat export restrictions for example could help bring artificially depressed farm prices in line with higher world prices encouraging increases in output and contributing much-needed foreign exchange This extended discussion of reform in Polish agriculture shows that private ownership of farms is only one step toward a wellfunctioning farm economy. For private farmers to take advantage of new opportunities many other changes also need to be introduced. These include providing full property rights in land competition in the distribution system and access to international markets for both inputs and outputs SUMMARY Reforms must be comprehensive if they are to succeed. Rapid implementation is the best way to limit the inevitable disruption associated with reform The success of reforms is best measured by their ability to encourage production of goods consumers want not solely by changes in measured output It is generally accepted that macroeconomic stabilization should be the initial priority for reforming countries with high inflation and severe external imbalances but rapid structural reform must begin simultaneously or follow soon after The difficulty of making a successful transformation is often underestimated. Realistic expectations about the benefits and costs of reform can sustain support for the adjustment effort EASTERN EUROPE AND THE SOVIET UNION The degree to which the former command economies have implemented the basic reforms needed to effect a successful transition to a market economy varies significantly. This section summarizes the recent developments in several Eastern European countries where the reform process is well established and in the Soviet Union. Poland Yugoslavia and the former East Germany began their reform efforts in early Czechoslovakia and Hungary moved to accelerate their reform plans during the year. Bulgaria and Romania have not yet proceeded very far on the path toward economic reform and have faced considerable political uncertainty and disruption. In Bulgaria a political impasse delayed the adoption of a comprehensive reform program. Although reform was debated in Romania and some privatization occurred lack of public support during stalled progress toward implementing price reform and other essential elements of a comprehensive reform program. In the Soviet Union hopes that comprehensive economic reform would be implemented quickly were dashed in late and early by an abrupt shift in government policy It is too soon to judge the full economic impact of reform programs. Even under ideal conditions transition to healthy market economies will take time. Moreover several external shocks affected the economies of Eastern Europe in It will take time for these countries to realize the benefits of the reforms taken to date POLAND YUGOSLAVIA AND EAST GERMANY Although Poland Yugoslavia and East Germany took different paths these countries had in common in programs focusing on macroeconomic reforms as the first step. Poland 's program was the most ambitious and comprehensive. Enacted in January Poland 's program emphasized quick measures to stabilize the economy including price reform steps to close the budget deficit restraint of monetary growth and establishment of a convertible currency at a fixed rate. The fiscal balance moved from a deficit of about percent of GNP in to a surplus in The inflation rate dropped sharply but then settled at a higher than desirable level of about percent a month. Authorities were able to stabilize the foreign exchange value of Polish currency and to maintain current account convertibility while rebuilding the stock of foreign exchange reserves as exports to the West surged and imports fell. Activity in the newly emerging private sector appears to have increased significantly in However reflecting a decline of about percent in the sales of the socialized industrial sector real GNP is reported to have fallen percent in Measured unemployment had moved from negligible levels before the reform to above percent The Polish program involves putting in place a far-reaching set of provisions to establish competitive industries and independent financial institutions. The privatization of existing enterprises moved slowly until late in the year when the government completed its first large privatization and began the process of privatizing a number of other large companies using a " menu " of different techniques. Finally almost all price controls were removed though wage flexibility was still limited by the central government through tax policy In the government of Yugoslavia embarked on a comprehensive program to stop soaring inflation. In its initial phase the program devalued and fixed the nominal exchange rate of Yugoslavia 's currency. Wages were temporarily frozen while most prices were allowed to adjust freely and import barriers were lowered. The program built on earlier structural and institutional reforms to recapitalize the banking system and restructure lossmaking state enterprises The initial results of the stabilization program were quite positive. Monthly retail price inflation fell from percent in December to near zero in the second quarter of and the decline in real output was less than that experienced by Poland. By midyear however fiscal problems began to appear reflecting inadequate controls over public sector spending. Monetary policy was eased under pressure from illiquid enterprises and workers ' demands for faster wage growth. Inflation jumped up to the range of to percent a month. In January there were worrisome developments in the stance of monetary policy that cast further doubt on inflation prospects. Even more discouraging were the escalation of ethnic rivalry and signs of political disintegration which threaten the chances of implementing a coherent program In the former East Germany unification caused far-reaching changes in the economy. Adopting the currency and many legal and economic institutions of the former West Germany through unification has reduced many uncertainties that have plagued transitions in other countries. Nonetheless output in the third quarter of was percent below its level a year earlier although not all the decline was due to the reforms. Unemployment rose to about percent of the work force and roughly percent of the population was underemployed. Real wages rose perhaps reflecting the need to dissuade workers from emigrating to the former West Germany and labor productivity declined. Competitive problems for firms with outmoded equipment and products and substandard product quality hidden prior to unification are now a concern. On the other hand the flow of investment from the western portion of Germany is expected to grow supporting a rebound in growth in the medium term HUNGARY AND CZECHOSLOVAKIA Reform proceeded less rapidly in Hungary and Czechoslovakia Entering the problems of inflation and declining output were not as severe in these countries as in Poland and Yugoslavia. Thus macroeconomic reform may not have appeared critical. However as proceeded the pressures for reform grew Many of Hungary 's subsidies were removed although those for a few key goods including some food and energy products remained The external trade performance of the economy was good with a hard currency trade surplus of near $ billion in despite poor agricultural performance due to drought and the impact of the Persian Gulf crisis. However inflation remained high at over percent a year and the size of the fiscal deficit is troubling. Official unemployment stood at percent at year-end. Industrial production was down about percent in but production by small firms boomed. The privatization program began to take hold in with the process of privatization under way for large state enterprises. A second group of firms to be privatized was to be announced in early Sales of small enterprises to individuals were brisk and the government planned to privatize small firms in the next years. As began Hungary was taking steps to implement a 3-year reform program including an expansion of external convertibility for international trade transactions After a year of focusing on political and legislative reform the Czechoslovakian Government implemented a comprehensive economic reform effort in January The program decontrolled about percent of all prices established partial convertibility for the international trade of goods and tightened fiscal policy. Small business privatization through auction began in January but legislation to allow privatization of large state enterprises had not yet been passed. Over the months to September output fell about percent and unemployment remained below percent THE SOVIET UNION In late and early economic reform efforts in the Soviet Union appeared to come to a halt. The government 's decision to devalue large denomination ruble notes announced in January caused disenchantment and created uncertainty about future economic prospects. The threatened increase of KGB involvement in economic affairs is likely to stifle private incentives and entrepreneurship. These developments have dimmed hopes for market reform and further damaged an economy that had already deteriorated sharply in Official statistics estimated the decline in output for at about percent but the actual decline in living standards appeared to be much worse. Most of the reduction in output was in manufacturing construction and transportation The problems in transportation reflected the critical nature of Soviet distribution problems ; the collapse of the distribution system could lead to widespread food shortages in despite record harvests. The balance of payments on international transactions was expected to be in deficit by $ billion in Arrears on loans from abroad may have exceeded $ billion and the fiscal deficit which reached percent of GNP in could rise further in The Soviet Union remains an important trading partner of Eastern Europe. Therefore the prospects of the region depend importantly on the health of the Soviet economy. But the recent retreat of economic reform in the Soviet Union raises concerns that its economy will continue to deteriorate and slow progress throughout Eastern Europe. Reforms initiated in began to dismantle the command system but did not replace it with market mechanisms or incentives. Fundamental change must occur if the Soviet Union is to reverse the deterioration in living standards CHALLENGES IN AND Several economic shocks complicated the reform efforts of the region in late and continued into Together they represent a formidable challenge to the region 's democratically elected leaders The End of the East Bloc Trading Regime The shift toward convertible currency trade at market prices within Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in January presents a difficult challenge for the region. From until the end of trade between the countries of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union was conducted essentially through bilateral barter arrangements governed by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( CMEA ) The unit of account was the " transferable ruble " which could not be exchanged for any other currency. Trade was thus conducted at nonmarket prices and trade surpluses were merely reflected in accumulation of transferable ruble balances. Over time the effect was to reinforce central planning and make the Eastern Europeans and the Soviet Union more dependent on each other Although the nonconvertible currency system of CMEA was wasteful and inefficient it is widely agreed that on average it benefited the Eastern European countries with respect to the Soviet Union over the past decade. Essentially Eastern Europe received oil and natural gas from the Soviet Union at below world market prices. The effect of CMEA 's end will vary across countries. Hungary has already had some success reorienting its trade toward the West for instance while Bulgaria with fully percent of its trade with the Soviet Union faces a more difficult challenge Moreover the former East Germany has sharply reduced its demand for Eastern European products and concerns about the economic and political stability of the Soviet Union make the trade outlook even more uncertain. Eastern European countries are negotiating bilateral agreements governing trade among themselves and with the Soviet Union in Other Shocks The increase in the price of oil following Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait in August was a significant shock to the economies of Eastern Europe. The task of estimating the impact of oil price shocks and designing policy options is difficult for developed market economies let alone the economies of Eastern Europe. ( Chapter of this report discusses oil price shocks and economic policy. ) Because these are economies in transition the market mechanism even in the countries where reform has gone furthest does not work as quickly smoothly or efficiently as it does in industrial economies to adjust demand to the higher price of energy. Although the price of oil has fallen since October and especially since the start of Operation Desert Storm in January future oil prices remain uncertain In addition to the oil price effects Soviet shipments of oil to Eastern Europe fell approximately percent in because of Soviet production declines. Several Eastern European countries also were to receive oil from Iraq as debt payment. The international embargo on Iraq meant that this oil had to be replaced by purchases at world market prices. Some countries also lost substantial construction contracts and worker remittances from the Mideast Another adverse shock in was a drought that affected Southeastern Europe. Bulgaria Hungary and Romania were the most severely affected. The costs of the drought included the loss of crops and reduced livestock populations as lack of feed grains forced many farms to send their animals to slaughter sooner than planned Implications for the Transition Taken together these shocks represent a formidable challenge to Eastern European governments. If sound policies are maintained and oil prices stabilize in a range not far from that prevailing prior to the Iraq invasion of Kuwait these challenges should be manageable. However these are pressing concerns and they can create pressure to ease up on adjustment efforts. Delaying reform however would only aggravate the economic costs of these shocks and risk a return to the piecemeal reforms that were so unsuccessful in the mid-1980s. Countries that can build a consensus to accelerate reforms have much to gain SUMMARY Poland Yugoslavia and East Germany starting from different circumstances are all undergoing rapid transformations to a market economy. Although the output and unemployment costs of the transition have been greater than initially expect- ed the measures taken are the basis for a significant improvement in living standards in the medium term Hungary and Czechoslovakia in adopted more gradual programs but by the end of the year both had plans to accelerate their reform efforts The apparent abrupt halt to reform efforts in the Soviet Union aggravated an economic situation that had deteriorated badly during Recent adverse economic developments complicate the efforts of Eastern European countries to make successful transitions to market economies. The challenge facing these countries is to maintain and intensify their reform effort with the support of the Western industrial countries despite the uncertainties they face in REFORM IN THE AMERICAS Major steps have been taken by governments throughout Latin America toward open market-oriented economies and away from outmoded statist institutions. Prospects are now better than ever before for the integration of the economies of North and South America through broadly expanded trade and investment linkages RECENT HISTORY OF LATIN AMERICAN REFORMS Most recent Latin American reform efforts are rooted in the adverse economic environment of the early 1980s and the failure of policies pursued for decades. By it was widely accepted that a new approach to solving the economic problems of the region was essential. Almost every country in Latin America now recognizes the need to move away from inward-looking policies such as efforts to substitute domestic production for imports toward trade-opening policies designed to strengthen competitiveness in world markets The role of the public sector and of cumbersome state-owned enterprises is being widely reassessed and deregulation and privatization have appeared on policy agendas throughout the region. As in Eastern Europe correcting price distortions reforming public expenditure and taxation policies and improving the performance of financial markets are now important components of many of these countries ' market-oriented strategies Much-needed and welcome political transformations are accompanying the trends in economic policy. Argentina in Uruguay in Brazil and Guatemala in Panama in and Chile and Nicaragua in are among the countries abandoning authoritarian regimes to join the ranks of Latin American democracies. Chile 's new democratic government is effectively demonstrat- ing that an open and democratic political system can reinforce the benefits of an expanding market economy The 1990s should be a decade of great opportunity for the region With sustained world growth and expanded trade opportunities being sought through the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations and other Western Hemisphere pro-trade initiatives ( discussed in Chapter ) the restructured economies of Latin America have great potential to prosper. Perhaps most encouraging for the other countries of the region are the recent performances of Mexico and Chile two countries at the forefront of the Latin American reform movement MEXICO Mexico provides one of the best modern examples of a country engaged in economic restructuring. The difficult movement toward a more market-oriented open economy has been under way for a number of years. The reform process recently has been accelerated by the current President of Mexico and the benefits of market-oriented reforms are now being realized. The roots of the reform effort are different than in Eastern Europe but Mexico did share some of the characteristics of the command economies. Public sector expenditures represented nearly percent of GNP in for example and the inefficiencies of the state-owned enterprises accounting for percent of GNP in stifled economic performance. Mexico also maintained a restrictive import policy with extensive government control over trade and a highly overvalued exchange rate Mexico 's debt crisis precipitated in when oil prices fell interest rates rose and holdings of foreign exchange dwindled necessitated the imposition of stringent macroeconomic stabilization measures. To restore external balance and stem the outflow of private capital the exchange rate was adjusted to reflect market forces and domestic spending was reduced. External equilibrium was attained initially at the expense of price stability real wages growth and employment. But the success of the effort facilitated the restructuring of Mexico 's external debt service which allowed attention to turn to curbing inflation and reviving economic activity Mexico 's economic restructuring has focused on reducing the public sector 's role increasing external competitiveness improving public finances and modernizing the financial system. More than state-owned enterprises have been privatized merged or liquidated and subsidies to the remaining entities have been reduced These actions brought greater economic and financial efficiency to the state-owned sector and helped reduce public sector expenditures below percent of gross domestic product in Fiscal and financial system reforms have also been important. Tax policy reforms closed corporate tax loopholes and improved the tax collection system banking activities were progressively exposed to market forces and the goal of returning banks to private ownership was recently announced A major initiative to reduce trade barriers has promoted the efficiency and modernization of domestic industries and successfully contained inflationary pressures. The opening-up process was enhanced when Mexico reversed a longstanding antitrade policy by joining the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) in Extensive import-licensing requirements were largely replaced with tariffs which were then lowered significantly After many difficult years recent economic performance has been fairly good. GNP grew about percent in and is thought to have grown faster in Inflation last year increased somewhat from its level which had been the lowest rate in years. The increase in economic activity is fueled by new dynamism of the private sector which has been both reflected in and fueled by strong growth in private investment and private capital inflows from abroad. After declining by a third between and real private fixed investment grew at an average annual rate of percent between and Mexico must still meet the challenge of sustaining economic growth a necessity if widespread poverty is ultimately to be alleviated. The Mexican Government 's commitment to market-oriented reforms is strong although big hurdles are still ahead. The process of privatization for example has only recently been extended to the largest most complex state-owned enterprises such as the telephone system. The strong interest of the United States in Mexico 's success is illustrated in the President 's commitment to negotiating a free-trade agreement with Mexico ( discussed in Chapter ) The Administration strongly backed Mexico 's commercial bank debt-reduction agreement completed in March This agreement contributed to a significant reduction in debt and debt service and increased confidence in the economic policies of the Mexican Government CHILE Chile is unusual in Latin America in that its current reform efforts build on the dramatic economic restructuring in favor of private enterprise and markets that took place in the mid-1970s. After the overthrow of the socialist government in the country switched from extensive state intervention in most economic activities to a system based on private initiative. Price controls were removed trade barriers were reduced financial sector liberalization was undertaken and many state enterprises and financial institu- tions were privatized. However Chile 's transition to a market economy and the presence of an authoritarian government represented a contradiction that could not endure. With the return to power of a democratic government in March Chile 's strong free enterprise system is matched by a freely elected democratic government for the first time in nearly years Like other countries of Latin America Chile suffered an economic crisis in the early 1980s. The country was battered by many of the same external factors that hurt its neighbors and developing countries all over the world including a deterioration in its terms of trade ( as the price of oil rose and the price of copper Chile 's chief export fell ) a rise in international interest rates and a recession in the international economy. A heavy international borrower both before and after these factors came into play Chile 's debtservicing difficulties became unmanageable as interest rates rose and foreign exchange earnings fell. Faulty macroeconomic policies included inflationary levels of debt-financed domestic spending and an overvalued exchange rate that encouraged imports and discouraged exports. These policies heightened the debt crisis and deepened the economic recession. Poor supervision of the banking system also contributed to the bankruptcy of many enterprises and a financial crisis As elsewhere emergency stabilization measures were the first stage of economic reform. To redress the severe external and internal imbalances the overvaluation of the exchange rate was ended with a sharp devaluation and automatic wage indexation was suspended. Emergency measures included large public employment programs debt rescheduling and guarantees that private debt would be repaid. For a few years the government focused on cushioning the effects of the recession discouraging capital flight and improving the trade balance In the government moved to supplement emergency measures with a more comprehensive reform program aimed at improving several fundamental structural problems : the lack of export diversity the low level of savings and investment and a precarious financial system. The plan involved reducing import tariffs and strengthening export incentives ; improving public finances through the sale of state enterprises tax policy reform and conservative public spending policies ; and creating a more favorable climate for private savings and investment through tax pension and housing policy reforms. Bank supervision was strengthened and banking reform began in the mid-1980s. As a continuation of banking and financial policy reform the central bank was given greater autonomy in Between and the Chilean economy emerged from the recession and grew at an average rate of percent a year. Unem- ployment declined real wages increased inflation dropped and exports other than copper such as fruit forestry and fishery products performed very well. Private savings improved significantly too rising from about percent of GNP in to percent in Although stronger world copper prices since helped buoy economic performance much credit goes to the successful implementation of the reform program The new democratically elected government remains strongly committed to an open market economy with a low level of state involvement. It is also directing new attention to social programs to alleviate poverty. In carrying out its constitutional mandate the government faces the challenge of meeting its social priorities while maintaining the strict fiscal policies that have helped reduce external debt. This Administration 's strong commitment to improving trade and investment relations between the United States and Chile can help sustain Chile 's efforts and contribute to their success SUMMARY Governments throughout Latin America are rejecting earlier models of economic development which stressed inward-looking policies and extensive state ownership for a market-based approach that emphasizes openness and private enterprise Some of this reorientation stems from the debt crisis of the early 1980s which prompted stringent stabilization measures and revealed the underlying weaknesses of the structures of these economies Many Latin American countries have embarked on sweeping reform programs. Mexico and Chile are strong examples and efforts are also being made in Argentina Peru Venezuela and elsewhere THE ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES In both Eastern Europe and Latin America the Administration has provided strong support for the transitions to democratic societies and free-market economies. First and foremost this effort involves continued leadership through promoting our democratic ideals building support among other industrial countries for the reforms and making clear that markets offer the best hope for sustained growth in living standards This leadership is backed up by humanitarian technical and financial assistance and endorsement of measures to open markets and expand trade. The Administration has assisted Bulgaria Hungary Poland the Soviet Union and other countries in coping with severe shortages of necessities such as food and medicine The U.S. Government 's economic technical assistance is designed to support strong and comprehensive reform programs including social safety nets. The Administration also has encouraged democratic institution building in Eastern Europe. That assistance has supported an independent press and electronic media the democratic political process and the rule of law ( for example helping to draft legislation and support for an independent judiciary ) It has also supported social and cultural pluralism through educational programs and cultural exchanges The public discussion of how to help reforming countries has been focused excessively on the need for financial assistance which is only one part of the answer. Absent sound reform policies this money would most likely be wasted. Assistance should be designed to mesh with and encourage the reform effort so that it is used to accelerate rather than delay necessary reforms. While assistance must be responsive to short-term needs it is important to develop long-term assistance priorities that reinforce the fundamental reforms needed to establish long-term sustainable growth U.S. SUPPORT FOR EASTERN EUROPE In Eastern Europe the Administration is committed to encouraging the rapid transition of centralized command economies to free market systems. A vital component of this commitment is economic technical assistance The U.S. technical assistance effort offers a range of options that countries in transition can choose from depending on their needs This range includes providing management training and market economics education giving technical assistance on energy issues and helping to set up banking systems. The U.S. Government for example has helped to establish a regional environmental center in Budapest and has provided assistance to reduce pollution in Krakow one of Eastern Europe 's most polluted cities. Much of the assistance is directed to the private sector rather than the government. Legislation in provided assistance to Hungary and Poland. In Congress approved legislation expanding the U.S assistance effort to $ million in fiscal and extending funds to other economies in transition in Eastern Europe Polish Stabilization Fund A key element of U.S. Government support for Poland was a U.S contribution to a $ billion stabilization fund in January The U.S. Government provided a $ million grant to the fund with other governments contributing primarily in the form of loans or lines of credit The fund was designed to provide credibility to the Polish reform plan by supporting the Polish Government in its effort to stabilize the exchange rate. Reducing inflation was a cornerstone of the Polish program which included measures to open the economy to foreign competition fix the exchange rate to the U.S. dollar and make the Polish currency convertible. Given the uncertainties associated with this initial attempt to transform a centrally planned economy into a market system and the importance of adhering to a fixed exchange rate to break inflationary expectations the fund appears to have bolstered confidence that the reform measures could and would be sustained. The fund was renewed for Some people have questioned whether the stabilization fund represents an efficient use of official assistance noting that Poland has not drawn upon the resources of the fund. The fact that the fund did not need to be used however suggests that it provided confidence and support for the Polish program Assistance to New Private Enterprises Another element of the U.S. Government assistance effort is creation of Enterprise Funds. Funds were established in for Hungary and Poland and in November the President announced that a fund would also be created for Czechoslovakia. These funds promote development of the private sector by providing grants and loans to entrepreneurs making equity investments and supporting technical assistance. They are thus an important source of venture capital to new firms Trade Measures for Eastern Europe To promote market reforms and ensure that these countries face open markets the Administration has concluded business and investment agreements with Poland and Czechoslovakia and granted most-favored-nation ( MFN ) status to Czechoslovakia in In January the President requested MFN status for Bulgaria ( MFN status had already been given to Hungary Poland and Yugoslavia. ) MFN status ensures that the United States will provide tariff treatment as liberal as that provided to other trade partners except those with which it has a free-trade agreement. The Administration is also negotiating bilateral investment treaties and is working to relax existing trade restrictions with a number of countries in the region. Expanded trade opportunities are critical to creating a supportive external environment for reforms. Therefore the United States and other countries should examine ways to expand trade opportunities for Eastern Europe U.S. SUPPORT FOR LATIN AMERICA The U.S. Government has long been active in providing technical assistance and supporting market-oriented reforms in Latin America. In June the President unveiled his Enterprise for the Americas Initiative ( EAI ) to expand free trade throughout the hemisphere and lay the foundation for long-term growth in Latin America and the Caribbean. The initiative consists of three parts : trade investment and debt. Chapter discusses the trade elements of the initiative. On the investment side the President proposed that the Inter-American Development Bank provide loans in support of reform of the investment regime. The President has requested that the Congress authorize a 5-year grant of $ million to provide further support for investment reform particularly privatization. These efforts are aimed at developing the private sector and improving the environment for private foreign investment. In that sense the initiative parallels the goals of the Enterprise Funds for Eastern Europe Latin America would also benefit through the EAI from reduction of the substantial debt owed to the U.S. Government. For some loans the stock of debt would be significantly reduced and interest payments on the amounts that remained could be paid in local currency and used by the country in support of environmental projects. Other loans could be sold to investors making equity investments in the economy. The reduction in debt and debt-service payments would be contingent on these countries pursuing economic reforms including an open investment regime. The debt reduction supported by the EAI complements continuing U.S. initiatives to reduce the burden of the region 's commercial bank debt The EAI has been extremely well received throughout the region where leaders have acclaimed the initiative as the most important opportunity in hemispheric relations in years. Persistent efforts both in the United States and in each Latin American and Caribbean country to follow through on the vision of the initiative will be required to bring about real results. The EAI is a significant addition to the Administration 's ongoing technical and financial assistance programs in the region. Other Administration initiatives such as the Andean Trade Preference Initiative and the proposal for a U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement supplement the EAI and are described in Chapter WORKING WITH MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS AND OTHER GOVERNMENTS In his speech to the annual meetings of the World Bank and IMF in September the President stressed the central role the multilateral institutions can play in helping economic reform in the 1990s. Both institutions have long been involved in support of economic reform in Latin America and Africa and both are expanding their efforts in Eastern Europe. In the IMF supported the reform programs of Hungary Poland and Yugoslavia. Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia joined the World Bank and the IMF in September ( Czechoslovakia had been an original member of these institutions before withdrawing in ) In January Czechoslo- vakia embarked on an IMF program and new programs for Hungary and Poland are expected to follow soon ( Box ) In addition at the initiative of the United States the IMF has modified its policies so that it can help Eastern European and other member countries cope with higher import costs and other adverse trade effects stemming from the Persian Gulf crisis. The Administration also participated in the quick establishment of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and encouraged the World Bank to expand its policy-oriented lending program in support of critical structural reforms. Through policy advice and lending the international financial institutions will take a leading role and advance the interest of the United States and other countries as well At the Houston Economic Summit in July the President on behalf of the heads of state of the seven leading industrial nations requested that the IMF lead a number of international institutions in a study of the Soviet economy. That study presented to the President in December provides a comprehensive analysis of the Soviet economy. The report recommends that dramatic marketoriented reform proceed quickly and concludes that when reform begins technical assistance not large-scale financial aid is essential to successful reform The effectiveness of the U.S. Government assistance effort is enhanced by effective cooperation and coordination with other governments. The stabilization fund for Poland is just one example Another is the effort now under way to work with Poland 's other official creditors to reduce Poland 's stock of official debt. U.S. efforts to create a stable growth-oriented global economy after World War II paved the way for others to join the ranks of global economic powers. These countries now can share the responsibilities of supporting this effort for the economies in transition. The President was instrumental in establishing a group of Western governments ( called the G-24 ) to coordinate assistance for Eastern Europe on a case-by-case basis in support of IMF-led adjustment efforts. The G-24 has already coordinated about $ billion in grants credits guarantees and technical assistance for Eastern Europe THE ROLE OF THE U.S. PRIVATE SECTOR The private sector can contribute to reform in emerging market economies through several different avenues. The President announced on May the creation of the Citizens Democracy Corps to channel voluntary assistance to Central and Eastern Europe. The President has appointed the steering commission and it is beginning its work. Other organizations involve retired executives and financial sector experts. For example the International Executive Service Corp organized a number of technical assistance Box The Bole of the IMF in Economic Eeform The International Monetary Fund an organization of member countries provides technical assistance policy advice and financial support to countries undertaking extensive structural and maeroeconoinic reforms IMF financial support is planned in conjunction with the government officials of the country itself and requires strict adherence to an agreed schedule of policy adjustments and quantitative performance targets * Disbursement of support funds is conditional on meeting these targets Types of Support. Standby arrangements are loans that focus on fiscal monetary and exchange-rate policies aimed at overcoming short-term balance of payments difficulties. Repayment is to be made in % to years. Extended arrangements are loans that support medium-term ( to years ) programs of macroeconomic and structural reforms * Eepayment is to be made in % to years. Structural adjustment facility and enhanced structural adjustment facility arrangements provide resources to support medium-term ( years ) structural reform programs in low-income countries The Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility * This facility provides IMF loans for the following purposes The compensatory element provides resources to members to cover temporary export shortfalls or excessive import costs of certain foodstuffs due to price fluctuations beyond their control. The contingency element provides protection to members with IMF programs against potential future adverse external shocks beyond their control that could otherwise jeopardize their economic performance under their IMF programs. In at the initiative of the United States the facility was modified to allow financing for higher oil import costs and certain other losses due to the Gulf crisis What is conditionality ? To ensure that nations with IMF financial support make consistent and substantial progress in attaining program goals the IMF and the member country agree in advance to quarterly or semiannual target levels for a number of policy variables such as domestic credit creation international reserves and government budget deficits. A country 's drawings on IMF resources are conditional on attaining these intermediate targets. If these targets are not met the IMF usually requires corrective policy actions before additional drawings may be made missions in Volunteers including nonprofit organizations and universities have already made a substantial contribution Ultimately governments can not and should not be the main source of financing to the private sector in these countries. Private firms here and in other countries also play a critical role in supporting the transition. Eastern European countries are blessed with able well-trained work forces but lack entrepreneurs and capital Meanwhile direct investment and other forms of long-term capital inflows will be the key to a successful transformation in Latin America. Over time the number of attractive business and investment opportunities will grow as these countries move toward free markets SUMMARY Financial assistance alone will not resolve the difficult challenges facing the countries of Eastern Europe the Soviet Union and the developing countries of Latin America The U.S. effort has focused on technical assistance aimed at making the transition a sustained success over the long term CONCLUSION The worldwide movement toward market reliance and political freedom continues to gather momentum. Nations in Eastern Europe are dismantling their command systems and endeavoring to replace them with thriving private sectors. This task will be long and difficult and both governments and their citizens must understand that decades of neglect and state control can not be overcome without a painful transition period. Given sufficient time to work comprehensive reform will improve living standards dramatically as producers begin to make efficiently the goods that consumers want to buy The Latin American countries do not operate under as high a degree of state control as did the communist countries of Eastern Europe but they also need to undo the extensive damage caused by failed economic policies. In both regions the normal operation of markets was obstructed through widespread government interference and reliance on inefficient public enterprises Successful economic reform requires the rapid and comprehensive implementation of several critical policy principles. Establishing sound monetary and fiscal policies decontrolling domestic prices and opening the economy to international market forces will set the foundation for economic stability. These principles must be accompanied by a set of structural reform efforts that promote efficiency and provide production incentives. The structural reforms require establishing private property rights and privatiza- tion of public enterprises promoting domestic competition and reducing and reforming the role of government The convincing lesson from earlier piecemeal reform efforts in both Eastern Europe and Latin America is that only comprehensive reform programs can hope to create dynamic growing economies. Implementing only part of the needed reforms is likely to yield little benefit. Without comprehensive reforms output may decline substantially because individual incentives to produce are absent and living standards can not be increased. The reforms should also be implemented as quickly as politically and socially possible since delays only prolong the pain and disruption of the transition period Reform efforts under way throughout the world present an enormous opportunity to improve living standards of hundreds of millions of people. Financial and technical assistance from the United States and other developed economies combined with perseverance and patience in the countries in transition can ensure that these nations make the most of their great new opportunities CHAPTER Trade Liberalization and Economic Growth THE GLOBAL TRADING SYSTEM has been a driving force of economic growth and prosperity with world trade increasing more than one and a half times as fast as world income since the early 1960s. The fraction of U.S. production sold abroad has more than doubled since then and exports now account for about one-eighth of gross national product ( GNP ) As the world 's largest economy the United States has greatly benefited from the rapid growth of trade. By promoting innovation flexibility and competition the expansion of trade and the globalization of markets and firms have stimulated economic growth and improved living standards Many natural economic forces such as the declines in transportation and communication costs have contributed to the growth of trade but trade liberalization through substantial reductions of tariff barriers has also been a significant factor. Seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations conducted under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) have helped reduce average tariffs in industrial countries on manufactured goods from over percent in to about percent today. GATT has also promoted trade by establishing internationally accepted rules of fair play that have prevented and resolved numerous commercial conflicts between nations A number of recent bilateral and regional economic policy initiatives have also helped to lower barriers to trade. In the Western Hemisphere for instance implementation of the U.S.-Canada FreeTrade Agreement has reduced many trade and investment barriers. Further market opening would come from a U.S.-Mexico freetrade agreement as well as from the hemisphere-wide system of free trade envisioned in the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative The current round of GATT negotiations known as the Uruguay Round is aimed at further lowering trade barriers and at preventing increased protectionism and government management of trade An important goal of the United States and other countries in the Uruguay Round is to modernize and improve the rules embodied in the articles of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. This includes extending rules to areas either previously uncovered or for which coverage is neither systematic nor explicit such as services intellectual property rights and foreign investment ; deepening and broadening coverage of agriculture and textiles ; applying rules more thoroughly to developing countries ; strengthening the dispute settlement procedures ; and updating unfair trade rules to reflect modern business practices. Another goal is to cut tariffs worldwide and eliminate them altogether in several large manufacturing sectors Unfortunately the negotiations were suspended in December due to an impasse in the part of the talks dealing with agriculture. Successful completion of the Uruguay Round is important In recent years the world has experienced a rise in nontariff barriers managed trade arrangements and other protectionist measures that have hindered the expansion of trade and offset marketopening initiatives. The opening of markets around the world that would come from the success of the current GATT negotiations could greatly increase U.S. and world GNP. By contrast a breakdown of the multilateral trading system could increase protectionist pressures to erect trade and investment barriers. Just as market opening stimulated economic growth increased protection can reduce long-run growth and prosperity. In addition an escalating cycle of import protection that led to a severe and sudden rise in trade barriers could contribute to a short-run economic downturn ; the ensuing declines in income and employment might in turn increase pressures for protection. The last great cycle of antitrade policies contributed significantly to the Great Depression of the 1930s Today 's trading environment is vastly more complicated than it was in previous eras. New complex products and services now permeate the world marketplace ; trade barriers are more intricate ; and companies are increasingly globalized. Through foreign direct investment and other international linkages such as joint ventures and production-sharing arrangements multinational companies have dispersed their production research and marketing facilities throughout the world. The result has been greater integration of the world 's markets and firms. Today companies compete worldwide not only through exports but also through the location of facilities. Globalized companies are also playing an increasing role in world trade ; for example two-thirds of U.S. exports are traded by multinational corporations with about two-fifths of these exports traded " internally " between the parents of multinationals and their affiliates located abroad. International trade and foreign direct investment are now inextricably entwined THE GAINS FROM FREE TRADE AND LOSSES FROM PROTECTIONISM Trade whether between individuals within a town between towns within a country or between countries is a natural economic process. The tendency for individuals to engage in trade stems from the fundamental fact that voluntary trade benefits all participants. Even within a town the exchange of goods and services permits greater efficiency and prosperity for all residents because it allows individuals to specialize in what they do relatively well. Clearly it would be an inefficient use of a town 's resources if all its citizens grew all of their own food made all of their own clothes and built their own shelters. With a division of labor and trade among individuals the town will produce more goods using its available resources Countries like individuals are not all equally proficient at producing all goods. Just as specialization and trade among individuals in a town make everyone better off international trade increases the prosperity of all nations by allowing countries to concentrate on what they do well and to trade for goods that they are relatively less efficient at producing. Technology for example enables U.S. companies to develop and manufacture many advanced goods more cheaply than companies from developing countries even though American wages are many times higher than developing country wages. For less technologically advanced goods the United States may also enjoy higher labor productivity. This productivity advantage however may not be enough to overcome the wage difference. As a result firms from developing countries may be able to produce such goods at a lower cost If market forces are allowed to act freely countries will make the products they are relatively cost efficient at producing and will trade for other products. Since this international division of labor is cost effective all goods will be cheaper ; consequently all nations will benefit. Trade barriers restrict the market forces that lead to this efficient international division of labor. Removing trade barriers increases the well-being of all nations by allowing a more efficient international allocation of resources EFFICIENCY PRODUCTIVITY AND GROWTH In when David Ricardo first argued that trade benefits all nations an efficient international allocation of resources was relatively simple. Countries made certain products and traded for others. Today trade is much more complex. Firms increasingly engage in international joint ventures technology-sharing arrangements and long-term supply contracts as well as direct investments in foreign companies and facilities. Through these interna- tional linkages firms achieve greater productivity and risk-sharing in research and development marketing and manufacturing Thus by improving the efficiency and flexibility of the allocation of resources the globalization of firms and increased competition among them boost the prosperity of all nations Open markets and multinational firms increase efficiency by allowing companies to take advantage of national differences in productivity and resource costs. But they also promote efficiency even more directly. The development production and marketing of some products and services require large up-front investments. Unrestricted international trade and investment permit firms to attain the most efficient scale of operation thereby increasing productivity and lowering average costs. The realization of these economies of scale is generally good for business and benefits consumers by increasing their choice of products and raising the purchasing power of their incomes These beneficial effects usually called the efficiency gains from trade are permanent although this fact is not universally understood. For instance it has been claimed that the economic cost of a major rise in trade barriers worldwide would be no greater than that of a mild recession. This claim however misses the point that recessions typically last for less than a year while protectionist trade barriers impose costs that would lower incomes around the world for decades. Thus even if the costs of a mild recession and an increase in protection were comparable on an annual basis a major rise in trade barriers would have a much greater total cost Globalization and the Flexibility of the Economy In today 's rapidly changing world marketplace flexibility is important : An efficient allocation of resources this year may not be efficient next year. The globalization of markets and companies increases the ability of the U.S. economy to respond to changes in technology and the state of the world economy. Access to foreign markets technologies and capital allows resources to move more quickly from one sector to another when patterns of international competitiveness shift. It also permits U.S. companies to respond more rapidly and effectively to changes in technology products and markets. The globalization of production networks also implies that reducing trade barriers in a particular foreign market may well lead to outcomes other than increased exports from the United States. These alternative outcomes include increased exports by companies that are affiliated with U.S. multinationals but located abroad ; increased exports by foreign multinationals located overseas ; and the establishment by U.S. companies of new facilities in the foreign market through direct investment Pro-competitive Effects of Trade Competition helps push companies to produce efficiently goods that consumers want and to charge competitive prices. If a domestic manufacturer tried to charge too much for its products for example consumers would buy from the competition. Trade barriers which tend to restrict import competition reduce these beneficial effects. Import competition promotes cost efficiency quality awareness and competitive pricing by domestic firms. As discussed below added competition can also encourage the rate of innovation Investment Effects of Removing Trade Barriers Freeing up international trade and investment promotes a more efficient use of resources. These efficiency gains however reflect only part of the benefits from an open trading system. To the extent that capital becomes more efficient and profitable investing in new capital becomes more attractive. Market-opening initiatives can improve the investment climate thereby promoting investment and spurring growth. An example can be seen quite clearly in the investment-led growth that Spain experienced after it joined the European Community ( EC ) in Membership in the EC committed Spain to removing all barriers to the movement of goods people and capital between Spain and the other EC nations During the following years Spanish investment grew at an annual rate of percent almost three times the rate of growth of Spanish income. In contrast investment in Spain grew more slowly than income during the first half of the 1980s. While the lowering of trade barriers was not the only factor stimulating Spanish investment the induced capital formation magnified the efficiency gains from liberalization by providing additional productive resources Long-Term Growth Effects of Trade Long-term growth has many sources. Growth of the labor force for instance provides more workers every year and thus the possibility of more output every year. Another source of long-term growth is improved technology and the rise in output per worker that is in labor productivity that accompanies it. The effectiveness with which capital and labor are combined to create output is constrained by technical and managerial know-how. Advances in such know-how are primarily produced by profit-motivated firms To develop new products or improve manufacturing efficiency for existing products a firm must invest in knowledge creation. The return on such investments is the profit that flows from the temporary advantage that the innovation gives the firm over its competitors. From an economy-wide perspective these profit-motivated innovations allow more output to be produced from the economy 's re- sources. The resulting productivity growth boosts the growth of living standards International trade can promote long-term growth by encouraging technological innovation. By permitting innovators to sell to a larger market trade may increase the profitability of innovation That in turn spurs innovation and growth of productivity and incomes. For instance access to foreign markets may allow firms to spread research and development costs over more sales thereby increasing the profitability of innovation. However this pro-innovation effect of a larger market may be partly offset by the fact that there may be more competing innovators and innovations in a larger market. Depending on the circumstances trade may stimulate innovation and productivity growth by confronting firms with a stark choice between innovating and going out of business The globalization of firms and markets also spurs technological progress through the international exchange of technical knowledge. Domestic companies for example often use imported components in making final goods. Foreign innovations that improve the quality or lower the price of such components improve the quality and lower the price of the final goods. A closely related pro-growth effect is the way in which international trade and investment may help alleviate duplication of research effort thereby permitting more efficient use of the world 's research resources The notion that international trade increases economic growth is centuries old and widely accepted today. Quantitative estimates of the impact of market opening on growth are more difficult to obtain than its efficiency effects however because economists have begun only recently to develop analytic frameworks that can capture the links between trade innovation and growth. Typically estimates of the gains from market opening incorporate only the efficiency effects. However in assessing the quantitative impact of market-opening initiatives such as the Uruguay Round it is important to include the innovation and growth effects as well since they are potentially quite large ( Box and Chart ) IMPORT PROTECTION AND MANAGED TRADE Just as opening markets is beneficial policies that protect markets from international competition reduce efficiency and impede growth. Import protection policies take many forms : Tariffs reduce import competition by taxing imports import quotas restrict the quantity of imports directly and voluntary restraint agreements ( VRAs ) reduce imports by inducing foreign producers to decrease their exports. Policies that manage international market forces or alter market outcomes such as government management of market shares prices or the composition of imports or exports are examples of managed trade Box * The Income Effects of a Successful Uruguay Successful eoiripi ^ tioii of the Uruguay Round would raise U.S. income sig ^ Ac ^ tly ; Tlie substantial reduction of tariff and nontariff trad ^ lbarriers resulting from a successful conclusion of the round would. ' " 'boost U.3. income by enhancing the efficiency of the U * S. economy. Additionally a more open world trading and investment system would promote growth by encouraging innovation and investment. Chart shows projected growth paths with and without successful completion of the Uruguay BotmcL Taking growth and efficiency effects together it is estimate ! that the level of U.S. GNP would be percent higher in the year than it would be without the reduction of trade barriers that is likely to result from successful completion of the Uruguay Round. Of course U.S. income would be higher even during ihe years preceding Adding up the annual gains over the next years yields an impressive $ trillion Chart Estimated increase in U.S. GNP from a Successful Uruguay Round Reduced trade barriers resulting from a successful Uruguay Round would boost U.S. income substantially Trillions of dollars U.S. GNP with Reduced Trade Barriers j = $ Trillion Estimated Gain in income over Years U.S. GNP at Trend Growth i Sources : Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and Council of Economic Advisers Protectionist policies in general and managed trade in particular dampen U.S. productivity and growth for many reasons. When governments interfere with market forces the allocation of resources reflects political interests and power which do not usually produce an allocation of resources that maximizes economic efficiency or average living standards. Moreover such allocations typically involve a delicate political balancing which makes it difficult to react flexibly to changes in the international economy or shifts in competitiveness. Also governments rarely have the necessary information background or general understanding of commercial realities to make good business decisions. Finally detailed government intervention may diminish competition which is essential to the proper functioning of the free-market system. When governments determine market shares sales or prices they lessen the pressure on firms to produce efficiently and price competitively Indeed managed trade often results in market cartels The Costs of Protection The cost of import restrictions drives home the importance of open markets. Import restrictions of all kinds tend to reduce import competition thereby raising the prices of both imports and those domestic products that compete with them. Higher prices benefit domestic producers of the goods but harm consumers who buy them. In this sense import restrictions are like a sales tax on imports that is used to finance a production subsidy to the protected domestic industry In the clothing and textile sector for example trade is managed in great detail by a worldwide web of thousands of bilateral quotas involving more than countries. The quotas and their associated growth rates are renegotiated under an international agreement known as the Multi-Fiber Arrangement. Every few years since the Multi-Fiber Arrangement itself has been renegotiated Additional quotas are intermittently placed on new fabrics and new suppliers when their exports rise enough to disrupt domestic production. In the United States imports of textiles and clothing are restricted by hundreds of these bilateral quotas as well as by relatively high tariffs. U.S. producers benefit from the higher prices on each item they sell while U.S. buyers lose because they must pay higher prices on each item they buy whether imported or domestic. It has been estimated that protection in this sector cost American consumers about $ billion in while U.S. producers gained slightly more than $ billion This pattern of gains and losses is similar for import restrictions on other products. Between and for example the number of imported Japanese automobiles was restricted by a voluntary restraint agreement. One study estimates that this VRA cost U.S. consumers $ billion in while U.S. automakers gained only $ billion. The imports of machine tools are currently restricted by VRAs. The consumer cost of VRAs on machine tools was $ million in while the gain to U.S. machine tool manufacturers was only $ million. Since consumers of machine tools are typically U.S. manufacturers themselves the VRAs have an additional effect. By raising the cost of important inputs the VRAs may reduce the competitiveness of other U.S. manufacturing firms Sugar provides another complex example of import protection The U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) must by law enforce a price floor of cents per pound of sugar. Moreover the USDA must maintain that price with no cost to the government. The problem is that the world price of sugar is far below cents and it fluctuates. If sugar imports were not managed almost all U.S consumers would buy less costly imported sugar driving the U.S market price below cents. Since the USDA stands ready to buy unlimited quantities from U.S. producers at cents it would be forced to purchase the entire U.S. sugar output every year. That of course would violate current law. The solution implemented by USDA is to manage a set of trade restrictions that reduces sugar imports enough to ensure that U.S. demand meets supply above cents a pound. Moreover since market conditions change in the United States and the rest of the world government officials must adjust these import restrictions to keep the market price near cents a pound. It has been estimated that import restrictions on sugar cost American consumers $ billion in while producers benefited by only $ billion The Myth that Protection Saves Jobs Although it is commonly asserted that protection saves jobs this assertion is misleading. Protection does not save jobs in the long run for the economy as a whole it merely keeps jobs in the protected sectors. Removing protection can however lead to short-run unemployment as displaced workers look for new jobs. The studies of voluntary restraint agreements mentioned above also calculated the consumer cost of the relevant protectionist policies relative to the number of jobs " saved. " What these calculations actually show is the consumer cost of keeping one person employed in the protected sector instead of some other sector. To take one example the consumer cost per job " saved " by the machine tool VRAs was estimated to be $ a year Political Economy of Protectionist Policies The discussion of protection leads to the issue of why some sectors are protected while others indeed most are allowed to adjust to import competition. More generally it raises the question : // consumers always lose more than producers gain why do the United States and other countries have import restrictions ? The answer is that the cost to consumers is spread over many millions of people while the gain to producers is divided among many fewer people. As a result producers often find it worthwhile to pay the cost of organizing and influencing their governments Since the per consumer cost of import restrictions is typically low consumers generally do not find it worthwhile to pay the cost of participating in such efforts Fairness in Trade To many the economic effects of trade barriers are only part of the story. To them it is simply unfair that some governments discriminate against foreign products through the use of tariffs or other barriers to trade. Overly bureaucratic procedures that impede imports unilateral decisions that imports do not mesh with certain tastes or standards and seemingly arbitrary health standards provide examples of governmental discrimination against foreign products that go against many peoples ' notion of fair play The concept of fairness in trade is embodied in the principles of GATT. A basic GATT precept for example is the most-favorednation ( MFN ) rule. Under MFN countries that are members of GATT must treat all other members equally in their application of trade measures. Most countries including the United States prefer to reduce trade barriers in concert with other nations in part because resistance to lowering protection is likely to be mitigated if it can be done on a more equal or fairer basis. The exchange-of-concessions approach to trade negotiations endorsed by GATT ( discussed below ) embodies this notion of fairness Another concept related to fairness is that of " national treatment " that is the idea that the products of domestic and foreign firms should receive equal treatment with respect to domestic taxes and regulations. In the process of assessing and mediating many international disputes over alleged unfair trade barriers GATT typically applies the national treatment rule by determining if the products of foreign firms are being treated differently from those of local firms SUMMARY Markets and companies are increasingly global in scope. The resulting increase in trade and investment benefits the United States and the world as a whole by allowing resources to be more productively and flexibly utilized Opening markets to international trade pushes companies to produce efficiently goods that consumers want and to charge competitive prices. Open markets also improve efficiency by allowing companies to operate at the most efficient scale of operation Reducing barriers to international trade and investment can improve the investment climate and increase the rate of innovation thereby increasing the rate of growth of living standards * Managed trade and protectionist policies are harmful because they reduce the efficiency and flexibility of the economy and hinder economic growth GLOBAL TRADE AND THE URUGUAY ROUND GATT has contributed significantly to the rapid growth of world trade. By facilitating the reduction of trade barriers through multilateral trade negotiations GATT has stimulated trade growth directly. Trade has also been fostered more indirectly by the strengthening and continued acceptance of GATT 's rules governing international commerce. Just as domestic business laws are essential to the smooth functioning of commercial relationships within a country GATT is important in facilitating trade among countries Today the GATT system is facing many challenges. The original agreement was written primarily to deal with trade in manufactured goods among developed countries yet today only about threefifths of world export earnings come from manufactures. Services account for about one-fifth of world export earnings agriculture accounts for about one-tenth and oil and minerals account for the rest. Moreover in recent years many developing countries have become important participants in the trading system yet they are not fully subject to GATT rules. Foreign direct investment by corporations is also an increasingly important aspect of the world trading system yet GATT rules do not explicitly address such investment The nature of today 's trade barriers poses new challenges to the GATT system. Since tariff barriers are quite low on average at least in developed nations continued market opening requires that nontariff barriers be reduced. While tariffs are easy to quantify and relatively easy to negotiate many of the nontariff barriers to trade discussed in the Uruguay Round such as government subsidies and import quotas have proved more difficult to negotiate and reduce. Additionally in the past decade the number of managed trade arrangements has increased. Agriculture automobiles consumer electronics semiconductors steel textiles and other sectors have been subjected to governmental management of exports market shares and prices in various parts of the world. Finally in today 's highly interdependent world what appear to be domestic policies may have international trade implications. In fact a number of recent trade disputes have their roots in national poli- cies that are not related to international trade in an obvious way ( Box ) banned all ii | | p>rte of growth promotants following a Cfemmunity-wide ban on nontherapeutic hormones used in The Umted States believed the di ^ iiot based on sdeiitifite evidence Mid that it constituted an unjustifiable restriction on trade. Bilateral consultations were eventually able to resolve a number of points of contention but not the underlying issue of how to deal with food standards that are not based on scientific evidence * The government of Thailand instituted a ban on cigarette advertising in addition to a bsn on imported cigarettes and other restrictive practices. In response to a complaint from the United States GATT found the import ban illegal but ruled that Thailand can prohibit tobacco advertising for health reasons In accordance with a U.S law prohibiting residues in foods of chemicals not registered with the Environmen * tal Protection Agency the United States recently imposed a temporary ban on EC wine imports containing a fungicide caEed procymidone until the health risk can be adequately determined. The EC and the United States are engaged in consultations on the temporary import ban A possible EC ban on certain furs caught in countries that permit the use of steel leghold traps would restrict U.S. fur trade. There is widespread support in the United States as well as in Europe for the development of more humane traps. However the U.S. Government opposes the imposition of an arbitrary deadline to meet standards that have not yet been developed and argues that trapping serves the desirable environmental goal of managing the population of fur-bearing animals PROCESS AND TIMING OF THE NEGOTIATIONS The Uruguay Round negotiations are an ambitious attempt to open markets as well as to meet the challenges posed by the greatly increased complexity of trade trade barriers and the firms in- volved in trade. Successful completion of the Uruguay Round would encourage growth and raise living standards in the United States and around the world. Success would also help defuse trade tensions and conflicts that might otherwise escalate. The use of costly agricultural export subsidies for example might increase if the Uruguay Round fails. Moreover complaints from U.S. industries about unfair trade practices might rise possibly increasing the use of retaliatory actions under U.S. trade law. For these reasons the Administration has encouraged all nations to make the commitments necessary to bring the Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion The Uruguay Round talks were scheduled for completion in early December at a meeting in Brussels. Due to an impasse in the part of the talks dealing with agriculture the Brussels meeting broke down and the Uruguay Round talks were suspended with no formal agreements in any of the many areas of negotiation. The impasse occurred when countries could not agree on a basis for detailed negotiations concerning agricultural export subsidies domestic farm policies that affect trade and agricultural import barriers Trade negotiations are based on what is referred to as an " exchange of concessions. " That is negotiators talk about mutual policy reforms as if they were exchanging concessions even though the reforms would benefit countries on all sides of the bargaining table. For instance as discussed above U.S. import restrictions on clothing cost American consumers billions of dollars a year. Yet developing countries ask the United States to make concessions on clothing that is to open further the U.S. market to clothing imports before they will make market-opening concessions that are likely to save their consumers billions. The word " concession " is used because domestic producers who compete with imports tend to resist such market opening. This exchange-of-concessions approach has been quite successful in previous GATT rounds primarily because it allows governments to counter national groups opposed to opening the domestic market with the political influence of domestic exporters who seek market openings in other countries AREAS OF NEGOTIATION The Uruguay Round talks have addressed three goals : reducing barriers to trade extending GATT rules to new sectors and improving GATT rules by strengthening and updating them to match modern commercial realities. In pursuit of these goals the negotiations have proceeded on a wide range of areas several of which are discussed below Tariff Reduction and Elimination A very important part of the negotiations is the reduction of tariffs. Participants in the Uruguay Round have already agreed to reduce the average of their tariff rates by about one-third. They have not however agreed upon the specific products on which tariffs will be cut. A vast number of products may be affected. The United States for instance has requested foreign tariff cuts on thousands of specific products and has offered to cut U.S. tariffs on thousands of products The United States has also put forth a novel tariff-cutting proposal called the Zero for Zero Initiative. Under this initiative the United States offers to cut U.S. tariffs to zero in particular sectors such as steel electronics construction equipment and pharmaceuticals if other countries agree to cut their tariffs to zero in the same sectors. When fully implemented the initiative would result in free-trade sectors ( FTSs ) involving thousands of products made in scores of countries thereby improving export opportunities for a large number of companies. The volume of U.S. exports that would be covered by the proposed FTSs is larger than the volume of U.S. exports to Canada the Nation 's largest trading partner Agriculture The strongest advocates of reducing protection of agriculture in the Uruguay Round have been the United States and a coalition of food exporting nations known as the Cairns Group which includes Australia Canada and New Zealand as well as Argentina and several other developing nations. Indeed the importance of an agriculture agreement to some nations has had broad implications for the entire Uruguay Round. Key trading countries from the developing world including Brazil Indonesia Malaysia Thailand and several others have expressed a reluctance to forge agreements unless agricultural reform is also negotiated and other issues of great interest to them are addressed. The Cairns Group has threatened to reject agreements on all other issues unless comprehensive agricultural policy reform is achieved Agricultural trade makes up about one-tenth of world trade yet it has never been seriously subject to GATT discipline. Indeed virtually every government intervenes in its agricultural sector. Particularly in industrial economies agricultural policies often promote producers ' interests through trade barriers or subsidization The EC maintains high domestic food prices with a maze of import barriers and export subsidies that largely insulates its million farmers from world market forces. Japan and South Korea maintain even higher barriers against most food imports. Canada the United States and many other nations also protect their agricultural sectors to some degree in a variety of ways The EC provides a prime example of government protection of agriculture. The EC was once a major food importer. Now government-controlled prices are set so high that European farmers produce much more than European consumers wish to buy. To dis- pose of these surpluses the EC must subsidize exporters to buy EC products at the high internal prices and sell them on the world market at much lower prices. Other countries may have to match the EC 's subsidized export prices if they are to compete in the world market. The net result of these and other similar practices is that world prices of many agricultural products are significantly depressed and resources are inefficiently allocated. In the first full year of the Uruguay Round negotiations the EC spent about $ billion on export subsidies and the United States spent about $ billion ( Box ) An agreement to reduce agricultural trade barriers and subsidies would bring significant efficiency gains to the global economy. By allowing market forces to determine agricultural production and prices such reductions would increase the amount of trade in most agricultural commodities and according to one study would add $ billion annually in real terms to the combined income of developed market economies. The largest efficiency gains would accrue to the economies of the EC the United States and Japan In Europe manufacturing output and total employment would increase while in Japan land and food prices would fall. Despite these beneficial effects Europe and Japan have strongly resisted reform partly because of the high levels of protection that existing barriers give to their politically powerful farm groups The United States which exported about $ billion worth of agricultural products in has a large stake in achieving comprehensive agricultural policy reform. It has been estimated that the net effect of global agricultural protection lowers the U.S. agricultural trade balance by $ billion. While U.S. exports are a key concern the U.S. interest in an agriculture agreement has other dimensions too. For example reducing domestic farm subsidies could help reduce the U.S. budget deficit. Resistance to reducing domestic farm programs unilaterally is strong however partly because the programs help offset the price-reducing effects of other countries ' farm subsidies The United States could increase the efficiency of its economy by unilaterally reducing the degree of protection in agriculture Indeed as described in Chapter the United States has already taken important steps toward farm policy reform. However if the United States reformed its agricultural policies in concert with others U.S. farmers would face more open export markets and more favorable market prices. One study estimates that world market prices would have been roughly percent higher in in the absence of subsidies and trade barriers worldwide Textiles Trade in textiles and clothing accounts for about one-tenth of all manufactured exports. This trade is particularly important to de- Box Export Subsidies : Who Gains and Who Loses ? If the Uruguay Round fails an increase in the subsidization of agricultural exports especially by the European Community ( EC ) and the United States is a distinct possibility. Indeed the Congress has already authorized an additional $ billion for U,S. export assistance to be used to offset EC subsidies should the round fail Who gains and who loses when a country imposes export subsidies ? Its domestic farmers gain since they secure higher prices and greater exports. Its taxpayers lose since they pay for the subsidies. Its consumers can also lose because the subsidies typically raise domestic food prices. That is because export subsidies encourage farmers to sell more to foreign markets making less available at home. Adding up the gains and losses to farmers taxpayers and consumers the subsidizing country as a whole is usually worse off Other nations that export agricultural products may have to counter with expensive export subsidies of their own or risk being squeezed out of world markets. Consumers in countries that import the subsidized exports may welcome the lower food prices that result but farmers in those countries would be harmed. Many food importers are developing countries with relatively large shares of their populations working on farms By depressing food prices in importing countries subsidized exports can create an artificial disincentive to agricultural investment Despite their high domestic costs countries may be willing to bear the burden of export subsidies in the short run. If U.S subsidies for example counter EC subsidies effectively by displacing EC sales in export markets the European Community may agree to reduce its subsidies and return trade to a freer basis. The risk of this strategy is that a " subsidy war * * may occur which can send food prices in international markets down and taxpayer costs at home up veloping nations since it accounts for almost a quarter of their manufactured exports. The continued existence and increasing restrictiveness of the global management of textile trade has eroded the confidence of many developing nations in the GATT system One of the goals of the United States and other nations in the Uruguay Round is to phase out the policies that currently control textile and clothing trade. The negotiations are aimed at establishing a mechanism to return trade in this sector to the regular rules of GATT over a certain period of time. The transition mechanism being considered in the negotiations would use the basic structure of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement for those textile and apparel products currently under quota. During the transition the growth rates of these quotas would be increased and certain products would be progressively integrated into GATT. Furthermore a special procedure would allow new quotas to be placed on uncovered products and suppliers to keep these imports from disrupting domestic production. If the Uruguay Round talks succeed in phasing out textile and clothing protection U.S. consumers would save billions of dollars annually Services In American companies exported over $ billion of services making the United States the world 's largest exporter of services. International trade in services such as insurance banking and tourism accounts for about one-fifth of world export earnings One important aim of the Uruguay Round is to include in the GATT system a multilateral agreement on principles and rules for trade in services as well as to eliminate progressively impediments to trade in services. The talks have focused on obtaining a services agreement consisting of three parts : a broad framework agreement called the General Agreement on Trade in Services that would lay out principles and rules governing services trade ; a set of annexes that would discuss particular service sectors in detail ; and a list of commitments by countries to open their services markets to foreign firms Negotiations in this area are so new that even the definition of trade in services had to be addressed. The proposed agreement defines services trade as the supply of a service by a firm from one country to a consumer from another country. This definition covers cases in which the firm is located in the consumer 's market ( such as in banking ) the consumer travels to another country to purchase services ( such as in tourism ) or the firm and consumer are located in different countries ( such as telecommunications ) The proposed agreement also had to define what constitutes a barrier to trade in services. The proposed definition states that countries should not discriminate among foreign service companies and should treat foreign service firms no less favorably than domestic firms. Any deviation from this standard would constitute a trade barrier. An example of a barrier to trade in services under this definition would be a law that makes it difficult for an insurance firm from one country to set up in another country. One other important principle that would be established by the proposed trade-inservices agreement involves " transparency. " This principle would require countries to publish all laws and regulations that affect trade in services Intellectual Property Rights In U.S. export earnings from royalties and licensing fees amounted to $ billion. In the United States and most other industrialized nations the rights of knowledge creators to earn profits on their creations are protected by laws that make it illegal to pirate patents software books records or tapes or to sell counterfeit goods. In many countries particularly in the developing world laws to protect these rights known as intellectual property rights do not exist or are not well enforced. As a result piracy and counterfeiting of trademark goods and services are widespread. The U.S International Trade Commission estimated that U.S. industry loses many billions of dollars a year to piracy and counterfeiting. The aim of the United States in the Uruguay Round has been to negotiate a set of international rules governing trade-related intellectual property rights and to erect an effective system to ensure that obligations under GATT and other agreements to protect these rights are enforced Investment The globalization of modern companies means that barriers to foreign investment act as barriers to trade. Because companies investing in foreign countries tend to import many of the inputs they use in production and to export a significant portion of their output restrictions on investment directly affect the flow of trade The Uruguay Round has included negotiations on new rules that would restrict the use of investment policies that inhibit or distort trade There is no generally accepted definition of what constitutes such a trade-related investment measure ( TRIM ) Examples include government requirements that foreign multinational corporations use specific amounts of locally produced goods in their products that foreign corporations export a certain share of their output and that foreign investors may only use a limited amount of the foreign exchange they earn to purchase inputs. Current GATT rules indirectly cover a few of these measures but the rules are neither comprehensive nor clear and their application to developing countries has never been tested The U.S. position shared by most industrialized countries is that GATT should prohibit TRIMs that inherently restrict or distort trade establish a test to discipline those nonprohibited TRIMs that can have adverse trade effects and develop a timeline to phase out existing prohibited TRIMs. The negotiations have been hindered however by deep differences of opinion between developed and developing countries. Many developing countries which are largely host countries for foreign direct investment insist that control of such investment through TRIMs is crucial to achieving their development objectives In the long run given the increasing overlap between investment and trade activity it is desirable to have strong GATT rules covering all aspects of foreign investment not merely trade-related foreign investment analogous to those that cover trade. Even if the Uruguay Round adopts rules regarding trade-related investment measures nothing comparable to GATT 's rules on goods trade would exist for investment. Establishing common multilateral rules for investment throughout the world is a high priority for the United States because differences in foreign investment policies across countries reduce the benefits that stem from the global production networks of multinational corporations Dispute Settlement An effective and reliable dispute settlement mechanism is an important component of the GATT system. One of the most significant ways in which the Uruguay Round may strengthen the rulesbased international trading system is by improving the GATT mechanism that is used to settle many trade disputes among nations. The current procedure establishes a panel of experts that decides the merits of the dispute and announces its findings. While this system has performed reasonably well in many cases in recent years some nations have complained that the process is too slow and unreliable. These shortcomings reduce the credibility of the multilateral dispute settlement procedure and erode confidence in the GATT system as a whole. Procedural changes that have resulted from the ongoing negotiations have already improved the process. The final goal is a dispute settlement procedure that is swift reliable and effective Safeguards GATT recognizes that countries may need to impose new import restrictions to allow import-sensitive industries time to adjust to shifts in competitiveness. Temporary import restrictions for this purpose so-called safeguard measures can be imposed if increased imports cause or threaten to cause serious injury to an industry As a general principle GATT indicates that import restrictions should be tariffs rather than quotas or other quantity restrictions and that these measures should be applied equally to all trading partners. GATT also allows all countries affected by the safeguard measures to retaliate or request compensation from the country that imposes them These conditions have discouraged the use of GATT 's safeguard provisions. As a consequence countries often rely on bilateral arrangements such as voluntary export agreements to limit imports The EC is by far the leading user of these arrangements but the United States Japan Canada Sweden Switzerland Norway and Finland have also used them. These arrangements are not subject to GATT rules of any kind. Their use allows political pressures rather than market forces to influence trade flows. These arrangements also tend to favor old suppliers over new suppliers and to exclude third countries ( which may be indirectly affected ) from discussion of the design implementation and removal of the restrictions. Uruguay Round negotiators are seeking new rules to clarify the conditions under which safeguard measures may be taken and to discourage the use of voluntary export agreements Antidumping The term " dumping " can describe selling a product at lower prices in some countries than in others or selling a product below cost. GATT allows a country whose industries are injured by the dumping of imports to impose a special tariff called an antidumping duty. In the Uruguay Round the United States and other nations seek to update GATTs antidumping rules to match modern commercial realities and to standardize and clarify procedures for investigations of alleged dumping SUMMARY The United States and other nations are endeavoring to strengthen extend and modernize GATTs rules governing international trade as well as to reduce trade barriers worldwide Long-run U.S. goals of multilateral trade liberalization are embodied in the positions taken by the United States in the Uruguay Round. These include extending GATT discipline to trade in agriculture textiles services and intellectual property ; ensuring that developing countries take on the full obligations of GATT ; establishing explicit international rules for foreign investment ; and making the GATT dispute settlement mechanism swift fair and effective Successful completion of the Uruguay Round is important to the future growth and prosperity of the United States and the world U.S. PRO-TRADE INITIATIVES IN THE AMERICAS AND ELSEWHERE The primary thrust of U.S. trade policy is to use multilateral discussions and fora such as GATT and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to promote free rules-based trade Indeed the multilateral Uruguay Round negotiations are the President 's top trade priority. The Administration however has made substantial progress toward promoting trade via other channels This progress is evident in a number of regional and bilateral protrade initiatives as well as in the avoidance of increased protection and a reduction of the overall level of tension in our trade relationships U.S.-MEXICO FREE-TRADE AREA In June the Presidents of the United States and Mexico strongly endorsed the goal of a comprehensive free-trade agreement between the United States and Mexico ( Box and Chart ) Such an agreement would progressively eliminate impediments to trade in goods and services and to investment as well as protect intellectual property rights. The United States already has freetrade agreements with Canada ( signed in ) and Israel ( signed in ) In addition the United States Mexico and Canada have been consulting on the possibility of a trilateral negotiation Mexico has reduced its trade barriers as part of its across-theboard market reform effort ( described in Chapter ) Since Mexico has reduced by roughly percent the product coverage of a form of import restriction known as import licensing. Mexico has also lowered its tariffs from an average of roughly percent in to about percent in However this 10-percent average is still much higher than the 4-percent average tariff that the United States has on imports from Mexico. A free-trade agreement would eventually bring both numbers to zero on U.S.-Mexico trade and would eliminate many nontariff measures A free-trade agreement would boost the international competitiveness of both U.S. and Mexican firms. To reduce costs companies often allocate phases of a manufacturing process among a number of nations. A free-trade agreement with Mexico would further encourage this natural international division of labor. By lowering the overall costs of U.S. manufacturing firms a free-trade agreement would make U.S. firms more competitive against imports in the United States and against other countries ' exports in the world market. This gain in manufacturing competitiveness encourages productivity and higher wages. The proposed free-trade agreement would similarly boost the competitiveness of Mexican firms. Additionally the two-way reduction in trade barriers would benefit Mexico by supporting its market reforms and encouraging economic growth INITIATIVES FOR THE AMERICAS In June the President unveiled his Enterprise for the Americas Initiative which will among other things pave the way to free trade throughout the Western Hemisphere. The proposed legislation addresses three issues : trade investment and debt. Chapter Box 7-C The Composition of U S * -Mexieo Trade Mexico is the third largest trading partner of the United States after Canada and Japan. About percent of UJSl exports went to Mexico in while about percent of U.S imports came from Mexico * The composition of trade with Mexico is quite similar to the U,S ~ Canada trade pattern as can be seen in Chart Most U.S.-Mexico trade is two-way trade in manufactured goods A closer look at the manufactures category reveals that much of this trade is two-way trade in similar products. The four largest U.S. exports to Mexico in were auto parts processed food electronic components and electrical switchgear. The four largest imports from Mexico were autos and auto parts electrical distributing equipment telecommunications equipment and electrical switchgear. Trade between the United States and Mexico in the manufacturing sector is almost balanced due largely to Mexico 's maquiladom program Maquiladoras are export-oriented plants most often located close to the U * S ~ Mexico border that are exempt from paying import duties on raw materials and parts that are used in making final products. In about percent of UJS. mer * ehandfee imports from Mexico originated in the maguiladoras * Chart U.S. Trade with Mexico and Canada Two-way trade in manufactured goods dominates U.S. bilateral trade with both Mexico and Canada U.S. Canada Trade U.S. Mexico Trade Imports from Mexico Exports to Mexico Imports from Canada ] Exports to Canada | Manufactures Agriculture Services Other Billions of Dollars Source : Department of Commerce Billions of Dollars discusses the investment and debt aspects of the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative. On the trade side the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative would establish a process that would eventually lead to a hemisphere-wide system of free trade. As a first step in this direction the United States would sign bilateral framework agreements with any interested country or group of countries in the region. These agreements facilitate discussion of means to eliminate impediments to trade and investment. The United States has entered into these agreements with Bolivia Colombia Chile Ecuador Honduras and Costa Rica. Negotiations have begun bilaterally with Venezuela Peru and Nicaragua as well as with Argentina Brazil Uruguay and Paraguay as a group. Framework agreements are also a possibility in the near future with El Salvador Guatemala Panama Jamaica and several other Caribbean countries. The next step is to negotiate free-trade agreements with individual countries and groups of countries. Chile which has a history of open markets has expressed strong interest in pursuing a freetrade agreement with the United States In October the President sent the Andean Trade Preference Act to the Congress. This proposal would eliminate U.S. import duties on many products imported from Bolivia Colombia Ecuador and Peru. A major goal of this unilateral market-opening initiative is to help these countries battle the production processing and shipment of illegal drugs by offering them opportunities to expand production and trade of products that are legal. Passage of this legislation early in is an important priority for the President. It will help in the fight against drugs and also help promote trade and prosperity in the hemisphere STRUCTURAL IMPEDIMENTS INITIATIVE One of the most significant developments in U.S. international economic policy in recent years is the U.S.-Japan Structural Impediments Initiative. This initiative is a new cooperative approach to opening markets. Instead of focusing on specific sectoral trade barriers the initiative is aimed at identifying and removing more basic impediments to trade market competition and balance of payments adjustment. The initiative produced a joint report in June On the Japanese side the joint report focused on a number of areas including the aggregate saving and investment balance ; laws regarding land use ; the structure of the Japanese distribution system which restricts the establishment and operation of large retail stores in Japan ; the organizational behavior of Japanese conglomerates known as keiretsu ; enforcement of Japan 's antimonopoly laws ; improved financial disclosure by Japanese firms ; and improved procedures for awarding patents. In the joint report the United States recognized that priority issues for U.S. policy in- elude reducing the Federal budget deficit stimulating private saving and improving education and training of U.S. workers SUMMARY In addition to pursuing market opening through multilateral fora the United States has undertaken several regional and bilateral pro-trade initiatives such as the proposed U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative and the Structural Impediments Initiative The proposed U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement would boost the international competitiveness of both U.S. and Mexican firms as well as increase efficiency flexibility and growth in both economies The ultimate goal of the trade liberalization components of the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative is a hemispheric system of free trade MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS AND THE TRADE-INVESTMENT LINKAGE The 1990s are likely to be marked by the increased globalization of companies a trend that began in the early post-World War II years and continued throughout the 1980s. The greater global integration of the operations of multinational corporations is the result of increasing foreign direct investment defined as the development of a new business or acquisition of an established business in a foreign market. It complements the globalization of markets engendered by the expansion of trade Indeed the globalization of companies results in a close connection between trade and investment. This connection can be seen quite clearly in the remarkable extent to which border-spanning companies are involved in trade. About percent of all U.S. exports and percent of all U.S. imports for example are actually transfers between parents of multinational corporations and their affiliates abroad ; that is the goods are transferred within the same company even though they cross international boundaries. The internationalization of operations underlying such " intrafirm " trade often means that a new product marketed globally is the fruit of research and development performed in one country engineering carried out in a second and production performed in a third The globalization of companies is a two-way street ; many countries in which U.S. multinationals are most active are also the ones that are the most active investors in the United States ( Box and Chart ) The global nature of companies has so progressed that sometimes it is difficult to decide which firms are foreign Honda for example sells more cars in the United States than it does in Japan. In fact some Hondas sold in Japan are actually made in Ohio. Whirlpool while headquartered in Michigan employs about people most of whom are non-American in different countries Box * Fdreigii Blreet Investment : Wh0 Invests and Where ? For most of the period immediately following World War H only companies based in the United States and in a few other countries developed or acquired businesses in other countries Such foreign direct investment was mostly in one direction * Countries that did the investing were rarely the recipients of foreign direct investment. Today * the United States not only continues to be the leading source of foreign direct investment with $ billion held abroad in but as Chart shows it is also the largest recipient of foreign direct investment * Chart World Stocks of Foreign Direct Investment Many countries that provide large amounts of foreign direct investment are also large recipients. Indeed the United States is both the largest source and the largest recipient Recipients Sources Other LDCs Developed % % Japan % Other Developed Other Europe % % Japan Germany % Germany Other Europe % % Note : Data are based on world stocks of direct investment Source : Department of Commerce % Statistics on foreign direct investment reflect historical purchase prices not current market values. Thus comparisons of stocks of foreign direct investment can be quite misleading. For instance the reported stock of foreign direct investment in the United States reached $ billion at the end of and exceeded the reported stock of U.S. direct investment abroad by $ billion. But much of U.S. direct investment abroad was made in the 1950s and 1960s while the bulk of foreign direct investment in the United States was made more recently. Because prices have risen considerably since the 1960s it is likely that the current value of U.S. holdings abroad exceeds the current value of foreign direct investment in the United States THE BENEFITS OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT Foreign direct investment in the United States is a sign of strength in the economy not of weakness. It is also a sign of the increasing internationalization of the economy through which U.S firms will be strengthened and made more competitive. This investment and the global orientation of companies benefit the United States. The unhindered flow of foreign direct investment leads to additional productive resources in the United States and facilitates the realization of cost-efficient scales of business by consolidating under one corporate roof separate but related operations. These boost the productivity and international competitiveness of the United States create jobs and promote innovation and productivity. The inflow of foreign capital helps to sustain U.S. investment despite the current low U.S. national saving rate and thus contributes to economic growth When U.S. multinationals first set up in Europe during the 1950s and 1960s many Europeans feared that Europe was being bought out by Americans and that their economies were being Americanized. In retrospect these concerns were unfounded. U.S. direct investment has benefited the European economies. The recent increase in foreign direct investment in the United States will similarly benefit the U.S. economy U.S. direct investment abroad also benefits the United States Extensive production networks of U.S. multinational corporations confer several advantages. One is the ability of such companies to compete more effectively in foreign markets by locating production facilities there rather than by exporting to those markets. Profits generated by such activities can flow back to the United States and U.S. affiliates abroad often create demand for exports of U.S production inputs services and technology. Foreign direct investment also provides insurance against the risk of new " host " country restrictions on trade. Finally U.S. direct investment abroad contributes to the economic health of our trading partners which in turn fosters greater U.S. economic growth U.S. multinational corporations from computer and electronics companies to pharmaceutical companies are often at the cutting edge of technology creation. Moreover they perform the vast majority of their research and development activities in the United States. U.S. multinationals are also major employers of American workers. The ratio of manufacturing jobs to service and wholesaling jobs was about one-fifth higher in U.S. multinationals ' parent operations than in their foreign operations in In general U.S multinational corporations today orient their operations toward the U.S. market. Indeed according to the most recent figures about three-fourths of total worldwide assets of U.S. multinationals are located in the United States. This share has increased from a decade earlier despite the growth of U.S. direct investment abroad It has been claimed that overseas production by U.S. multinational corporations displaces U.S. exports and in effect American jobs. A related concern is that U.S. multinationals produce goods abroad and import them into the United States rather than producing them domestically. Underlying these claims is the mistaken presumption that if U.S. direct investment abroad did not take place production would have been maintained at home and U.S exports to foreign markets would have continued. In most cases if U.S. multinationals did not establish affiliates abroad to produce for the local market they would be too distant to have an effective presence in that market. In addition companies from other countries would either establish such facilities or increase exports to that market. In effect it is not really possible to sustain exports to such markets in the long run. On a net basis it is highly doubtful that U.S. direct investment abroad reduces U.S. exports or displaces U.S. jobs. Indeed U.S. direct investment abroad stimulates U.S companies to be more competitive internationally which can generate U.S. exports and jobs. Equally important U.S. direct investment abroad allows U.S. firms to allocate their resources more efficiently thus creating healthier domestic operations which in turn tend to create jobs Another issue raised about multinational corporations is that the exports and imports they trade internally do not adjust as completely in the short run to exchange-rate changes as do goods that are traded between unrelated firms. Because of the long-run cost efficiencies associated with maintaining extensive global production networks and because some percentage of a multinational 's plant and equipment may not be completely salvageable if facilities are moved some intrafirm trade flows may well not adjust rapidly to shifts in exchange rates Of course like all trade flows intrafirm exports and imports do adjust to changes in exchange rates over time. Even in the absence of multinational enterprise however the open market for many of the types of products traded internally by multinationals is likely to be dominated by long-term contracts. That is because international business investments typically are economically risky and involve large commitments of capital and highly specialized assets Thus any apparent temporary rigidities in multinational corporate trade behavior reflect the fact that these firms have established efficient configurations of operations in the global marketplace Nonetheless relatively slow responses of internal exports and imports of multinational corporations to changes in exchange rates may subject U.S. economic policymakers to significant pressure to place restrictions on the way these firms build and maintain their networks of operations. Imposing such investment-restricting measures will result not only in corporate efficiency losses and thus potentially lower employment and a decline in profits but also in a decrease in U.S. competitiveness Foreign multinationals operating in the United States act in ways that are similar to U.S. multinationals in America. Table shows that in terms of paying their employees and the value added per employee these two types of multinationals are roughly the same TABLE l-l. Parents of U.S. Multinational Corporations vs. U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Corporations : U.S. Operations in [ Dollars ] Parents of U.S multinationals U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals Average compensation per employee Gross product per employee1 U.S. intrafirm exports per employee U.S. intrafirm imports per employee Data are for Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers In the area of intrafirm trade however there are pronounced differences. U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals export and import more per employee than U.S. multinationals operating in America. While the difference in export behavior is appreciable exports per employee are percent higher for U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals than for parents of U.S. multinationals the more than eightfold difference in import behavior is particularly striking. The difference in import behavior is explained in part by the fact that a significant number of the U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals act primarily as wholesale marketing offices for their parent companies. The higher import propensity is also a nat- ural outcome of the relative newness of foreign multinationals in the United States. When U.S. multinationals first set up in Europe during the 1950s and 1960s they also tended to import more than local companies Judging from history it seems likely that foreign multinationals operating in America will tend to become more " local " with time As Table shows the importance of imports in the input purchases of U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals has been decreasing. Correspondingly foreign multinationals are increasing the extent of vertical integration in their American operations producing in the United States more of the inputs they use. Moreover the local content of products made in the United States by foreign multinationals is quite high and has been rising TABLE Parents of U.S. Multinational Corporations and U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Corporations : Input Supply Choices vs. [ Percent ] Vertical integration ( ratio of gross product to sales ) Parents of U S multinationals U.S. Affiliates of foreign multinationals ? Import propensity in input purchases ( ratio of imports to total purchase of inputs ) Parents of u S. multinationals U S Affiliates of foreign multinationals Local content ( ratio of local inputs to sales ) Parents of U.S. multinationals U.S Affiliates of foreign multinationals W Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers Although foreign direct investment in the United States has increased greatly in recent years the involvement of foreign firms in America is low by international standards. Indeed foreign multinationals account for only about percent of U.S. jobs and business output. Moreover the recent rise in foreign direct investment is not unique to the United States but part of the worldwide trend toward the international integration of markets and companies Another visible manifestation of this trend is the rise in joint ventures technology- and production-sharing arrangements and other forms of international alliances. Such partnerships are found in many industries such as medical equipment and computer chips U.S. FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT POLICY The complex linkages between trade flows and production operations of multinational corporations underscore the importance of not creating barriers to the free flow of foreign direct investment into the United States. Such barriers would subvert the natural forces of the global marketplace and reduce efficiency and growth The benefits engendered by the global production and trade networks of modern multinational corporations point to the undesirability of devising policies aimed at restricting foreign investment Questions raised about what differentiates a " domestic " firm from a " foreign " firm while conceptually interesting and important distract from policy questions about how to maintain the strength and flexibility of the U.S. economy. The Administration supports maintaining an open foreign investment policy with limited exceptions related to national security. This policy produces the greatest possible national benefits from all investments made in the U.S. economy. The United States has long recognized that unhindered international investment is beneficial to all nations that it is a " positive sum game. " The growing importance of foreign direct investment in the United States has raised concerns about the adequacy and quality of the Federal Government 's statistics on foreign direct investment in the United States. The Foreign Direct Investment and International Financial Data Improvements Act signed by the President in significantly upgrades government information on this score Among other things the new legislation provides for greater coordination among Federal statistical agencies in the collection sharing and assessment of data on foreign direct investment in the United States ; permits analysis of such data at a more disaggregated level than was previously feasible ; and requires the Secretary of Commerce to report annually on the role and significance of foreign direct investment in the United States. These improvements will be accomplished with no additional reporting requirements on businesses and by preserving the principle of nondisclosure of confidential information SUMMARY The 1990s are likely to be marked by greater global integration of the operations of multinational corporations as a result of increasing foreign direct investment. Concomitantly the flow of international trade carried out by multinational corporations especially intrafirm trade is growing Foreign direct investment in the United States benefits the Nation by providing additional productive resources thus helping to create jobs and increase productivity. U.S. direct investment abroad benefits the United States by enhancing the competitiveness of U.S. companies by generating exports and by contributing to the economic health of our trading partners U.S. affiliates of foreign multinational corporations operate very similarly to U.S.-based multinationals except that they tend to export and import more. However this pattern is typical of businesses of such young vintage and over time this difference is expected to diminish Maintaining an open U.S. and multilateral foreign investment policy one that results in the greatest possible benefits of in- vestment without regard to the nationality of investors remains an important U.S. economic policy objective CONCLUSION International trade and investment have promoted growth and prosperity not only in the United States but throughout the world Although largely the product of natural economic forces trade growth has also been encouraged by the reduction of trade barriers brought about by multilateral bilateral and regional market-opening initiatives. Multilateral market-opening talks organized by GATT have been instrumental in reducing trade barriers. Markets in the Western Hemisphere have also been opened by the U.S.Canada Free-Trade Agreement and will be opened further if the proposed U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement and the hemispherewide free-trade system envisioned in the President 's Enterprise for the Americas Initiative are realized In the Uruguay Round the United States and other countries are seeking to extend modernize and reinforce GATT rules and to reduce trade barriers further. Successful completion of the round and the continued openness of markets worldwide are important. A failure of the Uruguay Round might encourage protectionist pressures that could lead to rising trade barriers around the world Just as falling trade and investment barriers stimulated growth in trade and incomes a retreat away from open markets could decrease growth and prosperity. Indeed if the resulting closing of markets were abrupt and severe enough it could contribute to a worldwide recession The expansion of trade is complemented by the greater globalization of corporations. Indeed imports and exports between the parents of multinational corporations and their affiliates abroad now account for a significant portion of international trade flows. As a result today 's highly integrated world marketplace is one in which the benefits of trade are generated worldwide by rapid diffusion of new technologies lower production costs and greater product choice for consumers. The presence in the U.S. economy of multinational corporations both U.S.-owned and foreign-owned is in the Nation 's interest. An important U.S. economic policy objective is to maintain open markets for both trade and foreign investment Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Michael J. Boskin Chairman Richard L. Schmalensee Member John B. Taylor Member Council Members and their Dates of Service Name Edwin G Nourse Leon H Keyserling John D Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F Burns Neil H Jacoby Walter W Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S Davis Paul W McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C Wallich Walter W Heller James Tobin Hermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M Okun James S Duesenberry Merton J Peck Warren L Smith Paul W McCracken Hendrik S Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W MacAvoy Burton G Malkiel Charles L Schultze William D Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C Eads Stephen M Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L Schmalensee Oath of office date Position August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August February June October Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January May September Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The mission of the President 's Council of Economic Advisers which was established by the Employment Act of is to provide the President with the best possible economic advice to develop and recommend economic policies to the President and to appraise programs and activities of the Federal Government as they pertain to the health of the Nation 's economy. In addition to the Council 's role in directly advising the President the Council is represented usually by the Chairman at Cabinet meetings meetings of the Economic Policy Council the Domestic Policy Council and the Council on Competitiveness and at National Security Council meetings on issues of economic importance Michael J. Boskin Richard L. Schmalensee and John B. Taylor who comprised the Council at the end of continued to serve as Council Members in with Dr. Boskin continuing to serve as Chairman. Dr. Boskin is on a leave of absence from Stanford University where he is the Burnet C. and Mildred Finley Wohlford Professor of Economics. Dr. Schmalensee is on a leave of absence from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he is the Gordon Y Billard Professor of Economics and Management. Dr Taylor is on a leave of absence from Stanford University where he is Professor of Economics As it did in the Council continued to stress the importance of maximizing sustainable economic growth to raise American living standards setting ambitious but realistic long-term economic goals and removing barriers to market forces. In its interactions with various outside groups the Congress the business community international organizations the press as well as within the Administration the Council continued to emphasize the Administration 's fiscal monetary regulatory and trade policy principles This year 's Report follows last year 's Report in outlining these principles and showing how they are essential for maintaining strong economic growth and improved standards of living MACROECONOMIC POLICIES The Council closely followed macroeconomic developments throughout the year and emphasized the importance of credible systematic fiscal and monetary policies as a key to mitigating the recession and ultimately sustaining maximum economic growth.The Council briefed the President and participated in regular discussions on macroeconomic policy issues with the Department of the Treasury the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) and other members of the President 's economic team. The Council also regularly exchanged information and met with the Federal Reserve Board on monetary policy issues and the economic outlook The Council and the other members of the " Troika " Treasury and OMB continued to produce the Administration 's economic forecasts and projections. Usually two official forecasts are published each year : one at the start of the year which is used as part of the President 's budget and one as part of the Mid-Session Review in July. The Troika 's forecasting group is chaired by the Council. Dr. Boskin and Dr. Taylor testified on the forecasts before the Joint Economic Committee. In preparing its forecasts the Troika continued the practice initiated in of developing and publishing alternative sets of economic assumptions to indicate that the forecasts and resulting budget calculations have a considerable degree of uncertainty The Council continued to work to improve the general understanding of economics and the quality of economic information through a comprehensive series of memoranda and briefing papers on economic events for the President and the White House Senior Staff regular briefings for the White House press on major economic news and meetings with outside economists forecasters financial analysts and business people. The Chairman and the other Council Members appeared before numerous other organizations to explain the Administration 's economic achievements principles policies and outlook Dr. Boskin continued to chair the Working Group on the Quality of Economic Statistics. Based on the report of the working group the President approved a list of recommendations for improving economic statistics. During the Council worked closely with the major Federal statistical agencies to implement these recommendations The Council was one of the leading participants in the formulation of the Administration 's saving and investment policies through various Cabinet and sub-Cabinet working groups. In testimony to the Congress and in talks to business and other groups the Chairman and Council Members stressed the importance of raising national saving by lowering the Federal budget deficit and removing barriers to private saving to reduce the cost of capital to American firms stimulate investment foster research and development and improve U.S. competitiveness productivity growth and standards of living. The Chairman and Council Members also worked through various fora to educate the public and the Congress on the economic benefits of a lower capital gains tax rate The Council was also active on a range of budget issues in As a member of the President 's budget review group the Chairman testified before a number of congressional committees on the economic assumptions used in the budget and on the importance to the economy of lowering the Federal budget deficit altering the composition of spending more toward investment and research and development ( R&D ) and maintaining and improving the structure of incentives to work save invest and innovate in the tax system INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES International economic issues again occupied a substantial part of the Council 's time during The Chairman and Council Members stressed the benefits of free trade and open markets for goods services and investment and the risk to world economic growth posed by rising protectionism. The Council participated in formulating Administration policy on the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) the proposed U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative and many other issues. The Council also participated in formulating Administration positions on legislation in the international area The Council 's involvement in forging the Administration 's economic policy responses to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait included participating in interagency studies on the economic effects of the oil shock and the Iraqi embargo on Eastern Europe and the " frontline " states as well as consideration of Strategic Petroleum Reserve drawdown policy During the Council 's involvement in economic reform in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union increased. Dr. Boskin was one of the three coordinators of U.S. Assistance to Eastern Europe after serving as one of the leaders of the President 's Mission to Poland when economic reforms were put in place in December The Chairman traveled to the Soviet Union where he met with a broad range of high-level Soviet economic policymakers and advisers. He also chaired a working group on Soviet economic reform. Dr. Taylor followed up a trip to Poland in with two additional trips to Eastern Europe in to meet with and advise senior government officials in several newly democratic countries Dr. Schmalensee also traveled to several countries in Eastern Europe as part of a Coordinators ' Mission to discuss assistance needs with senior government officials. All three held numerous discussions in Washington with officials from Soviet and Eastern European governments Dr. Boskin traveled to Paris as part of the U.S. delegation to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Ministerial Meeting. He also chaired meetings of the OECD Economic Policy Committee. Dr. Taylor headed the U.S. delegation to the Economic and Development Review Committee at the OECD to assess U.S. economic policy. He was also a member of the U.S. delegation to the OECD Working Party on macroeconomic policy coordination. Dr. Schmalensee headed the U.S. delegation to the OECD Working Party meetings on microeconomic and structural issues and participated in an OECD meeting on integrating economic and environmental issues in preparation for the OECD Environment Ministerial Meeting Dr. Taylor was a member of the U.S. negotiating team for the Structural Impediments Initiative with Japan attending talks in Tokyo Bern Honolulu Boston and Washington. He testified before the Trade Subcommittee of the Senate Finance Committee and the International Economic Policy and Trade Subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee on U.S. trade policy. As part of the Uruguay Round he co-chaired the GATT market access negotiations and was a Senior Adviser with the U.S. delegation during the week of talks in Brussels. Dr. Schmalensee traveled to Japan to meet with government officials and business leaders for discussions on a variety of economic issues The Council provided the President and the White House Senior Staff with regular briefings and analytical materials on international developments and participated in preparations for the Economic Summit in Houston The Council also participated in discussions on a wide range of issues including developing country debt economic reform in Eastern Europe and macroeconomic policy coordination with other members of the Administration the Federal Reserve the World Bank the International Monetary Fund and representatives of other countries. The Council Members and the Council Senior Staff conducted numerous briefings on the U.S. economy for visiting officials and scholars MICROECONOMIC POLICIES The Administration considered and proposed action this year on a wide range of microeconomic issues. In its work in this area the Council repeatedly stressed that government regulation must pass careful cost-benefit tests and that where regulation is appropriate it should be formulated to allow workers and firms maximum flexibility and to provide incentives to meet social goals in the least costly manner. The Council worked with other agencies to ensure that the newly enacted Clean Air Act to the maximum extent possible both balanced costs and benefits in protecting the environ- ment and minimized the costs of regulation. The Council was also instrumental in ensuring that the Immigration Act the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Food Agriculture Conservation and Trade Act were designed to achieve reforms in a more cost-effective manner. The Council emphasized these principles of promoting flexibility enhancing incentives balancing costs and benefits and placing maximum reliance on the private sector in a wide range of policy areas including the forthcoming National Energy Strategy global climate change cable television telecommunications antitrust product liability medical malpractice and the regulatory oversight process led by OMB and the Council on Competitiveness Dr. Schmalensee dealt with a wide range of environmental issues as a member of the Environmental Policy Review Group. He served on the Clean Air Strategy Group and participated in negotiations with the Senate leadership on the Clean Air Act. He was a member of the Global Change Strategy Group and the Task Force on Economic Costs. Dr. Schmalensee testified on energy and environmental matters before the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and its Subcommittee on Energy Research and Development. He served as Co-Chairman ( with the Secretary of Energy ) at a Department of Energy hearing on energy pricing in the forthcoming National Energy Strategy. Dr. Boskin co-chaired the White House Conference on Science and Economics Research Related to Global Change and Dr. Schmalensee was a member of the U.S. delegation to the conference The Council also participated in various interagency working groups to develop policies to aid the disadvantaged without destroying incentives and job opportunities. Dr. Schmalensee was a member of the Low Income Opportunity Board and the Economic Empowerment Task Force PUBLIC INFORMATION The Chairman and Council Members regularly testify before the Congress make public speeches and hold briefings for the press. In addition the Council produces two publications a year for the public The Economic Report of the President is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Annual distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress and has a distribution of approximately THE COUNCIL AND THE STAFF The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council 's views on economic developments to the President through personal discussions and written reports. The Chairman also represents the Council at daily White House Senior Staff meetings ; at budget review group meetings with the President ; and at many other formal and informal meetings with the President and White House Senior Staff as well as with other senior government officials. The Chairman guides the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff Members of the Council are responsible for the full range of issues within the Council 's purview and for the direct supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention The small size of the Council permits the Chairman and the Members to work as a team on most policy issues. There is however an informal division of subject matter. Dr. Schmalensee is primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis including analyses of regulatory issues and foreign economies undergoing market restructuring. Dr. Taylor is primarily responsible for international trade financial markets and macroeconomic analysis including economic projections PROFESSIONAL STAFF The Council 's advice to the President depends on the analytical and empirical studies of its professional staff. The Council has benefited from an exceptionally capable staff during The professional staff currently consists of a Special Assistant to the Chairman and Senior Staff Economist a Staff Assistant to the Chairman a Senior Statistician Senior Staff Economists Junior Staff Economists and a Research Assistant. The professional staff and their respective areas of concentration at the end of were : Special Assistant to the Chairman and Senior Staff Economist Harry G. Broadman International Trade and Investment R&D and Regulation Staff Assistant to the Chairman Stefanie J. Reiser Senior Staff Economists Richard E. Baldwin Nicole S. Ballenger Howard K. Gruenspecht Michael W. Horrigan Charles J. Jacklin Adam B. Jaffe Robert B. Kahn Peter F. Kostiuk Ralph M. Monaco John Karl Scholz James A. Wilcox International Trade Agriculture and International Trade Environment and Regulation Labor Markets and Quality of Statistics Financial Markets and Banking Regulation Energy and R&D International Finance Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union Labor Markets Energy and Health Macroeconomics and Forecasting Public Finance Monetary Policy and Macroeconomics Senior Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Junior Staff Economists Mark A. Condon Erik D. Craft Alison F. Del Rossi Brian J. Hall Arik M. Levinson Naomi S. Smith International Trade and Macroeconomics Banking Public Finance and Regulation Labor Markets Environment and Regulation Monetary Policy Public Finance and Macroeconomics Public Finance and Energy International Trade and Finance Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union Research Assistant Derek H. Utter Forecasting Macroeconomics and Energy Philip J. Deutch ( Stanford University ) served as an intern during the fall of Andrew T. Levin ( University of California San Diego ) served as a consultant during the fall of James G Sununu ( Stanford University ) served as a Research Assistant during the summer of Omar N. Toulan who served as a Research Assistant through the spring of accepted a position with McKinsey & Company Inc Mrs. Furlong is assisted in the operation of the Statistical Office by Natalie V. Rentfro Linda A. Reilly and Margaret L. Snyder The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council 's statistical information system and is responsible for overseeing the publication of the Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President as well as for the verification of statistics in memoranda testimony and speeches Martha V. Gottron provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Report SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office which provides general support for the Council 's activities consists of Elizabeth A. Kaminski Administrative Officer and Catherine Fibich Administrative Assistant The Secretaries for the Council during were Alice H. Williams and Sandra F. Daigle ( Secretaries to the Chairman ) Lisa D Branch ( Secretary to Dr. Taylor ) and Francine P. Obermiller ( Secretary to Dr. Schmalensee ) The Secretaries for the Council 's staff were Mary E. Jones Rosalind V. Rasin Mary A. Thomas and Janet J. Twyman Lissa J. Rideout and David J. Kogut served as Student Assistants during the summer and winter of Dorothy Bagovich Statistical Assistant and Rebecca J. Hopkins Student Assistant assisted in the preparation of the Report DEPARTURES J. Steven Landefeld who served as Special Assistant to the Chairman resigned in the summer of to accept a position with the Department of Commerce. Margot E. Machol who served as Staff Assistant to the Chairman in the summer and fall of became a Member of the National Commission for Employment Policy The Council 's Senior Staff Economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to one or two years Most of the Senior Staff Economists who resigned during returned to their previous affiliations. They are John M. Antle ( Montana State University ) Randi M. Boorstein ( International Trade Commission ) Susan M. Collins ( Harvard University ) Brian F. Madigan ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Marc S Robinson ( General Motors ) and William L. Wascher ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Others went on to new positions. They are Jeremy C. Stein ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Rebecca M. Blank ( Northwestern University ) Douglas J Holtz-Eakin ( Syracuse University ) and Peter M. Taylor ( Senate Budget Committee ) Staff Economists usually have just completed their dissertations and spend one year at the Council as additional preparation for their professional careers. Staff Economists in were S. Lael Brainard ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) and Barbara A Claffey ( Department of Agriculture ) Junior Staff Economists generally are graduate students who spend one year with the Council and then return to school to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are : Janice C Eberly ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Elizabeth T Powers ( The Brookings Institution and the University of Pennsylvania ) and David E. Weinstein ( University of Michigan ) Beth Anne Wilson who served as a Research Assistant in began graduate studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Suzanne M. Tudor Secretary to Dr. Taylor resigned in Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-12 B-13 B-14 B-15 B-16 B-17 B-18 B-19 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 B-30 Gross national product Gross national product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross national product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in dollars Gross national product by sector Gross national product by sector in dollars Gross national product by industry Gross national product by industry in dollars Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Personal consumption expenditures in dollars Gross and net private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars Inventories and final sales of business Inventories and final sales of business in dollars Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars Relation of gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Saving by individuals Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-31 B-32 B-33 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 Population by age groups Population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Average weekly hours and hourly and weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-48 B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : B-58 B-59 B-60 B-61 B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-67 B-68 B-69 B-70 B-71 B-72 B-73 B-74 B-75 Money stock liquid assets and debt measures Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Commercial bank loans and securities Bond yields and interest rates Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-76 B-77 B-78 B-79 B-80 B-81 B-82 B-83 B-84 B-85 B-86 Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-87 B-88 B-89 B-90 B-91 B-92 B-93 B-94 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B-95 B-96 B-97 B-98 B-99 B-100 Farm income Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Balance sheet of the farm sector INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-101. International investment position of the United States at yearend B-102. U.S. international transactions B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-105. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance B-106. International reserves selected years B-107. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-108. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-109. Foreign exchange rates B-110. Growth rates in real gross national product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies from January through February NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter I960 p IV : IV IV : IV IV : IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : | | III IV " Gross national product Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Nonresidential Total Total Total Structures Producers ' Residurable dential equipment Change in business inventories ~ LO ~ 4J TABLE B-l. Gross national product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter I960 ' : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Government purchases of goods and services Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total Nation- Nonal dedefense fense State and local Final sales Gross domestic purchases Gross national product ( GNP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from preceding period Gross national product Final sales Gross domestic .P r- l chases f l ! TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter I960 * IV : IV : IV : IV IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Gross national product ! Change in busiProResiness ducers ' dential invendurable tories equipment Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable Services goods goods Total i.340.8 See next page for continuation of table Total Total Structures TABLE B-2. Gross national product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV " Total Nation- Nonal dedefense fense State and local GNP less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent change from preceding period Government purchases of goods and services Final sales Gross domestic purchases Gross national product Final sales A Gross domestic purchases TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter ' IV : IV : IV : IV : IV IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Gross national product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable Services goods Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and servicesl Year or quarter Exports I960 p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II.. Ill IV f Imports Government purchases of goods and services Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense GNP less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis State and local Final sales Gross domestic purchases a Percent change from preced- " ' implicit price deflator8 " TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment1 Year or quarter I960 " : IV IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II.. Ill IV : II III.. IV Personal Gross connational sumption product expenditures Rxed investment Total Nonresi- Residen- Exports Imports dential tial Government purchases of goods and services Exports and imports of goods and services1 Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Percent change from preceding period GNP fixedweighted price index Separate price indexes are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in gross national product personal consumption expenditures and related price measures [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Year or quarter I960 * : I II Ill IV : | | III IV : II.. Ill IV | | HI IV.. : II.. Ill IV Current dollars io'.s 9'.0 Constant ( ) dollars -l ! Implicit price deflator Chain price index Fixedweighted price index Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Chain price index weights ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ( Current dollars ~ 2i3 Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) TABLE B-6. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Gross national product Final sales Inventory change Total Total Durable goods Final Inven- Final Inventory tory sales change sales change _5 32./ Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ~ ! ^ ~ 2.S Nondurable goods Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output ; = TABLE B-7. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Gross national product Final sales 1,354.S Inventory change Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Total Final Inven- Final Inventory tory sales change sales change Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis " ? ! l Final sales Inventory change Services Structures Auto output TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter I960 " : IV IV IV IV : IV IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : | | III IV P Gross national product Businessl Total Total1 Nonfarm l Farm Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Households Statisand tical instidiscrep- tutions ancy ~ Government2 Total Federal State and Rest of the world local 'A A L2 TABLE B-9. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic product Year or quarter I960 " IV : IV IV : IV IV : IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV f Gross national product Business * Total = 3,131.7X Total Nonfarm J Farm Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Statistical discrepancy -2.B Households and institutions Government2 Total Federal State and local Rest of the world TABLE B-10. Gross national product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product FiGovern- StaTrans- Whole- nance ment Rest t is- of the portation sale insur- Servand and and ance ices govern- tical world Dura- Nondisment ble durable public retail and enter- crepgoods goods utilities trade real ancy estate prises Manufacturing Year Gross Agrinational culture Conproduct forestry Mining strucand tion Total fisheries Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Data in this table reflect the annual revisions of the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) published in July Later this year estimates will be published for consistent with the NIPA revisions of July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-ll. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross domestic product FiGovern- StaTransRest ment por- Whole- nance Gross tisof the tation sale insur- Servand Connational culture forest- Mining struc2 and ance ices govern- tical Resid- world Dura- Nonand product ry and disment crep- ual tion Total ble durable public retail and fisherenter- ancy goods goods util- trade real ies estate prises ities Manufacturing Year " ie ~ 2.B 36J ; Equals the statistical discrepancy in current dollars divided by the implicit price deflator for gross domestic business product Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of expenditures less the statistical discrepancy in constant dollars less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product originating by industry Data for gross domestic product by industry beginning are based on a revised methodology and are not comparable with data for earlier years. For details see Survey of Current Business January Note. The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification Data in this table reflect the annual revisions of the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) published in July Later this year estimates will be published for consistent with the NIPA revisions of July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Gross domestic product of noninancial corporate business Capital consumption allowances with capital Total consumption adjustment Net domestic product Domestic income Indirect business tax etc.1 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total ComProfits pensation of Profits after tax employ- Total Profits Profits ees before tax Divi- Undistax iability Total dends tributed profits Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory valuation adjustment ~ L7 -'.3 -L2 ^ Capital Net con- intersump- est tion adjustment TABLE B-13. Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : I II III IV : | | III IV : | | Ill dollars Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit Capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Indirect business tax etc.3 Compensation of employees Output Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax Net interest Output Compenper hour sation of all per hour of all employemployees ( dollars ) collars ) is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-14. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter I960 p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Food Cloth- Gasoline ing and and shoes oil Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Services Nondurable goods Durable goods Personal FurniconMotor ture sumption vehi- and expendi- Total cles house- Total and hold tures parts equipment Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total l Housing * Trans- MediElec- porta- cal tricity tion care Total and gas TABLE B-15. Personal consumption expenditures in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nondurable goods Durable goods Personal Year or quarter conMotor vehisumption expendi- Total1 cles tures and parts Furniture and house- Total1 hold equipment " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Food Cloth- Gasoline S ! and shoes oil Fuel oil and coal Total * Housing * Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Services Household operation ElecTotal tricity and gas Transportation Medi- cal care TABLE B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Year or quarter I960 " IV : IV : IV : IV : IV IV II III. IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV P LessCapital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Nonresidential Total Total ioig Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories -L6 TABLE B-17. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption Gross allowprivate ances domestic with investcapital ment consumption adjustment I960 " : IV IV : IV IV : IV IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV P... Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Presidential Total Total Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories -5l2 TABLE B-18. Inventories and final sales of business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Inventory-final sales ratio Nonfarm Quarter Fourth quarter : " : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III. IV Total2 Farm Total2 Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Final sales3 Retail trade Other Total Nonfarm4 Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in business inventories ( CBI ) component of GNP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at their respective end-ofquarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas CBI is stated at annual rates Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of the world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Inventories and final sales of business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories1 Nonfarm Quarter Total * Fourth quarter : I960 * II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV " Farm Total2 Manu- Wholesale facturing trade Retail trade Final sales3 Total Other Inventory-final sales ratio Nonfarm4 ' Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the constantdollar change in business inventories component of GNP is stated at annual rates Beginning inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories. Prior to they are included in total and total nonfarm inventories but not in the detailed categories shown Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions government and rest of world and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Ratio based on total business final sales which includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts from foreigners Year or quarter Exports of goods and services Total Total " ! ' " ! ! ! " " ' ! " : IV IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : | | III IV II Ill IV : | | III IV Merchandise Services ss received by the United States ( net ) l ! Payments to foreigners Imports of goods and services Total Total Merchandise Services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Transfer payments ( net ) Total ! '.8 Interest paid by From governFrom govern- ment to persons ment foreigners ( net ) ( net ) ! ! ! l ! '.3 Net ment TABLE B-21. Exports and imports of goods and services in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter ' : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV.. Total Imports of goods and services Merchandise Merchandise Total Durable goods Services Nondurable goods Total Factor inOther come * Total Total Factor income exports less factor income imports equals rest-of-the-world product Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Durable goods Services Nondurable goods Total Factor inOther come * TABLE B-22. Relation of gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Year or quarter * IV : IV : IV : IV : IV IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV 3'772 4'917'9 S'289'3 5'443'3 Equals : Net national product * * * * * * * * * 872'2 * Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Plus : Less : Less : consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment CiihciHioc Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy _ i less current surplus of government enterprises Equals : National income TABLE B-23. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter National income and capital " ET adjust- Equals : Plu S : LeSS : Corporate profits with inventory valuation GovernWage ment Contribu- accruals transfer Personal Personal Business tions for Net transfer less social disburse- payments interest dividend payments interest income income to insurance ments persons Personal income ments " IV : IV IV : IV IV : IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV " * * Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis _l o o o o o o o o o o _2 o o _4 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o TABLE B-24. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Year or quarter p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II.. Ill IV P National income ^ " Total Wages and salaries Supplements to wages and salaries2 Nonfarm Farm Total Total Proprietors ' income3 Capital consumption adjustment -'.3 -J _9 -'.8 Total Proprietors ' income Inven- Capital tory convalua- sumption tion adjust- adjustment ment ! _i -'.2 ! e ~ '.A '.1 -To National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-22 TABLE B-24. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total t. ~ I960 P : IV IV : IV : IV IV : IV II Ill IV II III IV II Ill IV " Rental Capital conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Total Total -24i9 Profits after tax Profits Profits tax before Divi- Undistax liability Total dends tributed profits Capital Net conInventory sumption interest adjustvaluation ment adjustment ! o -19.B Consists mainly of employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds With inventory valuation adjustment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -l ! o ~ ! TABLE B-25. Sources of personal income ^ [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursementsl Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total p IV : IV : IV IV : IV IV : II III.. IV : | | III IV : | | III IV P GovernOther Distrib- Service ment and labor utive indus- govern- income l indus- tries ment Manutries enterfacturing prises ! Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-24 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements TABLE B-25. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Transfer payments Rental income of persons Personal Personal with Year or quarter capital dividend interest con- income income sumption adjustment I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV IV : IV III IV : I II Ill IV : | | ni ' ; " ; ; IV Total Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployand ployment Veterans ees health insur- benefits retireinsurment ance ance benefits benefits benefits ! l '.2 LO '.5 Aid to families with depend- Other ent children ( AFDC ) 'A '.3 Is Less : Personal contribu- Nonfarm personal tions for income2 social insurance ! e Personal income exclusive of the farm component of wages and salaries other labor income proprietors ' income and net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-26. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV * ! ! ! " ! ! ! ! " Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax personal payments income Total Personal consumption expenditures Interest paid by consumers to business Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ! ! s J Personal transfer Equals : pay- Personal ments saving to foreigners ( net ) ! ! l ! ! ! ! '.9 Personal outlays Total Personal consump- Personal saving tion expenditures TABLE B-27. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : I II Ill IV : II III IV : II. Ill IV Disposable personal income Total ( billions of Per capita dollars ) ( dollars ) Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita Total ( billions of ( dollars ) dollars ) Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) ' Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July through and are averages of quarterly data beginning Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-28. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross investment Governmer t surplus or deficit Capital \ no tional income and grants ( ) na received Gross prod uct accounts by the busiUnited State ness Total Federal States savand ( net ) * ing i local Gross private saving Year or quarter I960 " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III IV * Total Total Personal saving -I. } -i ! s ~ \ -A -U '.5 -U L5 Total StatisGross tical private Net domes- foreign discrepancy tic investinvest- ment ment i ! s -l ! s ~ Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate capital consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment and private wage accruals less disbursements Consists mainly of allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants received by the United States net Consists of a U.S. payment to India under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This payment is included in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-29- Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net investment in Less : Net increase in debt tangible assets Increase in financial assets Securities Year or quarter Total Insur- Other Non- MortCheck- Time ance able Money Con- cor- gage and depos- savings market Govern- Corpo- Other and finan- Owner- sumer porate debt Con- Other Total its and pension cial occu- dura- busi- on sumer debt ment rate fund asnoncurren- depos- shares securi- equi- securi- re- sets8 its bles ness farm credit ties4 serves asties cy ties sets8 homes '.'.'. 7> " ' " " " " L8 6i4 U : II III... IV... : II III,. IV... : HI " ! ! ! l ! o -Is -A -l ! s 1&6 Saving by households personal trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Corporate and foreign bonds and open-market paper Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves and nonlife insurance claims for households and of consumer credit equity in sponsored agencies and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit U.S. Government and policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-30. Number and median income ( in dollars ) of families and persons and poverty status by race Familiesl Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Year Num ber ( mil- lions ) All RACES s * 1986s WHITE s " ! " ' " ! " .'. " " ! ! s 1986s BLACK s * s Median income Female householder Total Number ( mil * Rate lions ) Number ( millions ) Rate Median income of persons 152years old and over with income Females Males Num YearYearber round All All round ( mil- Rate persons full-time persons full-time lions ) workers workers $ $ $ % $ $ ^ 'The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families * Prior to data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in That index reflected different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition sex and age of family householder and farm-nonfarm residence. Minor revisions implemented in eliminated variations in the poverty thresholds based on two of these variables farmnonfarm residence and sex of householder. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 No. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-31. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over 12'007 * 37'687 * Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Population estimates in this series do not reflect the results of the census ; according to the census the total population on April was Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-32. Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Labor EmployCivilian force ment noninsti- Resi- includ- includdent tutional Armed popula- Forces * resirfent resirfent tion1 Armed Armed Forces Forces Civilian labor force Unemployment rate Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment All Civilian work- workers2 ers8 Civilian employment/ population ratio8 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian labor force participation rate4 Thousands of persons years of age and over I9606 : Jan Feb Mar fci June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec TABLE B-32. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Labor EmployCivilian force ment noninsti- Resi- includ- including dent tutional Armed resident popula- Forcesl resident Armed tion1 Armed Forces Forces Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonculfural UnemPloyment Civilian labor Civil- force All ian parwork- work- ticiers2 ers8 pation rate4 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July AUB Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr " ay : June Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fci June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment/ population ratio5 Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagricultural employment Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labo force and to employment o labor Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population and labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-32 through B-41 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Year or month Total Total x I9601 ! * ! x : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fc = June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec years ! l36 Unemployment Females Males years and over Total ' years See footnote Table B-32 Note.-See Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Males Females years and over Total Total years Total years years and years and over over 1J17 ! 2>86 TABLE B-34. Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other Wh te Year or month Total civilian workers Males Females Both sexes ll'624 I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total FeMales males Note.-See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Total FeMales males Both sexes Black Both sexes TABLE B-35. Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month : Jan Feb Mar & : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fc June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All civilian workers Black and other White Total Males Females Total FeMales males Both sexes Note.-See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Black Both sexes FeMales males Both sexes Total TABLE B-36. Labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment/population ratio Labor force participation rate Civilian2 Year or month I960 Total * ! '.' ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! " ! ! ! " " .'.... " ! '.'....'.'..'. : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec jfc & : : : : : : : FeTotal Mates males Both sexes years Civilian Black White and Black other " " J&9 ; E Total * Total Mates Females Both sexes years White Black and other Black .._ Labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of noninstitutional population including resident Armed Forces * Civilian lahnr fnrr a narront nf riuilian nnninotitiitinnal n/miilotinn in nrnnn cnaoifia/4 population including resident Armed Forces Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total Total ers Males years Males Females years Total and over years Total Total and years over Females years Total and over years years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Black fi = June July AUB sept : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fci June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-38. Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Black and other or black Males Total Females years years and over Total Females Males years Total Total years and over years Total years and over years years and over Black and other I960 Black : Jan Feb Mar & : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fe = June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE ^ ^ Unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Unemployment rate all work1 ers I960 : Jan Feb Mar fez June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! ! ! June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec Unemployment rate civilian workers All civilian work- Total ers Males Females years and Total years over years and years over Unemployed Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Both sexes years Black White and Black other ' " " ' Experienced wage and salary workers Married men spouse present Women who maintain families TABLE B-40. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; * monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month White Black and other or black All Females Females Males Males civilian Total work- Total ers Total Total years Total years Total years years and years years and years and over over over ovef W Black and other I960 Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : : : : : : : : : : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note.-See Note Table B-39 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-41. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Reason for unemployment Duration of unemployment Unemployment Year or month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Aug Sept : : : : : : : : June July Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug " : : : : : Oct Nov Dec sept : Less than weeks weeks weeks and over weeks Because ( mean ) Median duraJob duration losers tion ( weeks ) ( weeks ) Job leavers Reentrants entrants of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Data for by reason for unemployment are not strictly comparable with those for later years and the total by reason is not equal to total unemployment Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-32 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-42. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured Total unemploy- benefits Insured paid ment unem ( weekly ( millions ployment of average ) " dollars ) Thousands I960 p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ' July Aug : : : : : : : : : Sept Oct.. : : : : : : : Nov Dec Initial claims Exhaustions8 Weekly average ; thousands * * Benefits paid Insured unemployment as Total percent ( millions of covered employ- dollars ) ( dollars ) ment * * " Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) " Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) and Federal Supplemental Compensation programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning Julv Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Sept Oct.. Nov Dec. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Total Aug.. : : : : " " : ; : June July Aug Sept : : : : : : : : : : : : " ri : .zz : ..z ' : : : Oct Nov. Dec * See next page for continuation of table Total M Goods-producing industries Manufacturing Construction Total Durable Nonduragoods ble goods 7>96 TABLE B-43. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Year or month I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : " : ; : : Sept Nov Dec " Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Government Finance insurance and real estate Services ^ Total Federal State and local Note. Data in Tables B-43 and B-44 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-32 through B-41 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants ; etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-44. Average weekly hours and hourly and weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average weekly hours ManufacturYear or month Average hourly earnings Total private l Average weekly earnings Total private > ing Total priCurrent vate Total Over- dollars time dollars Manufacturing Current dollars dol-2 lars Confactoring struction ( current ( current dollars ) dollars ) Retail trade ( current dollars ) Percent change from a year earlier total private Current dollars I960 ! ' : Jan... Feb... Mar... fc June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct.. Nov.. Dec... : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. fc : June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec " $ $ $ $ $ Also includes other private industry groups shown Current dollars divided by the consumer price $ $ $ dol- lars ~ U in Table B-43 index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Monthly percent changes are based on data not seasonally adjusted Note.-See Note Table B-43 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-45. Employment cost index private industry Total private x " ST Year and month Total salaries December : Benefits > : : : : : : : : : : si December * 1976...' IZZ .ZZ : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Total Wages Bene- Total Wages BeneTotal Wages Beneand and compen1 X sala- fits sate sala- fits X sala- fits ries ries ries index June = ; not seasonally adjusted * Benefits Total sa5on ~ salaries C : : : : : : : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June St : " " : : : : : : 58i5 Percent change from " " ' ZZI " " " " " months earlier seasonally adjusted : : : : : : : : Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Service-producing Goods-producing = 57J " " 5L9 " " Sis Index June = ; seasonally : : : : : : : : : : : : Percent change from 60l adjusted : : : : : : : : : z : = : months earlier not seasonally adjusted z : z : zzi i ! o " 'Mis Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of labor free from the influence of employment shifts among occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Through December percent changes are based on unrounded data ; thereafter changes are based on indexes as published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-46. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter '...' : ' : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV.. Output per hour of all persons Output Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Hours of * persons Business sector Nonfarm business sector Compensation per hour3 Business sector Nonfarm business sector Real compensation per hour * Unit labor costs Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business Implicit price deflator6 Business sector 2&5 Nonfarm business sector 28'0 67io Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-47. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter : : : : : P : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV ' Output per hour of all persons Business sector Nonfarm business sector Output1 Business sector Nonfarm business sector Hours of all persons Business sector Nonfarm business sector Compensation per hour8 Real compensation per hour4 Business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Nonfarm business sector Unit labor costs Business sector " '3 Nonfarm business sector Implicit price deflator " Business sector Nonfarm sector Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars * Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-46 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-48. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month proportion " : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr May. June : : : : : : : : : : : July... Sept Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept " : : : ' r. : z zzzzzz zzz : r Oct Nov " Dec " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Manufacturing Total Durable Nondurable Mining Utilities TABLE B-49. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total industrial production Total pnportion I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr & : : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug sept " : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar t June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Materials Final products InterConsumer goods Equipment mediate Dura- Non- EnerAuto- Other NonDe- prodmotive dura- durable Total Busi- fense ucts Total ble durable gy Total prod- ble ness and goods ucts goods space 8C.8 Two components oil and gas well drilling and manufactured homes are included in total equipment but not in detail shown Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-50. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufactures Year or month Primary metals Total proportion ^ '.'..'. " .'.'.'. I960 " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Dec " Nondurable manufactures Transportation equipment Iron and steel NonFabriElectricated eleccal metal trical machinprod- machinery ucts ery Total Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Motor vehicles and parts Lumber Apparel Textile Printing Chemicals and mill and prod- prod- publish- and Foods products products ucts ing ucts TABLE B-51. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry Total Durable goods : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan.. Feb Mar Apr May June octl : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " ; : : Nov p Dec " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Utilities July Aug Sept Mining 1990P Advanced processing Primary processing Non- durable goods TABLE B-52. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Public construction Tntal Year or month new construction Residential1 buildings Total Total8 Nonresidential buildings and other construction * New housing units Total Commercial * Indus- Other4 trial Total Federal State and local8 '.B I960 " New series SBC next page fof continuation of table TABLE &-52. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Total Year or month new construction Residential buildings1 Total New Total2 : Jan Feb Mar Apr Hay.. : " : : : " : : : : " : June July Aug " " : : : Sept Oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr Hay.. : : : : " : June Aug : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : sept Oct July Nov " Dec " housing units Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction l Total Commer- cial Indus- Other * trial Total Federal State and locals Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to I960 included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Includes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) 'Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total resioWial * Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities telecommunications and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-53. New bousing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized New housing units started Private and public1 Year or month Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Total ( farm and Nonfarm nonfarm ) Type of structure Total lunit 2to4 units Type of structure Total units or more lunit to units units or more I960 ) 2,<M 1J60.0 1,1C 1.74S.5 ' '1 ! { ) { ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb Mar Apr May \ June : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July AuJ sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oc ? Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " l2b M88 Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA tinder Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts ; in places for ; in Authorized by issuance of local building permit in permit-issuing places bee and in places prior to places for ; in places for ; in places for l \ Not available separately beginning January Series discontinued December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-54. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Industries surveyed quarterly Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Year or quarter I960 .'. ' " ! ! * * : II III IV : | II HI IV * : II * All industries Total Total nonComfarm Dura- NonMin- Trans- Public mercial busible durable Total ing porta- utili- and tion ties other ness2 goods goods Addenda Nonmanufacturing ManufacSur- Surtur- Total veyed veyed ing quar- annuterly ally8 " " " ' " : : : " : : Excludes forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate which effective with the April-May survey are no longer surveyed quarterly. See last column ( " nonmanufacturing surveyed annually " ) for data for these industries " All industries " plus the part of nonmanufacturing that is surveyed annually Consists of forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations,- and * Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in October and November corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-55. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month : Jan Feb Mar ft June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr SfaV : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Nov " oct : : Retail trade Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Total manufacturing and trade Inven- Ratio * Sales1 Inven- Ratio * InvenInventones ' * tories * Ratio Sales tories * Sales1 tories * Ratio ' Safes ^ Monthly average for year and total for month retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are : beginning monthly average sales for the year ; and for earlier years sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to averages. Monthly data are ratio of inventories at end of month to for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and TABLE B-56. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments1 Year or month Total ! : Jan Feb Mar Jay " " ! June... July.... Aug.... Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Jay ' " " ' June.... July Aug Sept.... Oct Nov " Dura- Nonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries Total Inventories2 Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries MateMateWork Work Finished rials Finished in rials in Total and proc- goods Total and proc- goods supplies ess supplies ess Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for prior periods Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-57. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Total New orders1 Durable goods industries NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries Total tries nondefense Unfilled orders * Total Monthly average for Seasonally adjusted Unfilled orders shipments ratio3 NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries year and total for month end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-58. Consumer price indexes major expenditure classes [ = ] Food and beverages Year or month All items '.'..' '.'.'.' '. ' " .' : Jan Feb Mar fc : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fc June July Aug Sept Nov Dec oct : : Total Housing Food Includes alcoholic beverages not See table B-59 for components HouseOther hold Apparel TransEnterFuel and furnish- and portation Medical tainment goods care and Total Shelter other ings upkeep services utilities and operation ' Energy3 shown separately See tables B-60 for definition and B-59 for components Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs and therefore are not strictly comparable with earlier figures Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics OP1 ool TABLE B-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes [ = except as noted ] Shelter Food and beverages Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar fcn June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total At Away Total Total Total home from home Household fuels ' " iosio zri Fuel oil Other Home and Gas Home- mainteutilities other and Rent owners ' nance Total house- ( Piped ) public Total hold and resi- costs and elec- services repairs dential fuel tricity commodities " ' " " ' " " i'02 ! EE Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately December = Fuel and other utilities Renters ' costs Food " " 2L4 " TABLE B-59. Consumer price indexes selected expenditure classes Continued [ = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June July Aug... Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.-- ' June July Aug.. sept Oct Total : : : : : Nov Dec Total New cars Motor fuel * Used cars & Automobile maintenance and repairs Other " " " ' " " Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services Includes direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60. Consumer price indexes commodities services and special groups [ = ] Commodities Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar... fc JuneJuly... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec... : Jan... Feb... Mar.. MayJune. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. All items All com * modities Food All Special indexes Services Commodities less food All NonDurable durable services Medical care services Services less medical care All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy Energy Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-61. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ Percent change ] Year or month Dec to Dec.1 Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less energy All items less food All items Dec to Dec.1 Year to year ^ Dec to Dec.1 Year to year L3 All items less food shelter and energy All items less food and energy Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Year to year Change from preceding period Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Auc Sept oct ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr Nfay He ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug : : : : : : : : : : : ; " Sept oct ! : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec '.8 '.2 '.2 o ' : s '.5 '.3 Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted '.5 '.6 Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted 'A ~ '.2 '.2 '.5 '.B : : i : .4s A Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted '.5 '.2 A 'A '.2 A o ' '.2 A : .4s Seasonally adjusted '.2 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-62. Changes in consumer price indexes commodities and services [ Percent change ] Food Total Year Dec to Dec.1 -J Year to year Dec to Dec.1 ~ L6 ~ 2.B Dec to Dec.1 Year to year L6 Dec to Dec.1 10J -L5 Changes from Year to year Medical care services Total Commodities less food Year to year Energy2 Services Commodities All items Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year '.B December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning are for all urban consumers ; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers See also Note Table B-58 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-63. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Rnished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr R/Tay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr Hay June ' " : : : : : " : : : : : : : : " : : : : " July l Aug Sept Oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec Total Crude Processed See next page for continuation of table Consumer goods Total Total NonDurable durable Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods TABLE B-63. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total '. : Jan Feb Mar June Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June Nov Dec Foods and Other feeds * : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : fci SEE fc : Aug * : : : : : : : " " " Materials and components For manufacturing For construction Crude materials for further processing Processed fuels Conand tainers Supplies Total lubricants Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-64. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Ener- gy Total % * Intermediate materials supplies and components Consumer goods exclud- Crude materials for further processing Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other foods and energy : Jan Feb Mar Apr.. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar SfaV June July Aug * Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds * Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May I : : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug sept : : : " " " " : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July z Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : : : : : : : : : : " : : : " Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power l Chemicals and allied products l Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp NonRubber Lumber Metals Machinery Furniture paper metallic and and and and and and metal equipment household mineral plastic wood allied products products products products durables products Year or month Transportation equipment Total Motor vehicles and Miscellaneous products ment I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec : : Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-66. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Total finished goods Year or month Finished consumer foods Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Finished goods excluding foods and energy Capital Consumer Total equipment goods Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec. to Year Dec.1 to year Dec.1 to year Dec. to year Dec. to year Dec. to year ^ ~ 5J .'9 ~ ~ 5l3 " " ~ o ' '.3 Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted Season- % Unadjusted justed : Jan Feb Mar & : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar J y ~ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ill -'.B .'l Is Season- S Unadjusted justed '.8 ! e Season- justed l'.3 ~ ! Unadjusted L2 ! s L3 Season- S Unadjusted L9 L7 Changes from _9 '.3 ~ \ A -i ! o S Unadjusted justed justed Season- ~ ! e ~ L3 '.2 'A o ' Seasonally adjusted -2l9 Unadjusted S justed o ' ~ i ! s Season- '.2 \ '.6 '.4 '.B December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-67. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml Year and month M2 M3 L Debt1 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits Ml plus overnight RPsand Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and smalltime deposits M2 plus large time deposits term RPs term Eurodollars and institutiononly MMMF balances M3 plus other liquid assets Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average ) ( oSs ) December : I960 : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept oct : : : : : : : : Nov Dec Percent change from year or months earlier2 Ml M2 M3 Debt Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors ; data from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate Note. See Federal Reserve Bulletin May for revisions made to the series in February See Table B-68 for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month December : I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Currency Travelers checks ! Demand deposits Overnight Money market mutual repurfund ( MMMF ) balances chase agreements Other checkable ( RPs ) General Institudeposits net plus purpose ( dCDs ) overnight tion and Eurodol- broker/ only1 lars dealer NSA Data for through are not seasonally adjusted See next page for continuation of table Money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) Savings deposits TABLE B-68. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Small Large denomidenomination nation time time deposits8 deposits2 Term repurchase agreements May June : : : : : : : : : : : : : : July Aug : : : : : : : Sept Oct. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : r Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr RlTay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec l'l30'0 l'l35 l'l42 l',148.3 * * * l'l588 Savings bonds ( RPs ) NSA December : I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr Term Eurodollars * Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances cial paper NSA Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note.-NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted See also Table B-67 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-69. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month December : I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr. May June July Aug Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Sept Oct Nov Dec sept. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : " : : Aug : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : " : : : Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements2 Reserves of depository institutions NonborMonetary rowed Nonborplus Total base Required rowed extended credit Data Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Total Seasonal Extended credit are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act and other regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-70. Commercial bank loans and securities [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted x ] Year and month December : * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July AUK sept : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May June July Auc Sept Oct. : : : : : Nov Dec P Total loans and securities * Loans and leases U.S State NonGovern- Other Comand Forbank ment securimercial Real Individ- Secu- finan2 politi- eign securi- ties Total and estate ual rity cial cultural cal banks ties indussubdiinstitrial visions tutions Foreign official institutions Lease financing Other receivables Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of weekly data for foreign-related institutions beginning July Prior to July data for foreign-related institutions are averages of current and previous month-end data. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans Excludes loans to commercial banks in the United States Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-71. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and mAnth Bills ( new issues ) 3-month : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 6-month Cons tant matur ties2 year year Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Highgrade NewCommunici- home mercial pal bonds mort- paper ( Standmonths4 Prime rate charged by banks * ard & Poor 's ) Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve rate6 Bank of New York High-low High-low n.oo n.oo n.oo n.oo n.oo : : : : maturities by the Treasury Department Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates. Since November this series has been published by the Federal Housing Finance Board ; it was formerly published by the Department of the Treasury Office of Thrift Supervision and by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-71. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3-month 6-month Constant maturities2 3year year Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Highgrade Newmunici- home Compal mercial bonds mort- paper ( Stand- yields3 months4 ard & Poor 's ) Prime rate charged 5by banks Discount rate Federal Federal funds Reserve Bank of rate New York High-low : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec High-low Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the7 one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-72. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n e e Open-market paper Other 3U Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors... U S Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm By borrowing sector : State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S Government and other loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources See next page tor caititwtiai of We TABLE B-72. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item II III IV II III IV II III Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial U S Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential Commercial Farm ! ! " Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n e e Open-market paper By borrowing sector : State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate Corporate Foreign net borrowing in United States Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S. Government and other loans Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Foreign funds At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-73. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten Total Multi- Coml-to4- family mercial family properhouses ties " sr to 4-family houses Total Total VA FHA guarinsured anteed Total l-to4family houses I960 II Ill IV | | Ill IV : | | Ill Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-74. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Other holders Major financial institutions End of year or quarter I960 II Ill IV : | | Ill IV : II Ill Total Total Savings institutions Commercial banks Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies ' Individuals and others4 Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments " Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-75. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Total credit December : : : : : : " : Jan6 Feb Mar Apr May June July Auc. Sept Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : : fi = June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Total 518'252 6&8.105 Automobile Ir stallment credit Revolving2 Mobile home3 210'l87 * Other Noninstallment credit * Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Excludes 30day charge credit held by travel and entertainment companies. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes open-end credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Not reported separately prior to July Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on 8a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Data newly available in January result in breaks in many series between December and subsequent months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-76. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Fiscal year or period Off-budget On-budget Total Held by the public * '.8 BA Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Transition quarter '.. " '.'.'.'. " * Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Addendum : Gross national product Surplus or deficit ( ) Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Receipts Outlays Total Not strictly comparable with later data Estimates Note.-Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-77 Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Act jal RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget '956 ^ -i ; TABLE B-77. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Description Actual Estimates RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS- ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget 9i236 Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See " Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-78. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and product accounts to the budget fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Total on-budget and off-budget receipts Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing : ? Timing adjustments Geographic exclusions -2i3 Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts EXPENDITURES Total on-budget and off-budget outlays ! ~ 6i8 Government contributions for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Lending transactions Deposit insurance and other financial transactions Defense timing adjustments Geographic exclusions Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note.-See Note Table B-76 For further details see Survey of Current Business February Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-79. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Expenditures nkL income Receipts and Expenditures product accounts P IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P -lis -2'.3 ii ! s Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit Receipts State and local government Federal Government Total government national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts ! o i ! o Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receiipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-80. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts Year or quarter Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Expenditures Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Net interest paid ContriPurbutions chases Transfor Total1 of goods fer social and payinsurserv- ments ance ices Total Less : InterInter- est reest ceived paid by government Less : Dividends received by government II... Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Prior to dividends received is included in interest received Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Surplus Addendum : deficit Grants ( ) in-aid national income State and and local prod- governuct ac- ments counts TABLE B-81. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Total Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate tax and profits tax and for social Total Nanontax tax receipts accruals nontax insurTotal tional ance defense Transfer payments Grantsin-aid to State and To To for- local per- eign- govers ern- sons ments Subsidies less Net current inter- surplus est of ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Calendar : ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV 10t.3 Includes or deficit ( ) national income and paid govern- product ment accounts enterprises Fiscal : Surplus an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis : beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July " y through September is 'a separate ' fiscal period ' ' " ' ' known as the transition quarter Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-82. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter i '.' " I : : : I ? ? ? ; : : : : : : r : : : : : : : : P : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III IV : : : : : : : : : : : ii. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : in IV : HI IV * Total Indirect Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal rate tax and profits tax and tions for grants-innontax aid tax nontax social receipts accruals accruals insurance : & : g Total1 Subsi- Surplus dies deficit Trans- Net less Purfer chases pay- interest current national surplus income of ments of and to divia nT per- dends govern- product services sons received ment accounts enterprises S Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis : i : o : : T-9.4 -ri '.5 -U TABLE B-83. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source2 Fiscal year1 Total I960 Sales Indiand Property gross vidual taxes receipts income tavoc laXcS taxes 20i089 3i269 General expenditures by function2 Corpo- Revenue ration from All net Federal income Govern- other taxes ment Total B.722 64J816 ilsos Fiscal H850 Education Highways Public welfare All other4 23>76 1U36 years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other governmental administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note.-Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-84. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] Marketable End of year or month Fiscal year : Total interesthaarina Dearing public debt securities1 ! Jan 'Feb ! '.. Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ' : Jan Feb Mar ! ! Apr May June ! July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec fc : : : : Total * * * Treasury bills Treasury Treasury notes bonds Total Nonmarketable Foreign govern- Governii <j U.O ment savings ment account and bonds series public series * 3>41 Other8 4i883 _ __ in millions of dollars : in September 1986-September ; in October 1987-May : in June-September ; in October 1988-May ; in June-December ; and in January-December * Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note.-Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-85. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Years Months Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July : : : : : Aug sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-86. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; 'billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month : Total Commercial banks2 Individuals3 Total Total Savings bonds4 Other securities Insurance companies Money market funds Corporatons * State and local governments " international7 tf Other investors8 June June June June June Sept June Sept Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept fee : Mar June Sept Dec. : : : : : : : : : Mar Deb : Mar Deb : Mar June Sept Dec. : : : : : : : : : : Mar June Sept U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J are include value * Includes domestically chartered banks>t : />.iL. brandies and agencies of fttreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks U.S. h and3 Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts * Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investment of foreign balances and international accounts in the United States Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored agencies Source : Department of the Treasury IW< C/4 A t A Ulr<ltUW< /IU.UUI h /t ~ ,W CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-87. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter * : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III. IV : II III IV II HI IV ? Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate prof its with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments TABLE B-88. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financiall Year or quarter p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill IV : II HI Total " ' Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other '.B -is Total TransManu- portation Wholesale fac- and public and retail turing trade utilities Other ~ > ~ ! Rest of the world LO Consists of the following industries : Banking ; credit agencies other than banks ; security and commodity brokers dealers and services ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts * See Table B-89 for industry detail Note.-The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to DigitizedSource : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis for FRASER TABLE B-89. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! " ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! I960 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! > : IV : IV : IV IV : iv.... ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! : IV : | | Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill Total manufacturing Total Pri- mary metal industries L6 Durable goods Fabri- Machin- Electric and cated ery elecmetal except tronic prod- electriucts cal fir U Nondurable goods Motor vehicles equipment ! ! o ! s Other ~ Food Chemi- Petrocals leum and and and Total kindred allied coal prod- prod- products ucts ucts Other Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC prior to Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-90. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Profits Year or quarter Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes ! ! ! ! ! ! : IV New series : : IV '.'. : II Ill IV : in " ! ! ! ! ! " ! ! IV : in " ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! : Stockholders ' equity2 Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity8 Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity2 In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period tu another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-91. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Year or quarter I960 : IV New series : : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II.. Ill manufacturing Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-90 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-92. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses External Internal Year or quarter Total U.S undisTotal tributed nrnfitc proms Inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Credit market funds Discrepancy Capital Increase ( sources in Securi- Loans Total less financial uses ) ties and Other assets Total and shortmort- term gages paper Capital con- Foreign sumption earn- Total allow- ings ' ances | II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : | II Ill : Foreign branch Consists of tax profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-93. Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices1 New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Finance Dow Jones industrial average9 Year or month Composite I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr fl/fay... June... July Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Aug I : : : : : : : : : : June : : : : : : : : : : Aug : : : : : Sept oct : : : : : : : : : ; " : : : Nov... July.. Dec Industrial Transportation Utility ' 54i Averages of daily closing prices except New York Stock Exchange data through Includes all the stocks ( more than ) listed on the New York Stock Exchange Includes stocks Includes stocks Standard & Poor 's series based on stocks in the composite index Common stock yields ( percent ) Standard & Poor 's composite Dividend- Earningsprice index price ratio7 ratio " ( = ) * May are averages of weekly closing prices Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Note.-AII data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-94. Business formation and business failures Business failures1 Year or month I960 " Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate8 Number of failures Total Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Under $ $ and over Total Liability size class Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mr ' : : : : ' : a " : : : : Apr June July Aug... Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr day : : : : : : : : May ' : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data beginning are based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data. Data for are subject to revision due to amended court filings Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation AGRICULTURE TABLE B-95. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Net farm income Gross farm income Cash marketing receipts Year or quarter Total1 I960 : II III IV : II Ill IV : | | Ill Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 ~ ! l ^ '.2 ! l Production expenses Current dollars dollars ^ ash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the GNP implicit price deflator ( Department of Commerce ) Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-96. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Crops8 Year Total I960 * : : rr : : : Livestock ' " " ' " " " * ; Total8 Feed grains Food grains Oil crops and products2 Farm output Crop producunit of hour of tion per total farm input work * acre Per Per Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown New survey-based labor productivity time series ; not comparable with data published in issues of the Economic Report of the President prior to January Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Source : Department of Agriculture TASLE B-97. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April1 Year Farm employment ( thousands ) As Num- percent ber of ( thou- total sands ) popula8 '6,051 '5,790 '5,620 '5,787 Total Family workers Hired workers Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Total tion ' ' ' ' ' ' ' % Feed Meseed chanical and Farm Farm power cultural livereal labor estate and chemimachin- cals * stock purery chases6 'Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote 'Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-32 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides 'Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases 'Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Note.-Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-98. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month Jan Feb Mar Apr May ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : June July Aug Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec sept. : : : : : : May ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : All farm products Crops Livestock and products All commodities services interest taxes and wage rates * Prices paid by farmers Production items Tractors and Fuels selfFertiland Total * proizer energy pelled machinery Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre8 Includes Includes items used for family living not shown separately other items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through February for April for and February for and January for Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-99. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] 1Tt ports 1jtports Year OilFeed Food seeds Total grains grains * and t \ : \ ( \ / ' | ( ( * ) b.i ( * ) H ! ! .'.... ! ffl ( ) \ I b.f Animals Tobacco and Total Cotton S Animals and prodtables * ucts 8X : and ( | i ' | j | ( * ) b.i ft ( * ) ! i ! i ! ! ft ! i AgriCocoa cultural beans trade and balance products '.3 Coffee \ i ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown separately * Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations * Less than $ million Note.-Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( l ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-100. Balance sheet of the farm sector [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Financial assets Physical assets Nonreal estate End of year Total assets House- Real estate Livestock > Machinery and Crops motor vehicles Invest- Total Real Nonreal estate hold Purments in claims debt8 estate debt " chased equip- cooper- Other * in- ment atives and puts furnish- Proprietors ' equity ings I960 P Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus Includes fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Sum of currency demand deposits time deposits and U.S. savings bonds Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans value above loan rate for crops held under CCC Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data include operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-101. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment valuation U.S. ASSETS ABROAD : U.S. official reserve assets Current Gold Historical Special drawing rights Current Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Current Foreign currencies Current U.S. Government assets other than official reserve assets Historical U.S. loans and other long-term assets Historical Repayable in dollars Other Historical Historical U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. short-term assets Historical U.S. private assets : Direct investment abroad Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks Historical Current Current Current U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns Historical U.S. claims reported by U.S banks not included elsewhere.. Historical FOREIGN ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES : Foreign official assets in the United States Current U.S. Government securities U.S. Treasury securities Other Current Current Current 25'.8 Other U.S. Government liabilities.. Historical U.S. liabilities reported by U.S banks not included elsewhere.. Historical Other foreign official assets Current Other foreign assets in the United States : Direct investment in the United States Historical U.S. Treasury securities Current U.S. securities other than U.S Treasury securities Current Corporate and other bonds Current Corporate stocks Current U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S nonbanking concerns Historical U.S. liabilities reported by U.S banks not included elsewhere.. Historical Note. In June the Bureau of Economic Analysis suspended showing estimates of the net international investment position and of total U.S. assets abroad and foreign assets in the United States inasmuch as some components are valued in current-period prices and others are valued in prices of earlier periods The second column here shows the valuation used for each component ; since some components reflect a mix of valuations for their subcomponents the valuation basis shown reflects that used for the major part of the category For further details including plans for developing new estimates see Survey of Current Business June Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-102. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Merchandise Services Imports Net Net travel Other uiner and services military transac- transpor- nets net tions3 tation receipts Year or quarter Exports Net Investment income5 Receipts Payments on U.S. on foreign assets assets3 in abroad U.S Net Balance on goods Unilateral Balance on services transfers current not and nei account income U48 : I II Ill IV : I \ \ '. " Ill IV : | II Ill " Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing Quarterly data are not seasonally adjusted Beginning includes transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from investment income and included in other services net See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-102. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total ! : II III IV II Ill IV : | | III " ! ITS official reserve assets87 " & Other U.S Government assets -l ! -1J568 ^ U.S private assets Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inf low ( ) ] Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( Sfclte ) Statistical discrepancy Of which : Total ( sum of Seasonal the items adjustmen * with sign discrepreversed ) ancy [ Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Note. See Survey of Current Business June for discussion of redefinitions and other adjustments to data as well as relationship of data shown here with data in the national income and product accounts Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonagrfcultural products Aari Vaar or Tear nr c 'r- quarter Total pr f ucts Total Indus- Capital trial supplies Autoand motive Other mate- automotive rials B * * Total leum and products Total Industrial supplies materials Capital goods except Auto- Other automo- motive tive III IV : | ii ! ! ! ! " ! ! ! HI IV | | : I : i ii HI * Nonpetroleum products Pafrn reiro- End-use categories beginning are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for merchandise exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign merchandise ) are now assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic merchandise Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Billions of dollars ] Item first quarters at annual rate ' Exports Industrial countries Canada japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC28 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Imports Industrial countries Canada japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC2.. Other8 Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Balance ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC28 Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Ecuador Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin American Republics other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-105. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Merchandise exports ( f.a.s. value ) General merchandise imports ( customs value ) Principal end-use commodity category Principal end-use commodity category Year or month Total InFoods dustrial supbev- pl.es er- and maages terials goods cept automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines lion ExConConeral In- Cap- Auto- sumsummer- ( f.a.s. ) Exer chanports er Foods dus- ital mo- goods less ( f.a.s. ) goods trial tive dise im- less ( nonsup- goods vehi- ( nonTotal im2 imfood ) Other cles bev- plies cept parts food ) Other ports ( cus- ports exexer- and auto- and cept ma- mocept value ) '4 toms ages terivalen- autoautotiuo IIO \ ue ; moals gines motive tive F.a.s. value Trade balance Customs value F.a.s. value ? ? Customs value : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? i ? Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning Includes undocumented exports to Canada through Beginning undocumented exports to Canada are included in the appropriate end-use category Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments C.i.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the US. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data beginning include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-106. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] 1QR9 1QCO 1O7O 1QO9 1QQ7 IQfiO 19<90 1OQO Nov Dec All countries Industrial countries * ; United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries- Total By area : Africa2 Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries 2/233 * Includes data for Luxembourg Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; ; November ; and December Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics TABLE B-107. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada European Community1 Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = ) : II III IV : II III IV P Consumer prices ( = ) : II... Ill IV II Ill IV Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom West Germany Portugal and Spain. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in Data for Portugal and Spain which became members on January are excluded prior to All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Trade Information and Analysis Office of Finance Industry and Trade Information ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-108. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France West Germany Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( percent ) : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : s > * Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( = ) : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 'Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France West Germany and United Kingdom should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Many Italians reported as unemployed did not actively seek work in the past days and they have been excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts. Inclusion of such persons would about double the unemployment rate for Italy through and increase it to percent for s There are breaks in the series for West Germany ( ) and Italy ( ) Based on the prior series the rates for West Germany were percent in and the rate for Italy was percent in Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-109. Foreign exchange rates [ Currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ] Period March | | Ill IV | | Ill IV Belgium ( franc ) Netherlands ( guilder ) March ' ! ! ! ! ! ' ! ! ! ! ! HI IV | | III IV ! ! ! Canada ( dollar ) Sweden ( krona ) France ( franc ) Switzerland ( franc ) Cents per unit of foreign currency Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Germany ( mark ) United Kingdom ( pound ) * Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) Multilateral trade-weighted value of theU.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real TABLE B-110. Growth rates in real gross national product [ Percent change ] annual average annual average annual average annual average OECD countries2 : United States Canada japan European Community Area and country Prance West Germany Italy United Kingdom U.S.S.R Eastern Europe China ' Estimates OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) includes Australia Austria Belgium Denmark Finland. France West Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey and United Kingdom not shown separately Includes Belgium Denmark Greece Ireland Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal and Spain not shown separately Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and Council of Economic Advisers