S : Sf : ' ; : W ^ W't- ^ WW ' : ; ,S4 Si : & ' I ! ' ; ' ! v i ! ' ^ ^ w iiilIiiii ? Bi'-tfl Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office Superintendent of Documents Mail Stop : SSOP Washington DC ISBN C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER A STRATEGY FOR GROWTH AND CHANGE CHAPTER THE U.S. ECONOMY IN AND BEYOND CHAPTER TRENDS AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE U.S LABOR MARKET CHAPTER HEALTH CARE REFORM CHAPTER MICROECONOMIC INITIATIVES TO PROMOTE EFFICIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ( iii ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Economic Report of the President To the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate : America has always thrived on change. We have used the opportunities it creates to renew ourselves and build our prosperity. But for too long and in too many ways our Nation has been drifting For the last years family life in America has been breaking down. For the last years the real compensation of working Americans has grown at a disappointing rate. For years a policy of trickle-down economics built a false prosperity on a mountain of Federal debt. As a result of our national drift far too many American families even those with two working parents no longer dream the American dream of a better life for their children In the American people demanded change. A year ago I sought your support for a comprehensive short-term and long-term strategy to restore the promise of our country 's economic future You responded and together we replaced drift and gridlock with renewal and reform. Together we have taken the first necessary steps to restore growth in the living standards of all Americans We have created a sound macroeconomic environment and strengthened the foundations of future economic growth. As a result of our efforts the economy is now on a path of rising output increasing employment and falling deficits Establishing the Fiscal Conditions for Sustained Growth For more than a decade the Federal Government has been living well beyond its means spending much more than it has taken in and borrowing the difference. The resulting deficits have been huge both in sheer magnitude and as a percentage of the Nation 's output. Since the Federal debt has been growing faster than the economy reversing the trend of the previous three decades. As a consequence of this binge of deficit financing Federal budget deficits have been gobbling up an inordinate share of the Nation 's savings driving up real long-term interest rates discouraging private investment and impeding long-run private sector growth On August I signed the historic budget plan that you passed several days earlier. It will reduce Federal deficits by more than $ billion. The plan is a balanced package of cuts in spending and increases in revenues. The spending cuts are specific farreaching and genuine. They will reduce discretionary spending by over percent in real terms in years. The plan increases income tax rates for only the top percent of taxpayers the group of Americans who gained the most during the 1980s and are most able to pay higher taxes to help reduce the deficit. At the same time a broad expansion of the earned income tax credit will help make work pay for up to million American families. Nine out of ten small businesses will benefit from more-generous tax breaks that will help them invest and grow. And new targeted capital gains tax relief will encourage investment in new small businesses Our deficit reduction plan has been the principal factor in the dramatic decline in long-term interest rates since my election in November Lower interest rates in turn have sparked an investment-driven economic expansion that has created more private sector jobs during the last year than were created during the previous four. The fact that investment is leading the recovery is good news for living standards because investment is the key to productivity growth and hence to growth in real incomes for all Americans Investing in Our Nation 's Future Laying the macroeconomic groundwork for sustained growth is the government 's first responsibility but not its only responsibility Government also has a vital role to play in providing some of the critical raw materials for economic growth : science and technology an educated and well-trained work force and public infrastructure For much too long we have underinvested in these areas in comparison both with our global competitors and with our own economic history. Our overall budget deficit has masked another equally disturbing deficit a deficit in the kinds of public investments that lay the foundations for private sector prosperity Like private investments well-chosen public investments raise future living standards. As a consequence deficit reduction at the expense of public investment has been and will continue to be selfdefeating. That is why our budget package increases much-needed public investment even as it takes steps to reduce the budget deficit. One without the other will not work With the help of the Congress our public investment initiatives in the areas of technology infrastructure the environment and education and training received about percent of the funding we requested in fiscal year We increased funding for such proven successes as Head Start and the WIC program in the human resources area and the Advanced Technology Program of the National Institute of Standards and Technology in the area of technological research. We also launched a number of new initiatives including the National Service program a new program of empowerment zones and enterprise communities for urban and rural development and several new technology programs including the Technology Reinvestment Project designed to help defense contractors retool to serve civilian markets. We increased funding for research into new environmental technologies. In addition we developed a comprehensive cost-effective Climate Change Action Plan comprising nearly initiatives to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions to levels by the year As these examples bear witness we have made significant progress on our investment agenda but much more remains to be done. We will have to work together to find room to fund essential new investments even as we reduce real government outlays to meet tight annual caps on discretionary spending. This will not be easy. But it is essential for we face a dual challenge we must fundamentally change the composition of discretionary spending even as we reduce it in real terms This year my Administration is requesting funding for several new investment initiatives. Our Goals proposal will encourage local innovation in and accelerate the pace of school reform. It will link world-class academic and occupational standards to grassroots education reforms all across America. Our School-to-Work initiative will provide opportunities for post-secondary training for those not going on to college. Our reemployment and training program will streamline today 's patchwork of training programs and make them a source of new skills for people who lose their jobs. Finally our proposed welfare reform will provide the support job training and child care necessary to move people off welfare after years. That is the only way we will make welfare what it ought to be : a second chance not a way of life Reforming Our Health Care System This year we will also make history by reforming the Nation 's health care system. We face a health care crisis that demands a solution both for the health of our citizens and for the health of our economy over the long run. The United States today spends more on health care relative to the size of its economy than any other advanced industrial country. Yet we insure a smaller fraction of our population and we rank poorly on important overall health indicators such as life expectancy and infant mortality. Over percent of Americans nearly million people were uninsured throughout And tens of millions more have inadequate insurance or risk becoming uninsured should they lose their jobs. Meanwhile health care costs continue to climb increasing premiums and medical bills for American families and aggravating budget crises at all levels of government. Both the Office of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget Office have concluded that unless the system is reformed rising health care costs will begin pushing the Federal budget deficit back upward as this century comes to a close Piecemeal approaches to solving our health care crisis will not work. If we simply squeeze harder on Federal health spending without attempting systemwide reform more of the costs of covering health services guaranteed by the government will be shifted to the private sector and medical care for the elderly the disadvantaged and the disabled will be put at risk. Similarly if we attempt to provide universal coverage without complementary measures to improve competition and sharpen incentives for costconscious decisions costs will continue to escalate Our health care reform proposal while bold and comprehensive builds on the strengths of our current market-based system. Our approach preserves consumer choice and our largely employerbased private insurance arrangements. It relies on market competition and private incentives not price controls and bureaucracy to provide health security for all Americans to rein in health care costs and to solve our long-run budget deficit problem Opening Foreign Markets Raising the living standards of all Americans is the fundamental economic goal of my Administration. That is why all of our initiatives in international trade share a common purpose : to open markets and promote American exports. This emphasis on exports is driven by two simple facts. First America is part of an increasingly integrated world economy and must adapt to this new reality if we are to stay on top. There is simply no way to close our borders and return to the insular days of the 1950s. To try to do so would be an exercise in futility doomed not only to fail but to lower living standards in the process. Second export industries offer the kind of high-wage high-skill jobs the country needs. By shifting production toward more exports we will shift the composition of employment toward better jobs. In short to realize our goal of higher living standards for all Americans we must compete not retreat The year just past will go down in the history books as a watershed for trade liberalization. With your help we enacted the North American Free Trade Agreement which links the United States Canada and Mexico together in the world 's largest marketplace We also successfully completed the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade which promises to add as much as $ billion to $ billion to the Nation 's output by the end of a decade. And we are now on a course of increasing trade and investment liberalization with the rapidly growing economies of East Asia and the Pacific which will be a major source of new export opportunities for American products in the coming years. At home we have eliminated much of our export control system and have rationalized our export promotion activities to help our producers workers and farmers increase their sales around the world Improving the Efficiency of Government My Administration is committed to improving the Federal government 's efficiency across the board. The National Performance Review ( NPR ) completed under the bold leadership of Vice President Gore provides a road map for what must be done. The NPR 's report shows how substantial budgetary savings can be realized by making existing programs more efficient and cutting those that are no longer necessary. As a result of our efforts to reinvent how the government performs we will reduce the Federal bureaucracy by positions bringing it down to the lowest level in decades My Administration is also committed to reducing the burden of government regulations by improving the regulatory review process. My Executive Order on Regulatory Planning and Review requires that all new regulations carefully balance costs and benefits that only those regulations whose benefits exceed their costs be adopted and that in each case the most cost-effective regulations be chosen This year we will also work with the Congress to develop the new regulatory framework required to encourage the development of the national information superhighway. We must cooperate with the private sector to connect every classroom every library and every hospital in America to this highway by the year Rapid access to the most advanced information available will increase productivity and living standards help to educate our children and help health providers improve medical care for our citizens The Economic Outlook An economic strategy built on long-run investments will not bear fruit overnight. But there are already signs that our policy initiatives are beginning to pay off. Prospects for sustained economic expansion look far brighter now than they did a year ago when my Administration first asked for your support. Growth of real gross domestic product increased steadily over the course of and the economic expansion has continued into Consumer spending should remain healthy because of continued gains in employment and output and investment spending should remain strong because of low long-term interest rates and increasing levels of demand. Low interest rates will also continue to support the recent expansion in residential construction. The Administration forecasts that the economy will grow at percent in and will remain on track to create million jobs over years As begins our economy is strong and growing stronger With continued deficit reduction more public investment a re- formed health care system increased exports and a reinvented government we can create the foundations for an even more prosperous America THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Laura D'Andrea Tyson Chair Alan S. Blinder Member Joseph E. Stiglitz Member CONTENTS Page CHAPTER A STRATEGY FOR GROWTH AND CHANGE The Legacy of the Recent Past Inadequate Recovery from Recession Inadequate Productivity Growth Worsening Income Inequality Large Deficits Mounting Debt Inadequate Public Investment Prosperity and Growth : The Benefits of Economic Change Reducing the Deficit to Promote Capital Formation Investing in People Investing in Public Infrastructure Investing in Technology Trade Policy and Living Standards Health Care Reform Summary : Prosperity and Change Creating Opportunity Summary CHAPTER THE U.S. ECONOMY IN AND BEYOND Struggling to Grow The End of the Cold War Weak Foreign Economies The Debt Workout Oversupply of Commercial Buildings Credit Crunch Corporate Downsizings The Headwinds Are Mostly Calming Overview of the Economy in Consumption Expenditures Business Fixed Investment Inventories Residential Investment Net Exports Employment and Productivity Incomes Inflation Monetary Policy Fiscal Policies and the Timing of Output Page The Federal Government 's Fiscal Stance Industrial and Regional Disparities Deficit Reduction and the Real Interest Rate How Deficit Reduction Reduces Long-Term Interest Rates Short-Run Effects of Interest Rates Long-Term Effects of Deficit Reduction The Economy 's Response to Higher Income Taxes Do Taxes Change Behavior ? Do Higher Tax Rates Increase Tax Revenues ? The Economic Outlook Risks to the Forecast Sources of Long-Run Growth Conclusion CHAPTER TRENDS AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE U.S LABOR MARKET Employment Growth A Slow Recovery Sources of Job Growth Unemployment and Nonemployment Trends Is the Natural Rate of Unemployment Increasing ? Direct Measures of the Natural Rate The Magnitude and Costs of Job Loss Slowing Wage Growth and Widening Inequality Slow Income Growth Growing Inequality Explaining Slow Wage Growth Explaining the Growth of Inequality Job Quality Hours of Work Job Stability Benefits Toward a Comprehensive Work Force Policy CHAPTER Health Care Reform Universal Coverage and Health Security Insurance Market Reform Insuring Major Risks and Preexisting Conditions Community Rating Reducing Administrative Costs Creating a More Efficient Market and Containing Costs Explaining Cost Increases Who Pays for Health Care ? Health Care and Government Budgets The Architecture of the Health Security Act Elements of Reform Page Providing Comprehensive Benefits Organizing the Insurance Market Paying for Insurance Providing Discounts Using Savings to Guarantee Health Security and Reduce the Deficit Economic Effects of the Health Security Act Macroeconomic Effects Sectoral Effects Conclusion CHAPTER MICROECONOMIC INITIATIVES TO PROMOTE EFFICIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY Promoting Efficiency in the Public and Private Sectors Creating a More Effective Government Promoting Competition More Efficient Regulation of Natural Monopolies Addressing Environmental Externalities Managing Resources on Federal Lands Climate Change Action Plan Superfund Reauthorization : the Administration Position Sustainable Development and Green Accounting Promoting Technology Principles of Technology Policy The Administration 's Technology Initiatives Technology Policy Growth and Competitiveness CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY Trends in U.S. Trade Trade Jobs and Wage Inequality The Administration 's Trade Initiatives Domestic Initiatives : The National Export Strategy Bilateral Negotiations Regional Initiatives Multilateral Initiatives : The Uruguay Round The Trade Policy Agenda Trade and the Environment International Trade and Competition Policy Regionalism Foreign Exchange Market Developments The European Monetary System The European Currencies in Turmoil The Maastricht Treaty on Economic and Monetary Union Conclusions APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production LIST OF TABLES Page Structural Budget Deficit as Percent of GDP Effect of OBRA93 on Fiscal Budget Distribution of the Change in Taxes Under OBRA93 by Income Category Changes in Statutory Marginal Tax Rates Under OBRA93 for Married Individuals Filing Jointly Contributions to Growth of Interest-Sensitive and Other Components of GDP Structural Budget Deficits Sources of U.S. Economic Growth Foreign Country Real GDP Growth Administration Forecasts Accounting for Growth in Real GDP Health Perception and Health Status by Type of Insurance Coverage Distribution of Population and Health Spending by Spending Category Estimates for Sources and Uses of Health Care Funds Estimated Premiums in the Regional Alliance Discounts Under the Health Security Act in Caps on Premiums by Firm Size Allowed Growth Rates of Alliance Premiums New Federal Spending and Savings Due to Reform Sources and Uses of Federal Funds Under Reform Employer Payments for Health Care : Baseline and Reform U.S. Merchandise Trade by Industry and U.S. Merchandise Trade by World Region and Stock of U.S. Outward and Inward Foreign Direct Investment U.S. Merchandise Trade Balances with Selected Countries Selected Trade Indicators for Six Industrialized Countries Intrafirm Trade as Share of Total U.S. Exports to and Imports from Europe and Japan LIST OF CHARTS Page l-4a l-4b Growth of Real GDP in Recoveries Real Income Productivity and Compensation Shares of Total After-Tax Income by Income Category Federal Budget Deficits With and Without Deficit Reduction Package Net Federal Debt as Percent of GDP Federal Civilian Fixed Investment as Percent of GDP Federal Deficits and Real Interest Rates Correlation of Investment and Productivity Ratio of Wages of College Graduates to Wages of High School Graduates Ratio of Public to Private Net Nonresidential Capital Stock Projected Real Growth Rates of Principal Federal Budget Components Shares of Wages and Benefits in Compensation Earned Income Tax Credit for Families with Two or More Children Recovery Pattern of Nonfarm Payroll Employment National Defense Purchases as Share of GDP U.S. Merchandise Exports to Various Trading Partners U.S. Exports Implied by Industrial Country GDP Households : Credit Market Debt as Percentage of Disposable Income Nonfinancial Corporate Business : Credit Market Debt as Percentage of Output Defense Spending : Actual Versus Baseline Effects of Tax Withholding Change on Personal Consumption Alternative Measures of the Stance of Fiscal Policy Ten-Year Treasury Note Yields Real Interest Rates Federal Debt as Percent of Nominal GDP Dynamic Effects of Deficit Reduction Personal Income Taxes as a Share of GDP Changes in Output and Payroll Employment in First Eleven Quarters of Recovery Employment and Output in Recoveries Civilian Unemployment Rate Long-Term Unemployment as Share of Total Unemployment LIST OF CHARTS CONTINUED Page Long-Term Unemployment and the Unemployment Rate Employment-to-Population Ratios of Women Unemployment Rates by Educational Attainment March Ratio of White-Collar to Blue-Collar Unemployment Rates Real Hourly Compensation and Wages Average Annual Growth of Mean Family Income by Income Quintile Productivity Growth and Price Reductions Average Weekly Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Workers Help Supply Industry Employment as Share of Total Employment Part-Time Employment : Total and Voluntary Reallocation of Employment Between Industries Distribution of Population by Source of Health Insurance Coverage : Sources of Payment for Health Care by Insurance Status : Estimates Administrative Expenses of Commercial Insurers as a Share of Claims Paid Health Expenditure and Life Expectancy in Industrial Countries Estimates of Inappropriate Care for Five Common Procedures Sources of Health Care Financing as Percent of Total Expenditures Government Spending on Health Care as Percent of Total Government Revenues Health Expenditures as Percent of GDP Business Spending on Health Insurance U.S. Trade as Share of Real Gross Domestic Product U.S. Exports of Goods and Services Nominal and Real Effective Dollar Exchange Rates Exchange Rates of the Dollar Against Selected Currencies French Franc-Deutsche Mark Exchange Rates LIST OF BOXES Page The New Measure of Unemployment Saving Investment and Current Account Deficits LIST OF BOXES CONTINUED Page Credible Deficit Reduction and Real Interest Rates A Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution ? The National Service Program How Does the Earned Income Tax Credit Work ? The Economic Effects of the Midwest Floods of The Economic Effects of Lower Oil Prices Are Current Long-Term Interest Rates Sustainable ? Estimating the Long-Run Effects of Deficit Reduction The New Current Population Survey Growing Inequality of Employment and Unemployment Consequences of Productivity Growth Why Productivity Growth Does Not Cause Unemployment Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection Recent Reductions in Health Care Inflation Capped Entitlements Selected National Performance Review Recommendations Market Power Natural Monopoly Externalities U.S. Exports : More Than Peanuts The Case of the Polish Golf Carts Mexican Economic Reforms The Asian " Miracle " The Economic Impact of the Uruguay Round The Uruguay Round and U.S. Trade Laws Exchange-Rate Volatility and International Trade Criteria for Joining the Economic and Monetary Union CHAPTER A Strategy for Growth and Change ON ELECTION DAY the American economy faced a number of daunting challenges both short term and long term. The principal short-term problem was that recovery from the recession had been disappointing in almost all respects. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) had grown at only a 2.2-percent annual rate from the first quarter of through the third quarter of less than half the pace of a typical recovery. Payroll employment had actually fallen during the first year of recovery and had risen a scant percent from March to October Furthermore the seesaw pattern that had plagued the recovery raised fears that the weak economy might relapse into recession But America 's long-run problems ran deeper and their causes were less well understood. While U.S. workers and firms remained the world 's most productive our productivity growth had been sluggish for almost two decades. In consequence real hourly compensation and GDP per capita had advanced extremely slowly and real median family income had barely increased at all. In addition inequality had been rising for more than a decade leaving the American economy with the most unequal distribution of income in its postwar history. The combination of stagnant average incomes and widening dispersion meant that many middle-class and low-income families had actually suffered declines in their real incomes Finally the Federal budget deficit was large and rising the national debt had been growing faster than GDP for about a decade and huge amounts of foreign borrowing had transformed the United States from the world 's biggest creditor nation into its biggest debtor National economic policy was the major cause of some of our economic difficulties such as the Federal budget deficit but only a contributing factor to others such as growing income inequality Although the economic policy agenda of the new Administration can not cure all of these problems overnight steps we have taken have already contributed to noticeable progress on several fronts The recovery has solidified. Job growth has resumed. Fiscal policies that will reduce the Federal deficit substantially have been put in place. Although much more needs to be done taxes have been made more progressive and starts have been made on education and labor market policies that will address the inequality problem And perhaps most fundamentally of all the Administration has embarked on a comprehensive investment agenda designed to raise productivity which is the wellspring of higher living standards in the long run This chapter explains the Administration 's economic strategy and examines some of the specific policy initiatives that have been undertaken to pursue that strategy. The chapters that follow provide much more detail THE LEGACY OF THE RECENT PAST The policies of any new Administration are dictated in part by the challenges it faces and the problems it inherits from the past Because America 's current problems are both short run and long run in nature the solutions must be too INADEQUATE RECOVERY FROM RECESSION Short-run cyclical problems are almost by definition transitory But when the American macroeconomy performs poorly that one fact seems to overwhelm all others and crowd out consideration of longer run problems. In fact the U.S. economy has been operating well below its productive capacity for years now. From through real GDP grew only percent per year and the civilian unemployment rate ( by what was the standard measure until this year Box ) has remained above percent since November Under such circumstances public concerns with economic policy tend to be summarized in a single word : jobs Box The New Measure of Unemployment Beginning with its February announcement of the January unemployment rate the Bureau of Labor Statistics has changed its principal measure of joblessness * The changes reflecting technical improvements in the household survey used to estimate unemployment ( Chapter contains more details ) are expected to increase the measured unemployment rate by about to percentage point although the precise amount is impossible to know. All unemployment numbers used in this Report are measured on the old traditional basis As Chart shows the recovery that began in the second quarter of has been exceptionally slow by historical standards so slow in fact that the unemployment rate was still rising more than a year into the " recovery. " Only in mid-1993 did unemployment fall back to its rate at the recession trough. Growth has been not only slow but extremely uneven proceeding in fits and starts which have left consumers and business people wondering how long the recovery would last Chart Growth of Real GDP in Recoveries Real GDP in the current recovery has grown at only about half the rate of the typical post-World War II recovery Percent change from trough Quarters after Trough Note : " Average " includes all recoveries from to except The trough quarter for the current recovery is first quarter Sources : Department of Commerce and National Bureau of Economic Research Thus the Administration 's first task was to put the recovery on a sound footing not to produce a short-run burst of activity but to lay the groundwork for a sustained expansion that would restore confidence and encourage firms to resume hiring. In large measure this task was accomplished in ( Chapter provides more details. ) Sluggish economic growth in the first half of the year gave way to solid growth in the second half. More important job growth began in earnest : Employers added about million jobs to nonfarm payrolls between December and December As began the outlook for sustained expansion looked brighter than it had in a long time INADEQUATE PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH The economy 's longer run problems will not be dealt with so quickly. They require sustained attention over a long period of time. Primary among them is the troubling fact that growth in productivity has been anemic for about two decades Chart shows the remarkable slowdown in productivity growth that occurred around from an annual average of percent in the period to just percent since In part this slowdown is exaggerated by the fact that the first few postwar decades were aberrant : There was much catching up to do after the Great Depression and the Second World War. But America 's long-run average productivity growth rate over the century leading up to was slightly above percent per year ; since it has averaged about percent. At 2-percent growth productivity doubles in years ; at 1-percent growth doubling takes years. Even seemingly modest changes in productivity can have dramatic effects on living standards in the long run. Thus the Nation has much at stake in improving its productivity growth rate Chart Real Income Productivity and Compensation Productivity real income and real hourly compensation all slowed markedly around dollars Index = Real Median Family Income ( left scale ) Output per Hour ( productivity ) ( right scale ) Real Compensation per Hour ( right scale ) I I I I I I I I Business sector. Compensation deflated by implicit price deflator Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor Labor productivity output per hour of work may seem an abstract concept of more interest to analysts than to working men and women. But without productivity growth higher real wages would lead directly to lower employment as profit-oriented firms reacted to higher labor costs by trimming their work forces. It is only steady productivity gains that enable the economy to generate more jobs and rising real wages at the same time. Chart shows that growth in both real compensation per hour and real median family income slowed markedly at just about the time that productivity growth slowed. This coincidence in time is of course no coincidence at all. Productivity growth is the ultimate source of growing real wages and family incomes Nothing is more important to the long-run well-being of the U.S economy than accelerating productivity growth. Most of the Administration 's economic strategy is therefore devoted to that end WORSENING INCOME INEQUALITY Starting some time in the late 1970s income inequalities widened alarmingly in America. Chart shows that the share of the Nation 's income received by the richest percent of American families rose from percent in to percent in while the share of the poorest percent fell from percent to percent. Part of this change was due to the cuts in taxes and social spending of the early 1980s the net benefits of which were heavily skewed toward the rich. But there was a much more powerful force at work one not attributable to fiscal policy : The distribution of wage rates grew substantially more unequal. In real terms wages at the bottom of the distribution fell while wages at the top rose Chart Shares of Total After-Tax Income by Income Category The richest percent of Americans saw their share of total income rise sharply in the 1980s while the poorest percent saw their share decline Top Percent Lowest Quintile Source : Congressional Budget Office The forces underlying this widening of the wage distribution are not well understood. ( More details are contained in Chapter ) But the facts are stark. Between and the real median income of males with years of college fell about percent but that of males with only years of high school fell a stunning percent and high school dropouts fared even worse. A similar pattern emerges almost any way one slices the data : Wages near the top of the distribution rose faster than wages near the bottom. Salaries of chief executive officers rose rapidly while the minimum wage fell in real terms. Wages of skilled workers rose faster than those of the unskilled. Wages of experienced workers grew faster than entry-level wages The widening dispersion of wages accounts for most of the squeeze on the middle class because the middle percent of the income distribution derives about three-quarters of its income from wages and salaries. And these people do not bring home the highest wages but those nearer the middle. When middle-class wages stagnate middle-class family incomes do too. That is precisely what happened in the 1980s In sum for whatever reasons in the late 1970s our market economy began to dish out more-handsome rewards to the well-off and stingier ones to the middle class. Government policies compounded the problem by weakening the social safety net lowering the tax burdens of the wealthy and driving up real interest rates. In concert the market and the government produced the greatest disequalization of incomes since at least before World War II This Administration sees the combination of stagnating average incomes and rising inequality as a threat to the social fabric that has long bound Americans together and made ours a society with minimal class distinctions. Although the underlying forces of the market are vastly more powerful than anything the government can do the right kinds of policies can make a difference. For example changes in Federal tax policy have already shifted the burden of taxation away from the working poor and toward the well-to-do And several initiatives in the human investment arena described later in this chapter and in Chapter should help mitigate rising wage inequality LARGE DEFICITS MOUNTING DEBT Of all the Nation 's economic problems the one most directly traceable to government policy is the large Federal budget deficit Although the Federal budget has been in deficit almost every year of the postwar period until the 1980s these deficits were small enough that the ratio of public debt to GDP was stable or falling In fact the structural budget ( that is the one that would result if the economy were at a high level of employment ) after adjustment for inflation was on average roughly balanced for decades ( Table ) This approximate balance was not achieved by any formal legal requirement but rather through an informal unstated political consensus TABLE Structural Budget Deficit as Percent of GDP Adjusted deficit as percent of GDPi Fiscal years ( forecast ) Adjusted deficit is unified structural budget deficit corrected for depreciation of the value of Federal debt due to inflation Sources : Office of Management and Budget Congressional Budget Office and Council of Economic Advisers The budget picture changed dramatically with the tax cuts of the early 1980s and the structural inflation-adjusted budget began to display chronic large deficits for the first time. The deficit in fiscal the last year before the election of President Clinton was a whopping $ billion in the unified budget and $ billion on a structural inflation-adjusted basis. Worse yet both the deficit and the debt-GDP ratio were expected to rise further ( Charts l-4a and Deficits of this magnitude around percent of GDP would have been far less worrisome if American households were saving enough to cover both the government budget deficit and the needs of business to finance investment. But in fact American household saving rates not only are among the lowest in the world but actually fell in the 1980s. So for both of these reasons declining household saving and rising budget deficits national saving as a share of GDP dropped sharply in the 1980s Casual discussions often equate national saving with domestic investment but the two can differ in an open economy ( Box ) And in the United States of the 1980s they differed dramatically While national saving was falling as a share of GDP the share of domestic investment although low by international standards was roughly constant. To plug the gap between saving and investment the United States had to import massive amounts of foreign capital. In consequence our current account balance went from a small surplus to a large deficit in the 1980s All this foreign capital had its positive side : By limiting the rise of real U.S. interest rates it partly shielded investment from the consequences of huge Federal deficits. But it left the United States the greatest debtor nation in the world. Even more disturbing all this borrowing from abroad went to maintaining the Nation 's comparatively meager investment rate not to increasing it Chart 1-4a Federal Budget Deficits With and Without Deficit Reduction Package Budget deficits will now reverse course. Deficits would have kept rising without the reduction package Billions of dollars Without Deficit Reduction Package With Deficit Reduction Package _L _L _L _L J_ Fiscal Years Note : Data exclude health care reform. Projected for fiscal years Source : Office of Management and Budget Chart -4b Net Federal Debt as Percent of GDP Federal indebtedness as a percent of GDP is expected to plateau after fiscal under OBRA93 instead of rising as estimated without deficit reduction Percent Without Deficit Reduction Package * " " t _ With Deficit Reduction Package ^ ^ n I I I I I I Fiscal Years I i i Note : Net federal debt defined as debt held by the public less debt held by the Federal Reserve. Data exclude health care reform. Projected for fiscal years Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Office of Management and Budget Box Saving Investment and Current Account Deficits Private saving whether generated by households or by businesses can be used for one of three purposes : to finance domestic private investment to purchase debt issued by the government or to purchase foreign assets. If private saving is insufficient to cover the sum of the first two uses private investment and the combined deficit of all levels of government we must borrow the difference from abroad. Such a shortage of saving has characterized the United States for about a decade now When Americans borrow from foreigners we run a surplus in our international capital account. But since the capital account and the current account must balance under floating exchange rates the mirror image of this capital account surplus is an equally large current account deficit. Thus a country that saves less than it invests and runs a large budget deficit is bound to have a large current account deficit. Indeed chronic large current account deficits date from precisely the time that the United States started running huge fiscal deficits. Between and the overall government budget deficit rose from percent of GDP to percent. During those same years the current account balance went from a surplus of percent of GDP to a deficit of percent of GDP The legacy of foreign debt was not the only cost of our addiction to foreign borrowing. To attract the needed capital to American shores the United States had to offer interest rates higher than those prevailing in the other leading industrialized countries. This gap between U.S. and foreign interest rates in turn led to a sharp appreciation of the dollar as foreign investors demanded more dollar-denominated assets. The sky-high dollar made life exceedingly pleasant for American tourists in Europe in the mid-1980s. But it handicapped portions of American industry by making many U.S manufactured goods uncompetitive on world markets. It has taken years for our manufacturing sector to recover from this shock INADEQUATE PUBLIC INVESTMENT The budget deficit and the trade deficit were major national concerns in the 1980s and on into the 1990s. But there was also a third deficit : a shortage of funds for public investment in critical national needs like education and training transportation facilities and environmental infrastructure The share of Federal civilian fixed investment in GDP is only about half what it was in the 1960s ( Chart ) Furthermore the share of the Federal budget devoted to all types of public invest- ment including education and research and development as well as civilian and military fixed investment fell from percent in to percent in As the 1990s started more and more Americans were becoming painfully aware that our public investment was not what it should be Chart Federal Civilian Fixed Investment as Percent of GDP Relative to GDP the Federal government invested little more than half as much in nonmilitary infrastructure in the 1980s as it had in the 1960s Note : Includes Federal nonmilitary nonresidential fixed capital investment Source : Department of Commerce PROSPERITY AND GROWTH : THE BENEFITS OF ECONOMIC CHANGE The economic strategy of this Administration follows logically from this legacy. We must secure the expansion and spur long-term economic growth. We must reverse the trend toward rising inequality. We must reduce Federal borrowing and shrink the trade deficit. We must invest more in both private and public capital. And we must bolster our human resources While the Administration 's economic policy agenda is broad and varied it can be summarized in a single word : investment investment in private capital investment in people investment in public infrastructure investment in technology and investment in environmental preservation. Six major themes stand out and define the essence of the Administration 's economic strategy : deficit reduction ; investments in human capital ; investments in public infrastructure ; investments in technology ; expanding international trade ; and health care reform REDUCING THE DEFICIT TO PROMOTE CAPITAL FORMATION The legacy of large and growing Federal budget deficits required that first attention be devoted to their reduction so as to free up resources for expansion of private physical capital the machines factories and offices that make American labor more productive For too long Federal budget deficits have been gobbling up an inordinate share of the Nation 's saving thereby keeping real interest rates too high ( Chart ) and leaving the Nation with a Hobson 's choice between lower domestic investment and higher foreign borrowing. Reducing the budget deficit was a necessary part of clearing away the financial underbrush that had grown up around us in the 1980s so that economic growth could be put on a sounder and more sustained footing Chart Federal Deficits and Real Interest Rates Interest rates adjusted for inflation rose and fell sharply in the 1980s in tandem with the sharp increase and subsequent decrease in the Federal budget deficit Percent Percent Real Yield on 10-Year Treasury Securities ( right scale ) Deficit as Percent of GDP ( left scale ) J Note : Real rates are nominal rates minus 10-year forecast of inflation Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce and Department of the Treasury Deficit reduction is difficult and painful. But the President concluded that the Nation could not remain on the path bequeathed us by the previous Administration a path on which the national debt was growing faster than GDP and deficits were threatening to explode ( Chart ) So he gave first priority to putting the Nation 's fiscal house back in order Policy changes in the President 's deficit reduction package will gradually reduce the Federal deficit after years by % percent of GDP. By fiscal the last year of the program the deficit is expected to be $ billion below what it otherwise would have been : falling from $ billion to $ billion ( Table ) The ratio of debt to GDP at the end of fiscal falls from a projected percent without the deficit reduction program to percent with it TABLE Effect ofOBRA93 on Fiscal Budget [ Billions of dollars ] Before OBRA93 Item After 0BRA93 Outlays Discretionary Mandatory Debt service Revenue Deficit Change Note. Data exclude health reform Source : Office of Management and Budget The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of Because the President did not want to delay deficit reduction for another year the fiscal budget had to be prepared on a compressed schedule. The President introduced a detailed budget plan to a joint session of the Congress in February just weeks after taking office. The House and Senate passed the final version of the budget resolution on April the earliest date in the history of the modern congressional budget process. A spirited congressional debate followed leading to enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of ( OBRA93 ) in August Several principles guided the design of OBRA93. First and foremost the deficit reduction had to be large genuine and credible To this end the Administration proposed hundreds of specific spending cuts and increases in revenue. Second the package had to be balanced between expenditure cuts and tax increases. Specifically the $ billion of deficit reduction in fiscal consists of $ billion in net spending cuts including $ billion in lower debt service and $ billion in additional net revenue. Third the tax increases were highly progressive heavily skewed toward the people who are most able to pay and who benefited most from the large tax cuts of the early 1980s. Income tax rates were raised for only about the top percent of taxpayers. Some percent of the new taxes in OBRA93 will be borne by the upper percent of the income distribution ( Table ) Fourth even while cutting the deficit room had to be found in the budget for a variety of critical public investments ( more on this below ) TABLE Distribution of the Change in Taxes Under OBRA93 by Income Category Family income ( dollars ) Share of total change in taxes ( percent ) Average change in taxes ( dollars per family ) Share of families ( percent ) Less than or more All incomes2 Pretax family income ( CBO definition ) Total includes negative incomes not included in categories above Source : Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) The spending cuts touched virtually every part of the budget. On the discretionary side the Congress imposed what amounts to a 5year freeze on nominal spending capping fiscal spending at $ billion or about $ billion below the fiscal level. With inflation ( as measured by the implicit deflator for GDP ) projected to average about percent per year over the period the implied cut in real discretionary spending is about percent. Furthermore if inflation comes in lower than the forecast the caps will be lowered commensurately. The budget cuts in OBRA93 include a reduction in the Federal work force by positions ( since raised to positions ) delay of the cost-of-living adjustment for Federal employees defense cutbacks beyond those projected by the previous Administration and a host of smaller cuts in discretionary programs On the mandatory side of the budget the largest cuts were in the medicare program ( about $ billion by fiscal ) But there were also reductions in agricultural and veterans ' programs savings in the student loan program new receipts from auctioning portions of the radio spectrum ( discussed in Chapter ) and savings from shortening the maturity structure of the national debt. Total cuts in mandatory spending other than debt service are expected to reach $ billion by fiscal OBRA93 also increased taxes. Higher income tax rates on the top percent of households constitute the biggest source of new revenue by far : $ billion by fiscal ( The bracket structures be- fore and after OBRA93 are compared in Table ) In addition the 2.9-percent payroll tax for medicare which formerly applied only to the first $ of earnings now applies to all earnings ( raising $ billion by fiscal ) the taxable portion of Social Security benefits was raised for the top percent of recipients ( $ billion ) and the motor fuels tax went up by cents per gallon in October ( $ billion ) Finally OBRA93 increased the top corporate tax rate and closed a variety of business tax loopholes but also enhanced or created several tax incentives for investment. The net effect of these increases and decreases in business taxes should yield about $ billion in revenue by fiscal TABLE Changes in Statutory Marginal Tax Rates Under OBRA93 for Married Individuals Filing Jointly Marginal rate ( percent ) Taxable income ( dollars ) Over Source : Department of the Treasury OBRA93 Interest Rates and Investment As critical elements of the President 's deficit reduction package started to become known long-term interest rates began to fall indicating that the financial markets viewed the proposals as substantial genuine and credible ( Box ) Rates fell dramatically between January and October before backing off a bit late in the year As documented more completely in Chapter the medicine of low interest rates now seems to be taking hold. Business investment has been leading the economy 's expansion with consumer durables and housing important sources of strength. If we divide GDP into its interest-sensitive components ( business fixed investment housing and consumer durables ) and everything else the data tell a fascinating story. While the three interest-sensitive pieces typically account for about percent of GDP growth in they accounted for virtually all of GDP growth. The rest of GDP barely increased over the year ( Table ) It is important to understand why this Administration made deficit reduction a top priority and worked so hard to see it through the Congress. One important reason was the concern being expressed in many quarters that deficits were growing out of control and might threaten financial stability and thereby macroeconomic stability Box Credible Deficit Reduction and Real Interest Rates Long-term nominal and real interest rates dropped sharply in The decline in rates was closely linked to the proposal and enactment of the Administration 's budget ( as argued in Chapter ) Lower deficits reduce real bond yields through several channels : Lower Federal borrowing reduces interest rates directly by reducing demand for credit A more prudent fiscal policy reduces the likelihood that the Federal Reserve will need to pursue a restrictive monetary policy and so reduces expected future shortterm rates As long as international capital mobility is not perfect increased national saving leads to an increase in investment in the long run the consequent increase in the capital stock reduces the marginal product of capital and therefore the interest rate Because the plan had credibility financial markets anticipated these effects. Since future expected short-term interest rates govern current long-term rates long rates fell immediately In response to the proposal and enactment of the Ad * ministration 's plan. There would have been no such market response if the plan had lacked credibility. What features of the Administration 's plan account for its apparently high 'credibility ? The plan is based on realistic economic assumptions ; it does not presume that the economy can " grow its way out " of the deficit problem The President proposed and the Congress enacted many specific spending cuts in the fiscal budget thereby demonstrating the feasibility of maintaining the discretionary spending caps The tax provisions of the plan by and large result in permanent increases in revenue ; they do not merely shift future revenue into the current budget window The President showed himself willing to make difficult choices to correct the fiscal imbalance : freezing total discretionary spending ; increasing the taxation of Social Security benefits for recipients with the highest incomes ; and proposing reform of the Nation 's health care system TABLE Contributions to Growth of Interest-Sensitive and Other Components of GDP [ Average annual percent change ] Historical average ( ) Fourth quarter to fourth quarter Interest-sensitive components2 All other Component GDP Preliminary Business fixed investment housing and expenditures on consumer durables Source : Department of Commerce But the central objective of deficit reduction was and remains expenditure switching away from consumption and government purchases toward investment. The lower interest rates brought about by deficit reduction are the way the market accomplishes this expenditure switching The reasons for wanting to raise the investment share of GDP are straightforward : Workers are more productive when they are equipped with more and better capital more-productive workers earn higher real wages and higher real wages are the mainspring of higher living standards. Few economic propositions are better supported than these or more important. As Chart shows investment rates and productivity growth rates correlate well across countries. Lower budget deficits that raise private investment are therefore critical to raising the economy 's long-run growth rate However some people worry that deficit reduction might retard growth in the short run by siphoning off aggregate demand. Such a concern is justified. Deficit reduction by itself certainly does tend to contract the economy. After all raising taxes and cutting government spending reduce the demand for goods and services. But deficit reduction accompanied by sufficient declines in long-term interest rates need not be contractionary. It is of course the latter not the former that we experienced in Economists judge the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand by looking at changes in the structural deficit. Table shows that OBRA93 will reduce the structural deficit by about $ billion from fiscal to fiscal after which it is expected to rise slightly. The large deficit reductions after fiscal serve to limit what would otherwise have been even larger increases in the structural deficit mainly due to rising expenditures on health care Analysis by the Council of Economic Advisers suggests that the declines in long-term interest rates that have occurred since the election even after the backup late in are more than enough to offset the contractionary effects of this decrease in the structural Chart Correlation of Investment and Productivity There is a close correlation between investment rates and productivity growth rates across countries Average annual per capita real GDP growth rate ( ) t.u Portugal * Italy Japan Ireland Iceland Finland I * _ Turkey _ Belgium \ ^ ^ Canada ^ % Spam ^ ^ Norway ^ ^ ^ Austria ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ * r many < ^ r e c ^ ^ ^ ^ ' ^ Luxembourg ^ FLce ^ Denmark # Netherlands U.S. Sweden ^ ^ ^ ^ Australia Switzerland New Zealand I nR I I I I Investment as share of GDP ( average ) Source : International Monetary Fund deficit. Hence the economy should be able to grow right through the deficit reduction period TABLE Structural Budget Deficits Structural deficit Fiscal year Billions of dollars Percent of GDP Note Data for are forecasts excluding health reform Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Congressional Budget Office Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce There are limits however to the amount of deficit reduction an economy can be expected to withstand within a short period without endangering economic growth. The Administration 's judgment is that cutting the annual deficit by about $ billion to $ billion over a period of years is roughly the right amount given the current strength of our economy. Some critics dispute this judgment and call for much deeper cuts in spending than those provided in OBRA93 or for substantial increases in taxes. The Administration views this strategy of more aggressive deficit cutting in the near term as risky A small amount of additional deficit reduction would of course have only small effects on the economy. But further large spending cuts or tax increases at this time would require additional large declines in long-term interest rates to replace the lost aggregate demand. Should interest rates decline by less than the required amount economic growth would slow and jobs would be lost. For example a deficit reduction package substantially larger than OBRA93 would be needed to comply with the proposed balanced budget amendment to the Constitution ( Box ) The Council estimates that it would take a decline in long-term interest rates of roughly percentage points to offset the contractionary effect of such a large fiscal package. Since a 3-percent long-term interest rate seems quite unlikely complying with a balanced budget amendment seems likely to harm the economy perhaps severely Deficit Reduction and Public Investment Once it is understood that deficit reduction is not an end in itself but a means to an end the end of greater investment two important principles become evident First it is clear that deficit reduction is only a first step. We must start to build to invest in our future. That is why the President 's economic plan contains more than just deficit reduction ; it also includes new proposals to encourage private investment and needed public investments in education and training public infrastructure and technology. We must worry about the debt we bequeath to our children but we must also worry about the quality and quantity of capital broadly conceived that they will inherit Second it is clear that squeezing worthwhile public investments out of the budget is the wrong way to reduce the deficit. After all the main purpose of deficit reduction is to pave the way for more private investment. Cutting public investment to make room for more private investment is like running on a treadmill. America needs more of both not a swap of one for the other Shifting Federal spending priorities from consumption to investment is one of the hallmarks of this Administration 's approach to economic policy. We seek not only to constrain total government spending but also to reorient it toward more productive uses Doing so will take time and requires use of the surgical scalpel not the meat-ax in cutting the budget. As the Administration and the Congress struggle together over tight Federal budgets in fiscal Box ~ * ~ -A Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution ? To argue that substantial deficit reduction was imperative in is not to argue that the budget deficit must be reduced even further in the short run and certainly not to argue that we should mandate a balanced budget every year by constitutional amendment as some have advocated * This Administration opposes the proposed balanced budget amendment to the Constitution for many reasons. First and foremost the amendment would put fiscal policy in a straitjacket that might imperil macroeconomic stability thereby abdicating one of the government 's principal responsibilities and raising the specter of mass unemployment. Second the proposed amendment would lead to budgetary gimmickry such as mixing one-time asset sales with recurring income transactions and would be almost impossible to enforce. It could push economic policy decisions into the courts or even provoke a constitutional crisis Third there are many candidate definitions of " the budget deficit " making it both hazardous and unwise to enshrine any particular definition in the Constitution. For example do we want to balance the unified budget or exclude Social Security ? Why not the structural deficit or even the inflation-adjusted structural deficit ? Fourth the amendment 's call for a 60-percent congressional supermajority to waive the balanced budget requirement threatens to reinstall both gridlock and the tyranny of the minority Fifth and finally the amendment by itself would not reduce the deficit by a single penny ; all the hard choices that face us now would still face us. A deficit reduction package leading to a balanced budget would most likely have to include major new taxes on the middle class substantial cuts in Social Security benefits reductions in defense spending that go far beyond the Administration 's proposals and cuts in Federal spending on medical care large enough to imperil health reform. The Administration opposes all of these and beyond it is essential that we not allow fiscal myopia to lead to underinvestment in America 's future INVESTING IN PEOPLE The American work force remains the most productive in the world. Our aim should be simple : to keep it that way. But the rest of the world is not standing still ; it is gaining on us becoming ever more productive. And that is what compels change America has never competed on the basis of low wages and we must not start doing so now. It is widely believed that modern industrial processes demand workers with higher levels of education and training ; and evidence on the relative wages of say collegeeducated versus high school-educated labor ( Chart ) seems to bear this out. In workers with college degrees earned about percent more than workers with only high school degrees ; by this gap had reached almost percent Chart Ratio of Wages of College Graduates to Wages of High School Graduates Workers with college degrees earn substantially more than workers without and the gap between the two groups ' wages grew during the 1980s Note : Data for are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Some observers claim that average work force quality may actually have deteriorated in the United States in recent decades Whether or not this is true few dispute that the supply of work force skills has failed to keep pace with the growing demand. Although Americans are if measured by average years of schooling among the most educated people on earth the rate of illiteracy in our country has long been high. Tens of millions of adult Americans are either functionally illiterate or barely literate. International test scores suggest that our primary and secondary students are learning less science and mathematics than their counterparts in other countries This educational record is not good enough in a world economy that grows ever more competitive and ever more skill-intensive American workers must build the additional human capital they need as a bridgehead to higher wages and living standards. Lifelong learning must cease being a slogan and become a reality In a fundamental sense each American must be responsible for his or her own education and training. This Administration is committed to creating the requisite opportunities through a comprehensive agenda of education and training that starts before formal schooling and extends into the workplace. For example : Head Start will be expanded so that disadvantaged children have a chance to get ahead. Head Start has been proved effective in preparing these children for primary school and has been estimated to save about six dollars in future government spending for every dollar invested today Goals is a comprehensive legislative package that will set higher performance standards for American teachers and students The Departments of Labor and Education are collaborating on a new School-to-Work transition program that will help students get hands-on work-related training while still in high school. This is an area of our educational system that has been neglected for too long The new National Service program ( Box ) will not only provide opportunities for community service and the acquisition of job-related skills but also help send more Americans to college The reformed student loan program will also help more of America 's youth attend college by reducing borrowing costs and offering for the first time on a national scale loans whose repayment schedules depend on future earnings The new program for dislocated workers will have an important retraining component which will make opportunities available to displaced American workers. Some income support will be provided so that displaced workers can afford to take advantage of the training Each of these programs will help augment the Nation 's stock of human resources thereby raising the American standard of living INVESTING IN PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE The most obvious kind of public investment is building new public infrastructure the Nation 's highways bridges airports and water and sewage systems. The Administration believes the United States has underinvested in its public infrastructure. For example the Department of Transportation estimates that almost percent of our Nation 's highways have poor or mediocre pavement and about percent of our bridges are structurally deficient Box l-5. The National Service Program In August the Congress passed the National and Community Service Trust Act of ' ^ d ^ ^ ti& ^ / ^ ^ wm N&tional Service program. National Service provides participants both current compensation ( at below-market wa ^ s ) aad>duc&tiOTugl grants of up to $ per year td pay & * college and other post-secondary education. Participants also receive valuable on-the-job training accumulate exi ^ loyih ^ it ^ kiEsi tod acquire t ^ l-worid workexperience The economic rationale for this program is threefold * First employers may be reluctant to provide training in skills that can be utilized in a wide variety of employment applications because if the employee leaves the firm soon thereafter the firm will fail to recoup the cost of its investment. Since the accumulation of employment skills is socially desirable it may be economically efficient for the government to finance part of this training Second the decline in Federal revenue sharing has reduced the intergovernmental resources available to State and local governments. These levels of government often know best what services their residents need most. Accordingly the National Service program provides in-kind resources ( labor services ) to precisely those types of public and nonprofit organizations best able to determine what services are required Third the National Service program provides all Americans the opportunity to undertake community service positions by relaxing the tradeoff that workers often face between current compensation and the richness of an employment experience The program ensures that valuable but low-paid public service positions will not be the province of the wealthy The National Service program is funded through an initial appropriation of $ million over previous funding for related programs. This is scheduled to rise to $ million in and $ million in At these funding levels it is expected that the program will be able to support approximately participants in and about participants over the 3-year period covered by the legislation A variety of evidence indicates that there has been underinvestment. First while the statistical evidence is not unequivocal the weight of it points to handsome rates of return on well-planned investments in public infrastructure. Second estimated benefit-cost ratios on specific infrastructure projects are often quite high. Third the ratio of public to private capital has fallen markedly since the 1960s ( Chart ) Unless the data are grossly misleading the principle of diminishing marginal returns leaves only two possible conclusions : Either America was overinvested in public capital in the early 1970s or it is underinvested today Chart Ratio of Public to Private Net Nonresidential Capital Stock The ratio of public to private capital stock declined steadily and markedly in the 1970s and 1980s Note : Public capital stock is defined as Federal and State and local net stock excluding military capital Source : Department of Commerce Finally there is the evidence of the senses : America 's roads and bridges are badly in need of repair a number of our airports are overcrowded and our sewage treatment facilities are overburdened To many thoughtful observers America 's public infrastructure is simply not commensurate with our bounteous private wealth INVESTING IN TECHNOLOGY But physical capital is not the only determinant of productivity nor even the most important. Over long periods of time rising productivity and hence advances in living standards depend on the upward march of technology. Indeed studies of long-term economic growth attribute a large share of growth to improvements in knowhow ( Table ) The history of progress in the industrial world is working smarter not working harder TABLE Sources of U.S. Economic Growth [ Average annual percent change ] to Source Labor inputs Capital inputs Total factor productivity ( technological change ) Adjustment from nonfarm business output to GDP TOTAL ( GDP growth ) to Note. Labor and capital inputs are measured for the nonfarm business sector Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce and Department of Labor Technological change does not come for free. Technology advances because scientists and engineers working in laboratories and on shop floors make new discoveries. And research is expensive Since the dawn of the industrial revolution alarmists have argued that technology and automation threaten jobs. Such claims are still heard today. But history shows that they have never been right in the past and suggests that they are wrong again. Time after time in epoch after epoch and country after country technological advance has produced higher wages and living standards not mass unemployment. That is exactly what we expect to happen again in the 21st century. And the government should be helping this process along facilitating growth and change not impeding it While the bulk of research and development ( R&D ) must and should be done by private industry support for basic and generic research has long been recognized as a legitimate function of government because of informational externalities. New technology is expensive to discover but cheap to disseminate. So what one company learns passes quickly to others making it impossible for the innovator to capture all the returns from its discovery. In fact estimates find that innovating businesses capture less than half of the social returns to their R&D. Furthermore estimated social rates of return on R&D range as high as to percent suggesting that there is systematic underinvestment For this reason the Administration asked the Congress to extend the research and experimentation tax credit which was done in OBRA93. For the same reason the Administration is increasing funding for research partnerships with industry such as the Advanced Technology Program and adding dozens of new manufacturing extension centers. Each of these initiatives and others are designed to speed the pace at which precompetitive technologies are invented and disseminated. Once that stage is passed the market mechanism should and will take over. ( Chapter has more details on the Administration 's technology policy. ) The development and deployment of new technology have long been of interest to the government. But technology policy is especially critical in a period of large-scale defense cutbacks because more than half of total Federal support for R&D has traditionally been related to national defense. With less need for research on weaponry the Federal Government must now make a choice. Will we reduce total research support or will we shift the research dollars into civilian technologies ? The President believes that the latter is the wiser course which is why the Administration is reorienting the research capabilities of the Defense Department and the national laboratories toward R&D partnerships with industry Technology surely creates the wave of the future. America must be on the crest of that wave with the technology capital and skilled work force needed to take advantage of tomorrow 's economy TRADE POLICY AND LIVING STANDARDS This Administration 's policies toward private physical capital human capital public infrastructure and technology all share a common objective : to raise the living standards of American families. Trade policy is yet another means toward that same end. This Administration vigorously supported the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) worked hard to complete the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) streamlined the Nation 's export promotion programs and eased restrictions on exports and is striving to open the Japanese market through bilateral negotiations all for the same reason to open markets and boost American exports. ( Chapter contains more details on the Administration 's trade policy. ) The emphasis on trade expansion is in turn driven by two simple facts First Americans now live in an increasingly integrated world economy and must therefore become increasingly outward-looking to stay on top. There is simply no way to close America 's borders and return to the insular days of the 1950s and 1960s. Trying to do so would be an exercise in futility doomed not only to fail but to lower living standards in the process. International competition through trade has long been a powerful engine of change and progress for America and for the world. We must not let that engine idle. Instead we must use it to power America up the technology ladder by moving our workers into the jobs of the future not keeping them mired in the jobs of the past. In the President 's words we must " compete not retreat. " Second jobs in export industries pay wages that are about percent above the economy-wide average according to the Council 's latest estimates. The implication is that if the Administration succeeds in shifting the composition of GDP toward more exports we will automatically shift the composition of American employment toward better paying jobs. No government program or central direction is needed to accomplish this. The market will do the work for us Trade expansion is sometimes inaccurately characterized as " exporting jobs. " Nothing could be further from the truth. A more accurate description is that international trade and investment lead low-skill low-paid jobs that would inevitably migrate to poorer countries to go there in exchange for high-skill better-paying jobs in the United States. American companies that compete successfully both at home and in foreign markets offer the best job opportunities for their workers. The history of capitalism throughout the world shows that companies and industries sheltered from the winds of competition tend to stagnate This Administration 's focus on exports does not signal a revival of mercantilism. Rather it reflects a belief that America 's export promotion efforts have lagged behind those of other countries and that our markets are already among the most open in the world The Administration fully expects trade liberalization such as through NAFTA and the Uruguay Round of GATT to raise both U.S. exports and U.S. imports. And we welcome both The North American Free Trade Agreement Indeed the recently ratified NAFTA illustrates the basic goals of Administration trade policy extremely well. NAFTA should boost trade with Mexico in both directions. In consequence economic resources will be allocated more efficiently on both sides of the border. Inevitably some American industries will therefore contract while others expand. Supported by the overwhelming preponderance of scholarly evidence the Administration believes that NAFTA will lead to net job creation in the United States Equally important is the composition of those jobs however. The new jobs that will arise in the United States will on average pay higher wages than the jobs that migrate south. It would be surprising indeed if anything else happened when a low-wage country and a high-wage country reduced trade barriers. In addition the lower tariffs and reduced trade barriers from NAFTA will reduce prices for a variety of goods that American families buy. Together the shift in the composition of employment toward higher paid jobs and the reduction in prices lead to a clear conclusion : NAFTA will raise the standard of living of the average American family and the average Mexican family as well The Uruguay Round of GATT The recently completed Uruguay Round of GATT was a landmark achievement for the entire world trading system. It literally rewrites the rules of trade for the start of the next century Earlier rounds of GATT talks had focused almost exclusively on tariff reductions. The market access component of the Uruguay Round continues this tradition by reducing tariffs on literally thousands of manufactured goods by more than one-third on average Such tariff reductions should be a tonic for world trade and growth just as they have been in the past and should increase specialization and economic efficiency around the globe. As usual producers will gain from bigger markets and consumers will gain from lower prices But the most remarkable achievements of the Uruguay Round are to be found elsewhere. For the first time trade in agricultural commodities has been brought under GATT a goal that had eluded trade negotiators for decades. When fully effective the agreement will reduce agricultural export subsidies by percent in volume and percent in value saving taxpayers and consumers in many countries billions of dollars. Trade in agricultural goods will also be liberalized by reducing tariffs on certain commodities ( like beef and fruits and vegetables ) partially opening markets that were previously closed ( like rice in Japan and the Republic of Korea ) and prohibiting certain food " safety " measures that were really disguised trade barriers. America 's farmers consumers and taxpayers all stand to gain handsomely from this agreement In addition for the first time GATT disciplines have been extended to a variety of service industries. This achievement of the Uruguay Round is a vitally important precedent for the United States for two reasons. One is that production patterns both here and elsewhere have been shifting and will continue to shift toward services. The other is that the United States seems to have a strong comparative advantage in many service industries ; in fact our trade surplus in services is already three times larger than our trade surplus in agriculture The United States did not succeed in bringing all services into the agreement and will continue to press for trade liberalization in sectors that were left out of the Uruguay Round. But the gains were still significant : Trade rules in such important industries as accounting consulting construction and telecommunications will now require that foreign countries grant the same treatment to American firms operating abroad as they do to their own companies Finally the path-breaking agreement will provide much stronger protection for a range of intellectual property rights including patents copyrights trademarks and trade secrets. Since the United States is the home of so much commercial innovation we will reap large gains from the agreement. Among the biggest industrial winners are software Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology In sum the Council estimates that the various provisions of the Uruguay Round once fully phased in after a decade will increase U.S. GDP by at least IV2 percent by raising real wages lowering consumer prices and protecting our national property rights HEALTH CARE REFORM Successful health care reform will accomplish many things. Perhaps primary among them is health security for all Americans a precious commodity that too many of our citizens have been denied for too long. In today 's United States workers who lose their jobs often lose their health insurance too. Other people and businesses lose their coverage because a family member or employee becomes ill and incurs large medical bills. Still other people are afraid to take jobs that would lift them out of welfare because they can not risk losing medicaid coverage. In total nearly million Americans lack health insurance millions more are inadequately covered and tens of millions live in fear of losing the coverage they have. Few people in other industrialized countries face such insecurity Under the President 's health care reform proposal which is described in detail in Chapter none of this would ever happen again. Americans would know that their health insurance would never lapse whether they changed jobs moved quit to start a new business or had the misfortune of serious illness in the family When effective health care reform is enacted one of the major sources of economic insecurity facing Americans today will have been removed Health care reform is also fundamental to long-run budget control. It is often said that the fastest growing part of the budget is " entitlements. " But the fastest growing part of the entitlement budget by far is health care spending ( Chart ) As the President has repeatedly emphasized controlling the costs of medical care is the key to controlling entitlements and therefore to longrun deficit reduction But health care reform will accomplish more than just budget control and security. The Administration also sees it as a route to higher standards of living For years the rising cost of health care has forced a shift in the composition of the typical pay packet away from wages and salaries toward fringe benefits especially health insurance. Chart shows that the share of health benefits in total labor compensation rose from percent in to percent in Correspondingly the share of cash wages fell. In absolute terms in fact real wages and salaries have barely increased in years. Almost all the gains in compensation have been taken as fringe benefits. This means that working men and women have for the most part paid Chart Projected Real Growth Rates of Principal Federal Budget Components From fiscal to fiscal health care spending is projected to grow four times as rapidly as any other major component Average annual percent change Defense Nondefense Discretionary Other Entitlements Net Interest Social Security Health Entitlements Source : Office of Management and Budget for their escalating health costs by taking home lower wages than they would have otherwise We can arrest this process only by containing medical costs. The President 's health care reform is designed to do precisely that by making the market more competitive and making both consumers and providers more cost conscious. On the assumption that the future will look like the past the Administration expects most of the benefits from effective health care cost containment to redound to working Americans in the form of higher take-home pay SUMMARY : PROSPERITY AND CHANGE All of the policy initiatives described here from deficit reduction to public investments ( both human and physical ) to trade expansion to health care share a common goal : raising the standard of living of average American families. But all of them also require change sometimes wrenching change. Deficit reduction required a host of painful changes in government programs and some increased taxes. Lifelong learning requires changes in the way we view education. Freer trade and export expansion mean that some jobs will disappear so that more and better jobs can be created Chart Shares of Wages and Benefits in Compensation Most of the decline in the wage share of total compensation has gone to increased health benefits Percent Percent Wages ( left scale ) _L Source : Department of Commerce And health care reform requires nothing less than a major overhaul of one-seventh of our economy None of this will be quick or easy. Real change rarely is. But in truth we have no choice for standing still is not an option that history allows. The secret to economic success is making change our friend not our enemy coming to view change as the opportunity for advancement that it is not as the threat that it sometimes appears to be CREATING OPPORTUNITY Our focus on raising the standard of living of middle-class Americans must not blind us to the fact that some of our fellow citizens have not managed to attain a middle-class living standard. And change is especially threatening to those at the bottom of the economic ladder When money incomes are corrected for purchasing power America is the richest of the world 's major nations in terms of per capita income. But a nagging poverty problem remains in this land of plenty. Millions of Americans have little or no earning power and are therefore on the public dole. Millions more work but do not earn enough to support their families. Two key policy initiatives enacted in the expansion of the earned income tax credit and the introduction of empowerment zones were designed to help lowincome workers by making work pay The earned income tax credit ( EITC ) provides needy families with both income support and greater rewards for working ( Box ) In part the credit offsets income taxes that low-income working families would otherwise have to pay. But the credit is also refundable meaning that if a family 's credit exceeds its tax liability the Internal Revenue Service sends a check for the difference. As part of OBRA93 the EITC was increased substantially both by making payments more generous and by extending the credit to more families Box How Does the Earned Income Tax Credit Work ? The earned income tax credit is often thought of as a type of negative income tax but in fact it is more complicated than that. The EITC has three ranges : a " credit range * " in which it functions like a wage subsidy a " plateau " in which it has no marginal effect and a " phaseout " range in which the credit is paid back as earnings rise ( Chart ) To illustrate when the increases enacted in are fully effective ( in ) the credit will work as follows for a family with two or more children. ( Less generous schedules apply to one-child and childless families. ) As earnings rise from zero to $ ( all dollar figures are in dollars ) the EITC will provide a 40-percent wage subsidy so that each $ of additional earnings will net the family $ The maximum credit is $ which is therefore reached when earnings hit $ The credit will then be constant as earnings rise from $ to $ Beyond $ however the family 's tax credit is reduced cents for each extra dollar earned. Benefits are thus exhausted when earnings reach $ Clearly the EITC provides a marginal work incentive in the credit range ( unlike a negative income tax ) a marginal disincentive in the phaseout range and neither in the plateau However to the extent that labor supply decisions involve whether or not to work rather than how many hours to work the credit provides a positive work incentive to all recipients As a first step toward welfare reform the EITC has many virtues. It will lift many families with children out of poverty. It provides positive work incentives for many of the lowest-paid employees in our society. It is better targeted on the low-income popu- lation than is say an increase in the minimum wage because minimum-wage workers are found in all family-income brackets. It is simple to administer requiring no special bureaucracy. And finally it apparently reaches a larger fraction of the eligible recipients than is typical of other income-support programs perhaps because it is easy to claim and carries no stigma Chart Earned Income Tax Credit for Families with Two or More Children The expanded earned income tax credit will substantially increase the credit for eligible families Tax credit in dollars Earnings in dollars Source : Department of the Treasury The goal of the innovative empowerment zone program is to strengthen business activity in certain geographic areas that are extremely depressed so that synergies from concentrated economic activity can help revive these areas. The program 's main tax incentive is a 20-percent tax credit for wages up to $ per year paid by a zone business to a zone resident. This should be a powerful incentive to create jobs in the zones. In addition a variety of regulatory waivers may be granted to give communities greater flexibility and several Federal agencies will direct spending toward the zones Beginning this year nine empowerment zones six urban and three rural will be selected by a competitive process that should encourage both imaginative thinking and private-public partnerships. In addition other neighborhoods will be designated enter- prise communities and be granted smaller benefits than the zones while sharing the relaxed regulatory environment. The program will be carefully monitored and evaluated over a 10-year period during which time we should learn a great deal about what works and what does not No American should think that programs like empowerment zones the EITC and welfare reform serve only the poor. Every citizen benefits when the welfare rolls are reduced when low-income families earn more when blighted neighborhoods come to life and when city streets once again become safe. We are after all one Nation SUMMARY An economic strategy based on long-run investments as ours is will not bear fruit overnight. It takes time to see tangible results and patience to wait for them. The important thing is to get started down the right path and soon. The Administration believes that marked a turning point in that regard. Recovery firmly took hold in and prospects for sustained economic expansion look far brighter now than they did a year ago. The long-run deficit problem while not completely solved looks far less threatening than it did then. The Congress has begun to fund the President 's ambitious investment agenda including infrastructure human capital technology and environmental preservation. Two historic trade agreements whose negotiations began years ago NAFTA and the Uruguay Round of GATT were brought to a successful conclusion. And the stage has been set for a much-needed national debate on health care reform in All of these accomplishments set in place the foundation for a more prosperous America CHAPTER The U.S. Economy in and Beyond THE ECONOMIC EXPANSION consolidated in setting the stage for sustained growth in A sharp decline in long-term interest rates to 25-year lows in large part the result of the Administration 's deficit reduction package was the major economic story of Momentum picked up in the second half with interest-sensitive sectors like housing and consumers ' and producers ' durable goods leading the way. Continued advances in these sectors helped to create sustained employment and income gains that put real gross domestic product ( GDP ) on roughly a 3-percent-peryear growth path During the economy was widely described as being in a jobless recovery advancing with a disconcerting seesaw quality. The combination of self-sustaining forces that typically appear in a recovery strongly rising employment accelerating incomes sharply rebounding automobile sales and housing activity markedly higher levels of consumer confidence and a renewed willingness on the part of consumers to take on debt was missing. Many of these forces did appear over the course of The economy experienced a sustained moderate expansion with healthier job creation. Payroll employment increased by jobs per month in double the 81,000-job-per-month pace of The unemployment rate higher at the end of than it had been at the beginning fell by almost a full percentage point in Many interest-sensitive sectors of the economy finally exhibited clear-cut improvements during Business spending for durable equipment increased at the fastest rate since Consumer spending for furniture and household furnishings another leading sector in business cycle upswings also posted one of the biggest gains in a decade. Motor vehicle sales rebounded smartly as consumers exhibited a newfound willingness to incur debt to finance a major purchase. Together these forces have put the economy on track for sustainable growth With a greatly improved outlook for the Federal budget deficit the Council of Economic Advisers expects long-term interest rates to remain relatively low for the foreseeable future which will help to keep economic growth on track. Low interest rates are the key ingredient that should allow the economy to grow in the face of future large deficit reductions which would otherwise tend to contract the economy. Expected growth in the ^ to 3-percent range for years should create about million new jobs and steadily reduce the unemployment rate from its currently unacceptable level toward a rate that is close to noninflationary full employment STRUGGLING TO GROW GDP growth over the current expansion has been much slower than usual. In the first year after a recession trough output typically grows by percent in real terms ; in this recovery output growth over the first year after the trough was less than percent Even though potential GDP growth is lower today than it was in the 1960s and 1970s mainly because of slower productivity growth this factor can only explain a small part of the slower rebound Not surprisingly given the well-established linkage between output growth and employment growth job growth in this expansion has also been atypically slow. The decline in employment during the recent contraction did not bottom out with the rest of the economy and no rebound in job growth was evident until a year after the recession 's trough. By late the growth path of employment was still well below the typical postwar recovery path ( Chart ) After quarters we have had the employment gains normally expected after just three quarters. Adjusted for the sluggish pace of output growth however employment growth has been closer to normal. ( For further discussion see Chapter ) A number of special factors have combined to induce this sluggish economic performance. These " headwinds " include defense cutbacks weak foreign economies an oversupply of commercial buildings in the wake of the 1980s the credit crunch debt overhang and a wave of corporate downsizings. None of these factors by itself explains why the recovery has run so far behind historical levels but there is evidence that together they have retarded economic growth significantly THE END OF THE COLD WAR The end of the cold war was a major geopolitical event for the United States and the ensuing defense builddown has had profound economic effects. In defense spending accounted for percent of U.S. GDP. By its share had fallen to about percent and by it is predicted to drop to about percent ( Chart ) This massive shift of national resources away from defense has meant numerous base closings cancellations of major weapons programs scaled-back procurement plans and attendant layoffs in Chart Recovery Pattern of Nonfarm Payroll Employment Employment growth in this recovery has been much weaker than in the average postwar recovery Index trough = Average Postwar Recovery Current Recovery I T Quarters from Trough Note : " Average " includes all recoveries from to except The trough quarter for the current recovery is first quarter Sources : Department of Labor and National Bureau of Economic Research the whole defense sector. For example total defense-related jobs are projected to number million by down from million jobs in In a purely arithmetical sense reduced defense spending subtracted roughly percentage point off the real GDP growth rate in Moreover the defense cutbacks have had a further adverse impact on aggregate demand through the expenditure multiplier. Moving resources out of the defense sector frees them up for use in the production of consumption and investment goods and services improving living standards. But this is a longer term effect. The conversion process takes time and although the defense scaledown is not as large relative to the size of the economy as it was at the end of several wars reconversion will cause painful dislocations in the short run WEAK FOREIGN ECONOMIES Weak economic performance in the rest of the industrialized world over the past few years has also taken a toll on the U.S economy by slowing export growth. The period will go down in history as the worst for economic performance in foreign industrial countries since at least During this 3-year period Chart National Defense Purchases as Share of GDP Defense spending as a share of nominal GDP is projected to continue to fall steadily over the 1990s Note : Defense spending projections taken from Mid-Session Review of the Budget Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget output growth averaged just percent per year in the European Community percent per year in Japan and only percent per year in the world 's other industrial countries ( Table ) Even though U.S. growth has been sluggish over the past couple of years it has been the fastest among all the Group of Seven major industrial market economies. The world 's second- and third-largest industrial economies Japan and Germany both entered deep recessions in the latter part of and are now operating well below their capacities. During all of the Group of Seven countries had substantial output gaps ( that is actual GDP was well below potential ) and growth was slowing in such developing-country markets for U.S. exports as Mexico and the Middle East In large part because of this global weakness U.S. merchandise exports which had increased by about percent in nominal terms in and percent in rose by only percent in Merchandise exports to Japan and Western Europe which together account for percent of total U.S. merchandise experts were especially hard hit dropping by about percent ( Chart ) Even exports to Mexico flattened in after half a decade of rapid increases. With excellent cost competitiveness in world markets U.S TABLE Foreign Country Real GDP Growth [ Average annual percent change ] European Community Japan Other industrial countries Developing countries Note figures are forecasts Source : International Monetary Fund exporters have been able to do better than a trade-weighted average of major industrial economies ' GDP growth rates would suggest ( Chart ) Still what had been a strong engine of growth from the mid-1980s until clearly shifted into neutral in Meanwhile growing U.S. reliance on foreign computers has led to a surge of imported capital goods. Office automation equipment which now accounts for nearly percent of real private investment in producers ' durable equipment has become the fastest growing major demand component in the U.S. economy and imports have been filling a growing portion of this demand. Imports also account for about one-third of the nonautomotive noncomputer portion of producers ' durable equipment spending up sharply over the past decade Together the slowing of U.S. exports and the surge in imports have meant that net exports ( the difference between them ) are now working against U.S. growth after making strong positive contributions from the mid-1980s to For example according to a simple calculation holding other components of demand fixed if net exports had simply not deteriorated in from their level U.S. GDP growth would have been over percentage point higher than it actually was in THE DEBT WORKOUT Working off the heavy indebtedness built up over the 1980s may also have retarded growth. During the 1960s and 1970s households and firms only gradually increased their levels of indebtedness relative to their incomes. Over the period this changed abruptly as individuals and businesses increased their indebtedness sharply ( Charts and ) For the corporate sector the proximate cause of increased indebtedness was a rise in debtbased financial restructurings such as leveraged buyouts. A portion of new debt issues in the 1980s was used to purchase equity in existing companies not to finance increases in plant and equipment investment. It is unclear exactly what motivated households to move further into debt during this period although rapid appre- Chart Growth of U.S. Merchandise Exports Continued weak economic growth in industrialized countries has depressed demand for U.S. exports Percent change from year earlier 6-month moving average r Western Europe All Countries Japan Note : Data are not seasonally adjusted f.a.s. basis Source : Department of Commerce Chart U.S. Exports Implied by Industrial Country GDP U.S. export demand has been healthier than would be expected given the lackluster performance of the major foreign industrial economies Billions of dollars ( ratio scale ) Actual Implied by Industrial Country Demand ,'/ I I I ! I I I I Note : The dashed line plots fitted values from a regression relating exports to industrial country GDP Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Department of Commerce ciation in the stock market and booms in numerous housing markets probably played a role. Higher asset values may have given consumers a greater sense of financial security to borrow and spend even in the face of modest personal income growth The debt-income ratios for both households and firms flattened as the 1980s came to a close. Beginning in firms initiated a dramatic reduction in their leverage. This balance sheet repair was presumably triggered by a reversal of the factors that led them to accumulate debt. Moreover there were declines in firms ' net worth which might have caused them to reduce leverage out of fear of insolvency For a domestic debtor to repay a domestic creditor there need not be any increase in national saving. Rather such repayments represent in the first instance adjustments in the portfolios of domestic households businesses and financial institutions. Yet the recent balance sheet adjustments probably did stem in part from an increase in saving and therefore acted to slow growth in aggregate demand By what mechanism would such balance sheet adjustments affect national saving ? If the households and firms who repaid debts had higher marginal propensities to spend than those who got the repayments the balance sheet restructuring would have increased saving. By virtue of their indebtedness we can infer that firms and households who retired debt had in the past shown much more eagerness to spend or to undertake investment projects. Extrapolation would suggest that they still had a high propensity to spend relative to the creditor firms and households. Therefore balance sheet restructuring was probably a drag on aggregate demand in recent years Of course the causality could be reversed. Indebted households and firms might have decided for reasons other than those based on the state of their balance sheets ( e.g. reduced expectations of income or profitability of investment projects ) to reduce expenditures using their free cash flow to repay debt rather than to spend OVERSUPPLY OF COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS Yet another headwind has been the glut of nonresidential structures that was built up over the 1980s. Investment in nonresidential structures soared in the early 1980s fueled in part by high inflation and changes to the Tax Code in that made commercial real estate investment more attractive. As this overbuilding continued vacancy rates rose sharply across the country The reversal of the tax provisions by the tax reforms together with higher interest rates in the late 1980s derailed the boom in commercial real estate. The decline in this sector was further exacerbated by the movement of the rest of the economy into Chart Households : Credit Market Debt as Percent of Disposable Income After trending upward slowly over most of the 1960s and 1970s the ratio of household credit-market debt to disposable personal income increased sharply in the 1980s Sources : Department of Commerce and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Chart Nonfinancial Corporate Business : Credit Market Debt as Percent of Output The ratio of nonfinancial corporate business debt to nonfinancial corporate GDP rose sharply in the 1980s. It has since begun to decline Sources : Department of Commerce and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System recession in Even by late more than years into the recovery the value of investment in nonresidential structures was more than percent below its peak in real terms. Clearly this small but volatile sector of the economy has failed to provide its normal cyclical lift CREDIT CRUNCH The credit crunch and its vestiges have also slowed economic activity over this recovery period. Many banks developed balance sheet problems in the 1980s as the developing-country debt crisis and widespread lending for speculative construction projects led to massive loan writeoffs and weak profitability. This weak profitability reduced the banks ' ability to lend and probably aggravated the credit crunch. More-aggressive bank regulation some of it a reaction to the 1980s savings and loan debacle accentuated the problem. In and there were widespread reports that wouldbe borrowers were having difficulty obtaining funds although these reports tended to be concentrated in certain industries ( notably real estate ) and regions ( particularly the Northeast ) A National Association of Home Builders survey of its members for example consistently ranked " obtaining financing for construction projects " as a top business problem over this period CORPORATE DOWNSIZINGS Finally corporations across the industrial spectrum have been restructuring their businesses and paring costs. The prolonged economic sluggishness apparently induced many firms to hunker down and reduce their breakeven points as much as possible often by shedding workers. Foreign competition and cutbacks associated with debt workouts might also have been factors. Technological changes have played a role as well ; some of the most notable layoffs have been at mainframe computer companies for example. In addition lower capital costs may have led some firms to substitute capital for labor Even though downsizing may well have made corporations more efficient and better poised to earn profits in the future the widespread layoffs have helped to depress wage and salary growth and probably consumer confidence as well. In addition although higher profits can imply higher incomes for corporate stockholders this group 's marginal propensity to consume is probably lower than it is among individuals whose primary source of income is wages This would also have reduced consumption spending and overall economic growth THE HEADWINDS ARE MOSTLY CALMING As the economy enters many of these headwinds are dissipating. The credit crunch is fading as banks show new signs of wanting to make business loans. The decline in yields on government bonds where banks had parked large amounts of assets and the improvement in overall business conditions are making such loans relatively more profitable. Aided by lower interest rates and greatly improved margins banks have also been posting record profits for the past years. Bank lending surveys by the Federal Reserve also suggest that credit conditions have eased. For these reasons bank lending today is becoming less of a retardant to growth Meanwhile the other industrial countries will not remain mired in recession forever. Indeed the ones that entered recession first in this global slowdown the United Kingdom Canada Australia and New Zealand for example are all showing signs of economic rebound. Even Germany a late arrival on the global recession scene recorded positive GDP growth in the second and third quarters of By late there were increasing signs that the European recession was nearing bottom and that at least modest growth would return in Even a small rebound in Europe would be welcome news to U.S. exporters. The odds of economic recovery in Japan at least by seem good as well Commercial construction has also started to improve although it will not be as bullish as it was in the mid-1980s. By late there were signs that vacancy rates for commercial real estate were posting significant declines implying that the worst might be over for this sector The key exception to the forecast of diminishing headwinds is defense cutbacks. These seem almost certain to continue over the rest of the decade unless there is some major change in the world 's geopolitical circumstances which might have other far less beneficial repercussions. Still with most of these headwinds blowing less fiercely over the mid-1990s than they did earlier in the decade the economy should be able to turn in a better performance OVERVIEW OF THE ECONOMY IN Although economic growth was sluggish in early substantial progress was made despite these headwinds. Employment increased steadily the unemployment rate dropped inflation remained subdued and real GDP increased by percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of Claims early in the year that only a half-speed economic expansion was under way gradually gave way to the view that more-normal growth was returning. Fourth-quarter growth of percent ( annual rate ) the highest in years reinforced this view The economy actually exhibited more underlying strength than was reflected in press reports or in indexes of consumer and business confidence. Domestic demand and real final sales both posted healthy increases. Real final sales to domestic purchasers ( that is excluding inventories and exports but including imports ) actually increased at an annual rate of percent on average from mid-1992 until the end of and only dipped below percent growth once over that period in the first quarter of At least a portion of that dip was arguably caused by a policy of the previous Administration : increased tax liabilities in early owing to a reduction in withholding that began in March In addition an early defense spending collapse caused a growth letdown in early A look at economic performance sector by sector provides a clearer picture of the laggards and leaders in the present expansion CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES Because consumer spending represents about two-thirds of GDP it is not surprising that the modest output growth in the expansion to date has been associated with sluggish consumption growth. Indeed consumption as a whole has failed to show the kind of sharp rebound typical of postwar recoveries : quarters after the recession 's trough consumption had advanced only two-thirds as far as would be expected from postwar experience. Consumer sentiment manifested a typical recovery pattern for only a short time ; the sharp advance usually seen when a recession ends sputtered to a halt two quarters after the trough. Sentiment trended upward only slowly over and although there was a sharp acceleration late in Weakness in consumer spending can also be seen in the behavior of the saving rate. Typically the saving rate falls as a recovery begins as consumers begin to spend ahead of income. Increases in spending on consumer durables such as automobiles and household furnishings typically follow. Such a drop in the saving rate did not occur after the trough however ; the saving rate actually trended upward slightly for almost years into the recovery Over real consumer spending lagged behind real income growth suggesting that households were still getting their balance sheets in order Nineteen hundred and ninety-three saw belated reductions in the saving rate. Between the fourth quarter of and the third quarter of for example the saving rate fell by more than percentage points and this provided much of the overall lift that the economy experienced. In fact over the last three quarters of real consumer spending increased at a 3.9-percent average annual rate not high by historical standards but at least tending toward the normal range for a postwar expansion BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT After a late start several important components of investment spending have rebounded in line with typical recovery patterns While investment in structures has remained weak for the reasons discussed earlier producers ' durable equipment has turned in a stellar performance. For about a year after the recession trough equipment investment remained stagnant ; then it spurted to a growth path above the postwar recovery average. Today investment in producers ' durable equipment remains one of the strongest components of the expansion. In fact over the year ending in the fourth quarter of investment in these goods increased by about percent a growth rate more typical of a Japanese rather than an American business cycle expansion. Certainly as far as equipment investment spending is concerned the weak portion of the recovery was limited to the first year after the trough. More recent activity has actually exceeded the postwar norm INVENTORIES Businesses kept inventories at extremely low levels relative to sales throughout and a major swing in farm inventories resulting from the Midwest floods and Southeast drought influenced the quarterly GDP growth pattern over the year ( Box ) The inventory-to-sales ratio was under throughout the year and the ratio for manufacturing hit an all-time low during the fourth quarter as sales perked up faster than some businesses expected. Several factors were at work. First the inventory-to-sales ratio in manufacturing industries is in secular decline. Second businesses seemed to lack confidence in the strength of the recovery. Disappointing growth in the first and second quarters of and pessimism about the economy 's future prospects probably made businesses extremely cautious about producing at a faster rate than was absolutely necessary. Third production problems in some key sectors that did experience a sharp pickup in demand especially automobiles probably prevented some firms from achieving the level of inventories that they deemed optimal The extremely lean inventories of late are good news for As opens manufacturers are in a position where they risk losing business because of inadequate inventories and they are therefore under pressure to increase output. There seems to be relatively little risk that overaccumulation of inventories will lead to production cutbacks in Box The Economic Effects of the Midwest Floods of Last summer 's floods in the Midwest were a human tragedy whose immense scope was obvious to all. Measuring their economic effects is more difficult however. The floods disrupted the day-to-day operations of businesses destroyed inventories and crops and wrecked a significant portion of the region 's infrastructure and housing stock But because the level of economic activity that would have occurred without the floods is unknowable the effects of the flooding on third- and fourthquarter economic performance can not be definitively assessed The clearest effect of the floods on national economic performance was a decline in farm output The Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) of the Department of Commerce judged that $ billion worth of farm output was destroyed by the floods and the simultaneous drought in the Southeast The BEA accounted for this crop loss by lowering its estimates of farm output by $ * billion ( ammalized ) in the third quarter of and by a further $ billion in the fourth quarter The adjustments were reflected in the change in farm inventories The result of these acljustments was that measured real GDP growth was lowered by about percentage point in the third quarter of and increased by about * percentage point in the fourth quarter * The BEA also ; reduced estimated farm proprietors ' income to account for crop damage and uninsured losses to farm property lowered estimates of the rental income of persons and nonfarm proprietors * income to account for uninsured property losses * Other flood effects are too embedded in the source data to be explicitly measured. These include : * effects of reduced farm output on inflation the negative effect of the floods on nonfarm business output in affected areas potential stimulative effects from the rebuilding of flooddamaged roads bridges railways and houses * * ~ espe ~ ciaHy if the rebuilding was funded from savings and not insurance company payouts ( whose effects are more like a transfer from owners of insurance companies to policy * Holders ) / ' " '- ' / " '. ' # the effect of Federal disaster assistance ^ insurance payments and emergency grants RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT Residential investment was an enigma over the first part of Mortgage rates fell to 20-year lows affordability was at 20year highs yet housing starts were flat for the first half of the year. Finally starting in August housing activity began to respond to these favorable economic conditions and posted sharp additional gains. Housing starts rose a stunning percent between July and December A healthy fraction of new homes being sold today are sold before construction has started. This suggests that the gains in residential construction are solid and that the upward trend in housing should continue without any likely inventory cycle. As ended the inventory-to-sales ratio of new homes as measured by the stock of homes for sale divided by the number actually sold in a month was at its lowest level since Given the unfavorable underlying demographic factors for housing especially the relatively low rate of household formation housing turned in a very good performance late in the year and was a solid contributor to the economy 's advance NET EXPORTS As mentioned earlier net exports shifted from being a major contributor to economic growth over the period to being a retardant in and Weak foreign economies severely crimped export growth while imports surged with the capital equipment spending boom. Even the growth rate of service-sector exports the brightest component of U.S. trade was hit by slow foreign growth. In current dollar terms U.S. trade in services still posted a $ billion surplus in however illustrating the strong comparative advantage of U.S. firms in this sector. And exports of services represented about percent of total U.S. real exports in By comparison agricultural exports in represented only about percent of the total EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTIVITY The increases in consumer spending and investment and the general pickup in the economy over the past year and a half have finally led to a more acceptable pace of job creation something that was completely missing over the first year of recovery. On average the economy generated jobs per month over compared with only jobs per month over and the loss of jobs per month over One important development in was the lengthening of the factory workweek and the increase in manufacturing overtime. In November the workweek reached a postwar record high and overtime reached its highest level since the data series was begun in the 1950s. Employers have apparently been concerned about the fixed costs of adding new workers and about the unsteady nature of the expansion. Many have apparently been concerned that another decline in orders might force new rounds of layoffs and so they have been trying to squeeze the most output possible out of their existing work forces. The good news is that with the workweek and overtime so high there should be building pressure on businesses to add new workers as demand continues to increase Productivity growth was weak over the first half of but rebounded in the third quarter as the economy picked up speed. Employers kept a tight rein on labor costs as output increased. Given the moderate rates of wage increase nonfarm unit labor costs ( the cost of labor needed to produce one unit of output ) increased by about percent about the same as the increase. These modest gains in unit labor costs helped to give a healthy boost to corporate profits and maintained the prospects for low inflation INCOMES Real disposable income increased by a modest percent in Pretax profits posted strong increases and proprietors ' income was up by over percent. But wages and salaries increased by a more modest percentage and interest income was stagnant as interest rates fell. Average weekly earnings of production workers barely kept up with inflation INFLATION Nineteen hundred and ninety-three saw the best inflation performance in a generation. The implicit price deflator increased by the smallest percentage since During the consumer price index ( CPI ) registered its smallest increase since and the core CPI ( excluding food and energy ) increased by the smallest percentage since Meanwhile the producer price index ( PPI ) for finished goods showed virtually no increase over the course of the year. The producer price index for finished goods excluding food and energy the so-called core PPI showed its smallest annual increase since the government began compiling this series in Measured inflation increased as began as prices of apparel public transportation tobacco products and motor fuels posted large increases. The GDP price deflator the CPI and the PPI for finished goods all accelerated from their previous quarter 's rate of change. The increase in inflation was temporary however ; many analysts believe it was due to problems with seasonal adjustment Lower measured inflation returned after the spring Wage gains remained modest as mentioned and showed no tendency to accelerate over the course of the year. Medical costs showed some signs of moderating over and recorded their smallest annual increase in years. They still increased at roughly twice the pace of the nonmedical CPI however. External price factors such as commodity prices remained generally tame throughout the year and oil prices fell sharply suggesting a flat commodity price trajectory as began. ( Box discusses the possible economic effects of lower oil prices. ) Given that the economy remains below its potential output level there appear to be few inflationary seeds from blowing into MONETARY POLICY Short-term interest rates were essentially constant over the course of and the Federal Reserve continued its vigilance on inflation. After indications of an acceleration of prices in the first several months of the year the Fed adopted an asymmetrical policy tilt poised to tighten monetary policy if inflation gained momentum. Over the summer however low inflation returned and the Fed reverted to its neutral policy stance The tendency in recent years for the broad monetary aggregates to behave in atypical ways given changes in interest rates and economic activity led the Federal Reserve to place less emphasis on these money supply measures in Some of the change in the behavior of the monetary aggregates stems from massive portfolio shifts by American households. For example the sharp decline in interest rates on bank certificates of deposit led many households to shift money into stock and bond mutual funds. The downward shift of M2 ( the broad monetary aggregate ) relative to income that resulted from this and other developments clearly reduced that aggregate 's usefulness as a short-term policy indicator. The sluggish growth of M2 did not signal that the Fed was running a tight monetary policy : In growth rates of Ml ( the narrow monetary aggregate ) and the monetary base were up to percentage points higher than M2 growth Another policy indicator in which the Federal Reserve has expressed some interest is the concept of a real short-term interest rate the nominal rate less expected inflation. It is generally assumed that real short-term rates will gradually rise as the economy strengthens and the output gap shrinks. The Federal Reserve 's shift toward reliance on a broader set of guidelines for setting monetary policy including short-term interest rates appears to be an appropriate adaptation to changing events. It should allow the overall condition of the economy to be carefully monitored and an appropriate policy response to be crafted FISCAL POLICIES AND THE TIMING OF OUTPUT The uneven pattern of strong growth in late and slowdown in early was attributable in part to tax and spending changes Box The Economic Effects of Lower Oil Prices Oil prices tumbled during Over the first half of the year West Texas Intermediate crude oil averaged about $ per barreL By the middle of October the price was down to about $ per barrel and by late December the price had fallen to about $ more than percent lower than earlier in the year. Weak global economic conditions including the recessions in Europe and Japan the seeming inability of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) to restrict its members ' production levels and the possibility that Iraq would soon be exporting substantial quantities of oil again were likely contributors to the price declines A drop in the price of oil like any relative price change has microeconomic consequences ; Some sectors benefit and others are hurt. Lower oil prices will likely bring painful dislocations in the ILS. oil industry and the regions where it is concentrated. If oil prices remain low domestic oil output is likely to decline faster than it already has been. U.S. dependence on foreign oil would also be likely to increase. Lower oil prices would also cause more energy to be used and might lead to higher levels of pollution * Because oil is such an important input into the VS. economy however lower oil prices will also have favorable effects on the U * S * macroeconomy in if prices stay in the $ 15per ~ barrel range. There are several transmission channels. The main beneficial effect is that lower oil prices translate into lower inflation which boosts real disposable income for consumers giving them the wherewithal to make more nonoil purchases. Lower oil prices also mean that businesses have lower costs which translate into higher cash flow and profit margins leading in turn to more investment spending. Foreign industrial economies also get an upward boost from lower oil prices and in turn demand more US. exports Some economic models suggest that if the 25-percent drop in oil prices in were sustained over real GDP growth would be between and percentage point higher in The same models predict that CPI inflation would be noticeably lower in that served to raise aggregate demand in and depress it in the first half of First there was a temporary burst in defense spending in the second half of Second a decrease in individual income tax withholding raised consumer spending in but reduced it in as households made their final settle- ments with the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) The Council estimates that these two factors added percent to the level of GDP in the second quarter of and percent in the third and fourth quarters. These gains were temporary however. GDP growth was percent lower in the first quarter of and percent lower in the second quarter than it would have been without these fiscal factors. There were also effects on the timing of consumer spending arising from the expectation and misperception of tax changes Defense Spending During the second half of defense spending temporarily increased well above its trend. Part of the change was in purchases of durables. The other portion was in " other services " whose increase was in part due to expenditures to close military bases Chart shows the temporary burst of spending relative to a baseline which is estimated as the trend in defense spending from the third quarter of to the third quarter of excluding the quarters of the Persian Gulf crisis and the last two quarters of Chart Defense Spending : Actual Versus Baseline Although defense spending is falling in the post-Cold War era two recent periods of relatively high defense spending stand out Billions of dollars ouu Persian Gulf War \ Actual \ ^ x ^ ^ > Baseline / A Temporary Defense Spending * \ \ Note : Baseline is trend in spending from : to : 1V excluding 1990.IV-1991 : and : III-IV Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Department of Commerce Change in Tax Withholding The change in the withholding tables reduced income tax withholding for most taxpayers by an average of $ a month beginning in March Taxpayers therefore owed the IRS an additional $ ( or received a smaller refund ) in Households basically faced two choices : They could let the cash accumulate in their bank accounts and use it to make the extra $ payment in April or they could spend it. From both time-series and cross-sectional estimates of consumer behavior the Council estimates that roughly percent of households spent the extra cash because of either liquidity constraints myopia or inertia. Given their incomes those households then had to reduce spending when they settled with the IRS in This shift in take-home pay led to the estimated shifting of consumption from to shown in Chart The presumption is that households readjusted withholding and spending after their final settlements so that this pattern will not repeat itself Chart Effects of Tax Withholding Change on Personal Consumption The reduction in personal income tax withholding in induced some households to shift consumption from to Billions of dollars Reduced Consumption as Households Repay IRS ( Actual ) Extra Consumption from Reduced Withholding ( Estimated ) I I I J_ : IV : II III IV Note : See text for calculation details Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Department of Commerce : There have been other changes in tax rules that worked in an offsetting direction regarding tax payments but not in an offsetting direction regarding consumption. Specifically the change in the safe-harbor rules for underpayment of estimated tax probably caused some high-income taxpayers to move payments that they would have normally made in their April final settlements with the IRS to estimated tax payments. A household paying estimated tax is probably less likely to let changes in the timing of tax payments affect its consumption than is the typical household Expectations of Tax Changes Anticipation and misperception of proposed changes in the tax law could have had further effects on the timing of demand During his campaign for the Presidency then-Governor Clinton proposed an investment tax credit. In December then-Senate Finance Committee Chairman Bentsen and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Rostenkowski announced that any credit would be retroactive to December Earlier in the quarter some firms may have delayed making investments in anticipation of receiving such a credit. Except for information-processing equipment however there was no discernable shift in investment spending during the fourth quarter of Given the lags in making investment decisions it is not surprising that the anticipation of a possible credit appears to have had little effect on most components of investment. There was however a substantial deceleration in investment in computer and other information-processing equipment during the final quarter of It is probably relatively easy to change the scheduling of purchases of such equipment. Hence this deceleration could well be explained in part by firms delaying purchases in anticipation of the credit Apparently there were also widespread misperceptions about the scope of the income tax increases in the Administration 's economic plan. As late as the end of July over percent of respondents to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll thought that middleclass taxpayers would bear most of the tax increases. In fact the income tax increases apply only to families with taxable incomes over $ the top percent of households. Hence it appeared for much of that many consumers incorrectly expected an income tax increase. This misperception may have accounted for some of the weakness of consumption in early Do the Fiscal Measures Threaten Growth ' ? High-income households will have to make increased tax payments in April because of the increase in income tax rates enacted in There is reason to expect however that these extra payments by high-income individuals in will have a smaller effect on GDP than the extra payments made in by taxpayers affected by the change in withholding. One reason is that high-income taxpayers are presumably more likely to make the payments out of savings. Another is that many high-income taxpayers reduced their tax liability by shifting income from to December Moreover under provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of ( OBRA93 ) these taxpayers can spread their increased payments over years Nineteen hundred and ninety-four will also see an increase in the earned income tax credit ( EITC ) Payment of the EITC will tend to stimulate demand. Although households are entitled to collect the EITC during the tax year most only claim it when they fill out their returns the following year and they are likely to spend most of it THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 'S FISCAL STANCE The size of the budget deficit is an incomplete measure of the stance of fiscal policy. One important function of the budget is to act as an automatic stabilizer against economic fluctuations. When the economy enters a recession tax collections fall as incomes decline and there is an increase in government spending on such items as unemployment insurance and income maintenance programs. As a result the budget deficit tends to increase in recessions and fall in recoveries without any change to the tax system or in legislated expenditures. Chart plots historical and predicted levels of the actual Federal budget deficit which is expected to fall from percent of GDP in fiscal to about percent of GDP by the late 1990s The effects of the business cycle and inflation mask the true fiscal stance of the government. Declines in output from its full-employment level reduce revenue and increase expenditures. Inflation reduces the real interest cost to the government for a given level of nominal interest payments which are included in the deficit Chart shows the actual deficit and the inflation-adjusted structural deficit. ( The structural deficit is the one that would prevail at a high level of employment. ) The estimates use the Congressional Budget Office 's estimate of the cyclical adjustment. For the inflation adjustment the outstanding Federal debt ( bonds held by the private sector plus the monetary base ) is multiplied by the inflation rate. As a result of the Administration 's budget plan the inflation-adjusted structural deficit falls to less than percent of GDP after fiscal its lowest level since This share moreover remains constant for the remainder of the forecast period. The conclusion is that current fiscal policy primarily as a result of the Administration 's recently adopted deficit reduction plan is following a more balanced and stable course than did the policies of the previous decade Chart Alternative Measures of the Stance of Fiscal Policy Fiscal policy as measured by the adjusted structural budget deficit is forecast to move to a more stable trajectory with the current deficit reduction plan Percent o GDP f Fiscal Years Note : See text for details Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Congressional Budget Office Office of Management and Budget and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System INDUSTRIAL AND REGIONAL DISPARITIES Disparities in growth across industries became more pronounced over Information-processing equipment benefited from heavy investment demand and experienced double-digit output gains Certain interest-sensitive sectors of the economy especially furniture motor vehicles and major appliances were clearly helped by the sharply lower long-term interest rates and also posted large output gains. At the opposite end of the spectrum the defenserelated industries aerospace instruments and ordnance saw continued sharp production cutbacks These industrial disparities contributed to regional differences in economic activities. The State of California has been particularly hard hit by the defense builddown and has yet to start posting gains in nonagricultural employment even though the rebound in the Nation as a whole began in March Aerospace jobs are a particularly acute problem : Of the defense-related jobs that are projected to be lost in California from to will be in the aerospace sector. California 's 8.7-percent unemployment rate at year-end contrasted with a rate of just percent for the Nation as a whole ( Chart ) Chart Unemployment Rates by State December The national unemployment rate masks substantial regional differences. California is the only large state with an unemployment rate above 1/2 percent % and over % % ED % % % % % or below Source : Department of Labor Chart Nonfarm Employment Growth by State November to November Employment gains are now widespread across the country. California remains a key exception I j % and over E % % % % % or below Note : Chart shows percent change in nonfarm payroll employment Source : Department of Labor Meanwhile the Mountain States were 's growth leaders Strong income and employment gains were seen in Utah Colorado New Mexico and Arizona ( Chart ) DEFICIT REDUCTION AND THE REAL INTEREST RATE As the new Administration took office it appeared that the ratio of Federal Government debt to GDP was on an unsustainable upward path. The explosion of debt in the 1980s had kept real interest rates high throughout the decade. Hence nominal rates did not fall by as much as the 1980s ' victory against inflation warranted Much of the recent reduction in long-term interest rates it will be argued below should be attributed to the change in budget policy in early The close linkage of the decline in long-term interest rates to the political and legislative events of the last months gives strong support to the view that high Federal debt in the 1980s was responsible for the high real returns on long-term bonds and that the change in Federal fiscal policy is responsible in large part for the declines in real interest rates The President 's economic plan reoriented fiscal policy from consumption toward investment both by reducing the size of projected budget deficits and by changing the composition of Federal spending from current expenditures to investment. The reduction in future Federal borrowing was well received by the financial markets In the words of the Federal Reserve Board Chairman in his July Humphrey-Hawkins testimony the financial markets " brought forward " the effects of future deficit reduction. The event analysis shown in Chart linking the announcement and enactment of credible budget reduction to changes in the long-term interest rate provides support for the view that the interest rate declines were largely due to budget policy Long-term interest rates are near the lowest they have been since the 1960s. On election day the 10-year Treasury yield was percent. It has ratcheted down several times since then with the declines closely tied to political and legislative events. The yield fell to percent at the end of February following Treasury Secretary Bentsen 's announcement of the proposed energy tax and the President 's speech announcing his economic plan. The decline stalled in April when the stimulus component of the President 's plan was filibustered in the Senate. It resumed its downward movement when the House passed the President 's budget in late May. It then fell to percent at the end of August after the plan was finally enacted by the Congress Long-term rates did increase in late reversing some of the decline that followed the passage of OBRA93. Reports in the finan- Chart Yields on 10-Year Treasury Securities Administration policy actions have had a noticeable effect in reducing interest rates Percent President 's Plan Introduced ( 2/17/93 ) \ * ' House Approves President 's Plan ( 5/27/93 ) Secretary Bentsen Details Fiscal Measures ( 1/24/93 ) Final Approval of Budget ( 8/6/93 ) _L Source : Department of the Treasury cial press attributed the increase in yields to the release of favorable economic data and to speculation by some financial observers that the Federal Reserve would tighten monetary policy. But these data and statements did not actually signal much that was new about the state of the economy nor any change of monetary policy Unobserved factors psychological or otherwise are important determinants of market prices. Still despite large unexplained fluctuations the three major moves in yields shown in the chart have resulted in a cumulative reduction in yields on 10-year Treasuries of basis points from the election to December The sharp decline in long-term interest rates in continued the downward trend that began in the early 1980s. Interest rates both short- and long-term had reached historic highs in the late 1970s and early 1980s during the period of very high inflation and the subsequent period of very tight money. The latter period was characterized by a negative or slightly positive slope to the yield curve ( which relates interest rates to lengthening maturities ) Long-term real rates remained high throughout the 1980s. Chart decomposes the nominal yield on 10-year Treasuries into expected inflation and the implied ex ante real interest rate. Expected inflation is measured by the Blue Chip consensus forecast ( a private sector survey of forecasts ) for 10-year inflation which has been compiled semiannually since Chart Real Interest Rates Recent declines in the nominal long-term interest rate reflect declines in the ex ante real rate from its unusually high level over most of the 1980s Percent Nominal 10-Year Treasury Yield Ex Ante Real 10-Year Treasury Yield Note : Real rate is nominal rate minus a consensus forecast of 10-year inflation Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Eggert 's Blue Chip Economic Indicators Over the period shown in the chart the ex ante real rate averaged almost percent. Unfortunately comparable data on longterm expected inflation are not available prior to Ex post real rates provide only an imperfect guide to ex ante rates especially for long-term rates because there are so few time periods over which to average the expectational errors. Over the second half of the 1950s the average ex post real 10-year rate was about percentage point over the 1960s it was percentage point and over the 1970s it was about percentage point. The low ex post real rates of the 1960s and 1970s were surely partly explained by the unexpected rise in inflation of the 1970s. For the 1960s and 1970s the ex post 10-year real interest rate understates the ex ante real rate because of the unexpected inflation in the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s. Based on forecasts of 10-year inflation the Council estimates that ex ante real 10-year interest rates averaged slightly above percent in the 1960s and about percent in the 1970s. Although higher than the ex post rates for the same periods these rates are well below the ex ante rates of the 1980s Therefore it appears that real rates were unusually high throughout the 1980s. Only with the declines in nominal rates over the last few years has the real rate begun to decline. With the most recent set of observations those of October the 10-year Treasury yield was percent and the Blue Chip consensus forecast for long-term inflation was percent so the real rate was close to percent. This level of real rates is somewhat above historical norms ( Box ) Box Are Current Long-Term Interest Rates Sustainable ? Long-term Treasury bonds now yield about percent. These nominal interest rates are very low by the standards of the last decade. But given the expected rate of inflation and historical standards for real interest rates they appear to be sustainable Long-term expected inflation is probably between and % percent implying a 2V2- to 3-percent real yield on long-term Treasuries. A real interest rate in this range although low relative to recent experience is not low relative to historical experience From to the ex post real yield on 10-year Treasuries averaged about percent. Over the period the ex post real yield on government bonds was under percent but these bonds are not wholly comparable to current Treasury notes because they were callable and had tax benefits Clearly if inflation remains under control bond yields have some way to fall to come into line with their historical real averages HOW DEFICIT REDUCTION REDUCES LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES The previous section discussed the circumstantial evidence linking Federal deficit reduction to the decline in real long-term interest rates. Over the 1980s which saw a growing and potentially explosive Federal debt real long-term rates were unprecedentedly high. Over the last months there have been sharp declines in real rates associated with policy changes that provide for credible deficit reduction. This section explores the four economic mechanisms that link Federal deficit reduction policy with the real rate : national saving investment and capital accumulation ; the policy mix ; short-run real activity ; and inflation risk Saving Investment and Capital Accumulation The Federal debt-GDP ratio doubled in the 1980s jumping from percent of GDP in to percent currently ( Chart ) To the extent that Federal debt substitutes for productive capital in an individual 's portfolio the increase in debt reduces income and productivity and raises the marginal product of capital and therefore the real interest rate. The Administration 's economic plan is meant to increase national saving and national investment. The cumulated additional investment will have a significant effect on the capital stock and therefore on future real interest rates. ( See the section on " Long-Term Effects of Deficit Reduction " below for estimates of the impact of the plan on wages and the capital stock. ) Chart Net Federal Debt as Percent of Nominal GDP From the end of World War II until the debt-GDP ratio fell to about percent Since it has increased to over percent Fiscal Year Note : Net Federal debt is defined as debt held by the public less debt held by the Federal Reserve Sources : Department of Commerce and Office of Management and Budget The policy changes in OBRA93 reduce the projected deficit for fiscal by % percent of GDP. Not all of this projected reduction in the deficit will go to national investment however. Changes in either the current account or private saving could offset the decrease in Federal dissaving During the 1980s much of the Federal deficit was offset by increases in the current account deficit. As the budget deficit is reduced there should be similar decreases in the current account deficit. The mechanism is simple. Deficit reduction is generally associated with an improvement in the price competitiveness of U.S goods and services abroad and therefore an increase in net exports. This expansion in net exports provides a stimulus that partially offsets the contractionary impact of spending cuts and tax increases on domestic demand. While it is difficult to determine the magnitude of this offset precisely studies suggest that net exports will rise by approximately percent of the initial deficit reduction Declines in private saving could also offset decreased Federal dissaving. However the experience of the 1980s provides strong evidence on the reaction of private savers to government deficits. Personal saving did not act to offset ballooning Federal deficits in the 1980s contrary to the predictions of neo-Ricardian theory. Therefore we expect no decrease in private saving as deficits are reduced under the President 's economic plan. After taking into account the reduction in the current account deficit we estimate that the deficit reduction plan enacted in OBRA93 should increase the share of national investment in GDP by about percentage point The deficit reduction package should increase the capital stock as productive capital substitutes for government debt in private portfolios. An increase in the share of investment in GDP of percentage point would have a substantial effect on the capital-labor ratio raising it in steady state by about percent ( see below for details of the assumptions underlying this calculation ) With conservative assumptions about the curvature of the production function ( which governs how much output per worker will increase for a given increase in capital per worker ) such a change in the capital-labor ratio would be expected to reduce the return on capital by about percentage points which is slightly higher than the decline in real long-term rates that we have seen to date It takes many years however to adjust to a new steady state Along the transition path the return on capital would fall only gradually. So even if we accept the implied reduction in the steady-state return on capital capital deepening alone can not account for the sharp reduction of interest rates on long-term bonds that has already occurred Policy Mix Credible deficit reduction also might affect long-term interest rates through the expectation of a changed mix of fiscal and monetary policy. In the 1980s the Federal Reserve pursued a relatively restrictive policy to counter the stimulus engendered by loose fiscal policy. This mix resulted in high real interest rates. With credible deficit reduction the Federal Reserve will be able to achieve a given level of nominal demand with a less restrictive monetary policy. This shift in the policy mix should reduce future real shortterm interest rates. Expectations that short rates will be lower in the future should be reflected in lower real long-term rates. As a consequence the composition of output will shift toward investment at the expense of consumption The Short-Run Level of Real Activity Long-term rates might also fall because of bad news about expected future real economic activity. Real growth in the first half of was indeed disappointing. But both Administration and private forecasters believed correctly as it turned out that growth would be better in the second half of the year. Moreover if there are fears of a future slump why is the stock market at record highs ? Presumably market participants expect good earnings and dividends. The low bond yields and high stock values are consistent with the path of stable growth low inflation and decreasing unemployment that the Administration forecasts. Finally the news of increasing growth that began to emerge in the fall was greeted by only modest increases in long-term rates Inflation Risk A decline in expected inflation could also account for the decline in long-term bond rates associated with the deficit reduction plan Chart shows however that there is no break in inflation expectations associated with this decline in long-term bond rates. The difference between the nominal and real interest rates in Chart gives a time-series of expected long-term inflation. In October the Blue Chip consensus expected an average annual GDP inflation of percent for and percent for In October the consensus was again for 3.3-percent inflation for and percent for Hence the consensus forecast implies that virtually all the recent reductions in nominal long-term rates were also reductions in real rates SHORT-RUN EFFECTS OF INTEREST RATES The reduction in real long-term interest rates has been an important element powering the economic recovery. As discussed elsewhere in this chapter reductions in Federal purchases especially for defense have been an important factor holding back the recovery. As the reductions in expenditures and increases in taxes built into the Administration 's plan take effect they taken in isolation would place a continued drag on the economy. But they should not be taken in isolation. Because long-term interest rates anticipate credible future fiscal consolidation the effects of deficit reduction in long-term rates show up in advance of the actual deficit reduction. The resulting increases in interest-sensitive expenditures provide a boost to economic growth that works in the opposite direction of the direct fiscal effect. This increase in interest-sensitive spending is closely linked with the sustained reduction in long rates. In real GDP in the interest-sensitive sectors ( business fixed investment housing and consumer durables ) rose percent while the non-interest-sensitive sectors showed virtually no growth The interest-sensitive components of spending did not however increase uniformly throughout Producers ' durable equipment was strong throughout the year growing percent from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Expenditure on consumer durables was also strong throughout the year ( with an 8-percent growth rate ) but production of automobiles was irregular. Investment in nonresidential structures was weak for most of the year most likely as a result of high vacancy rates in existing buildings due in turn partly to overbuilding in the 1980s. The lags in the response of residential construction to the low interest rates were unusually long. Residential investment fell at a 4-percent annual rate in the first two quarters of but rose at a 21-percent rate in the last two quarters Net exports would appear on many economists ' lists of interestsensitive expenditures. Normally low interest rates should lead to depreciation of the dollar and therefore to increased exports. This channel for interest rates was offset by other factors however Short-term rates fell around the world not just in the United States and the dollar has actually appreciated slightly on a multilateral basis. ( A further discussion of the exchange rate is presented in Chapter ) LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF DEFICIT REDUCTION The key macroeconomic rationale for reducing the Federal deficit is to increase investment and therefore productivity and real incomes in the future. Changes in fiscal policy should exert sustained effects on national investment and saving. As discussed above the President 's economic plan should increase the share of domestic investment in GDP by about percent once it is fully phased in Chart shows the projected impact of such an increase in the national investment rate on the marginal product of capital the real wage rate and the capital stock. ( Box contains details of the computation. ) The data are expressed relative to the initial steady-state position All of the variables require several decades to adjust to their steady-state values. The ultimate reduction in the return to capital is about percentage points. The reduction in long-term rates we have already seen is closer to IV2 percentage points. The reduction in the marginal product of capital takes place however over a very long period of time. Indeed as presented in the chart the marginal product of capital is down only percentage point after years Moreover since capital and bonds are not perfect substitutes their Chart Dynamic Effects of Deficit Reduction The real effects of raising the saving rate through deficit reduction include higher wages and investment and lower real interest rates Percent Percentage points Wage ( left scale ) Marginal Product of Capital ( right scale ) Years Source : Council of Economic Advisers rates will move by less than one for one. Other factors such as expectations about the policy mix therefore must explain the bulk of the rate reduction A small increase in the investment rate buys a substantial increase in the capital stock again over a long period. This increase in the capital stock should ultimately raise real wages and productivity by about 33A percent Initially consumption falls because of the direct effect of the Federal budget package. As output and productivity increase however so does consumption. It takes about years for the change in fiscal policy to have a net positive effect on consumption. Thereafter the effect of the economic plan is to raise consumption permanently eventually by more than 2V2 percent per year These calculations are quite conservative. They do not assume any externality from capital accumulation or any extra boost to productivity from embodied technological progress. If these factors are present the gains from the increase in investment could be substantially higher Box -Estimating the Long-Run Effects of Deficit Reduction Chart shows the results of applying a model of economic growth developed by Robert M Solow to the change in the investment rate engendered by OBRA93. To carry out these calculations we make several assumptions : The production function is Cobb-Douglas with a capital share of one-third. ( The Cobb-Douglas function presumes a fairly large degree of substitutability between capital and labor and will thus show a substantial output effect of increasing capital ) The rate of growth of the economy 's potential output ( a little below percent ) plus the rate of depreciation ( a little above percent ) is 1L5 percent The initial investment rate is percent about the ratio of fixed investment to GDP in It is assumed to rise to percent the first year * percent in the second percent in the third and is percent thereafter The magnitude and timing of the increases in investment re * fleet the increase in Federal saving from the deficit reduction package and the assumption ( see text ) that percent of the increased Federal saving will be offset by a reduced current account deficit These calculations are subject to a considerable degree of tincertainty. They are sensitive to the form of the production function and the assumed rates of depreciation and growth in potential THE ECONOMY 'S RESPONSE TO HIGHER INCOME TAXES Critics of the increase in income tax rates enacted in August make two related claims : first that higher tax rates will have an adverse effect on the level of saving investment and employment in the economy and second that the higher tax rates on high-income taxpayers will not result in much ( or any ) increase in tax revenues. The arguments offered to bolster these claims have a common foundation namely that the disincentive effects of higher marginal tax rates have a profound influence on individuals ' behavior We note first that economies can thrive under a wide range of top marginal tax rates which already weakens the arguments of these critics. In fact the U.S. economy has performed extremely well during periods of relatively high top marginal rates : We en- joyed healthy average real GDP growth of percent per year over the decade of the 1960s when the top marginal income tax rate on wage and salary income averaged percent but less impressive 2V2-percent average annual growth in the decade of the 1980s when the top rate on wages and salaries averaged percent Also many people in the United States admired the investment-led economic boom that Japan enjoyed in the 1980s when that country had much higher marginal income tax rates than did the United States. Obviously many other important factors besides marginal tax rates determine saving and investment patterns and economic growth DO TAXES CHANGE BEHAVIOR ? A central tenet of economics is that relative prices matter. Taxes on capital and wage income change the relationships among the various prices that people face when deciding how much to save invest and work and thus have an effect on the way people choose to allocate their time ( between supplying labor and taking leisure ) and their income ( between current consumption and saving ) This observation serves as the basis of the supply-side dictum that a reduction in taxes by inducing people to work harder and save more can induce higher rates of investment and economic growth The extent to which changes in the marginal tax rate on income affect labor supply and saving has been a subject of extensive research for many years. The preponderance of evidence seems to indicate that the changes are small. Saving rates seem to be little affected by movements in after-tax interest rates and hours worked and labor force participation rates for most demographic groups show only limited sensitivity to changes in after-tax wages It is undeniable that the sharp reduction in taxes in the early 1980s was a strong impetus to economic growth. But it is unlikely that the principal source of this growth was people reacting to reductions in marginal tax rates by working and saving more. The expansion that took place over the 1980s was tax-induced mainly insofar as lower taxes raised disposable income which led to increased consumption. For example between and the consumption share of GDP increased from percent to percent. In other words the 1980s ' saw a classical Keynesian demand-driven expansion not the kind of expansion that supply-side theory predicted. Those who would point to the effects of the 's tax cuts as evidence of strong supply-side effects of taxation are grossly overstating the case The increases in the top marginal income tax rates enacted by the Congress in will affect directly only the top percent of American families. Moreover top marginal tax rates remain low by historical standards. While some individuals may alter their be- havior because of the higher tax rates and for example cut back their hours worked others may actually increase their work effort in order to meet saving or consumption objectives. Overall it is unlikely that the Administration 's plan will induce large responses in labor force participation hours worked or savings in the overall economy DO HIGHER TAX RATES INCREASE TAX REVENUES ? Some also argue that income tax collections do not vary much when top marginal tax rates increase or decrease. In this view an increase in income tax rates provides such a strong incentive for people to reduce their taxable income that the tax base shrinks and no additional revenue is generated. For example a worker facing higher taxes on wages might choose to take some compensation in the form of nonwage benefits such as more vacation time or larger future pensions. Similarly individuals facing higher tax rates on unearned income might change the composition of their savings ( while keeping the level constant ) by investing in tax-exempt bonds rather than stocks or corporate debt History can serve as a guide to determining whether these offsetting effects of a change in tax rates are strong enough to have a significant impact on revenues. For the United States contrary to the supply-siders ' claims income tax cuts have generally reduced income tax revenues and tax increases have generally raised them Chart illustrates the effect that a number of changes in tax policy have had on personal income tax receipts. Several episodes stand out : The tax cut reduced the top marginal rate from percent in to percent in and then to percent in Income tax revenue as a share of GDP dropped sharply The special Vietnam war surtax imposed additional charges equal to percent of tax in percent in and percent in The result was a sharp increase in revenues in and followed by a decline as the surtax was phased out The tax cut reduced the top marginal rate from percent to percent in and cut tax rates for lower income individuals over the period. Since then personal income tax revenues as a share of GDP have never regained their levels. Similarly the tax reform reduced marginal rates in stages over and and revenues as a share of GDP in fell slightly below their level In short evidence from postwar experience strongly suggests that personal income tax revenues rise when marginal rates are increased and fall when marginal rates are reduced Chart Personal Income Taxes as Percent of GDP A number of historical changes in tax rates demonstrate the effect that rate changes have on revenues Percent | Reagan Tax Cut ( phased in over ) Tax Reduction Act of I I I I III M I I M I M I I l I I I I Note : Shaded bars denote recessions Sources : Department of Commerce and National Bureau of Economic Research THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK A credible deficit reduction plan and low long-term interest rates have set the stage for moderate but sustainable economic growth over the mid-1990s. As the ratio of the Federal budget deficit to GDP declines financial markets should be reassured that inflation and interest rates can be sustained at the levels of the 1950s and 1960s. Interest-sensitive sectors of the economy particularly business fixed investment should thrive and provide a steady demand base. Housing and demand for household durable goods and automobiles should also do well and underpin a steady economic expansion The lean inventories that the economy was carrying as it entered suggest that manufacturers should face gradually increasing order levels. With the factory workweek and manufacturing overtime at postwar highs there will be growing pressure on firms to add new workers to meet production demands. Higher employment should contribute to a steady increase in income and provide lift for all sectors of the economy. Income growth which was outstripped by increases in consumer spending over the course of should gradually overtake spending growth over the next couple of years leading to a slowly increasing saving rate Finally foreign economies should recover over the next couple of years and provide an export lift for U.S. firms. By early net exports should once again be contributing to U.S. growth rather than subtracting from it. Strength in these sectors is expected to more than offset the continued declines in real Federal spending that are expected over the next years The projected decline in the Federal budget deficit from percent of GDP in fiscal to about percent of GDP by fiscal should have benefits for the economy that go beyond interest rates. First with less government " crowding out " more funds will be available for private business investment. This higher investment level will increase the Nation 's capital stock and hence increase its long-run potential output. Second there is a linkage between the Federal budget deficit and the current account deficit Because foreign savings have been steadily flowing into the United States to cover the imbalance between domestic saving and domestic investment we have been running large capital account surpluses. These in turn have required large current account deficits because the two accounts are mirror images. A steady reduction of the Federal budget deficit therefore should also translate into smaller current account deficits With these developments GDP growth of 2V2 percent to percent per year in line with growth seems likely to continue over the rest of the 1990s ( Table ) This growth should be sufficient to reduce the unemployment rate steadily from the roughly 6V2-percent level of late to about 5V2 percent ( under the old unemployment definition ) by the end of ( Box in Chapter contains a discussion of the relationship between the old unemployment rate based on the historical Current Population Survey and the new unemployment rate based on the revised version of the survey. ) These gains will be paired with healthy increases in real disposable income which are as important as job growth to the American worker. After two decades of relative stagnation real wages should post solid gains and allow American families once again to enjoy steadily improving living standards Within this macroeconomic environment short-term interest rates are likely to drift slowly upward over the coming years as the economy strengthens. Long-term interest rates are not expected to increase appreciably however because inflation should remain subdued and budget deficits will continue to shrink. Healthy gains in productivity the mainspring of rising living standards will be the key to keeping inflation tame. The higher rate of business investment in the 1990s than in the 1970s and 1980s should keep productivity on a relatively fast track and prevent unit labor costs TABLE Administration Forecasts Item Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Real GDP GDP implicit deflator Consumer price index ( CPI-U ) Calendar year average Unemployment rate ( percent ) Old basis New basis ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Interest rate 10-year Treasury note ( percent ) Nonfarm payroll employment ( millions ) Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget from accelerating. Health care reform should help rein in the spiraling costs that have plagued that huge sector of the economy and thus help control overall inflation The Administration 's forecast is in line with private sector forecasts for and the mid-1990s. It assumes no dramatic shift in aggregate economic performance beyond the trends clearly established over low inflation low long-term interest rates and healthy investment spending. It also assumes that the historical ( Okun 's law ) relationship between output and unemployment continues to hold RISKS TO THE FORECAST As always there are risks to this forecast. First foreign economic activity may not pick up as expected especially if other governments remain reluctant to stimulate their economies by easing interest rates or pursuing countercyclical fiscal policies. It is also possible that the kind of industrial restructuring that the United States has endured over the past decade may prove to be a bigger hurdle than realized for key European trading partners and Japan Also the timetable for the correction of the Japanese speculative bubble of the late 1980s is unclear and could take longer than expected. The better the Group of Seven countries coordinate their macroeconomic policies over the next couple of years the lower the risk of a prolonged pause in industrial-country growth A second risk is that long-term interest rates could take back more of their declines of Such a move could crimp the interest-sensitive sectors that provided the economy with most of its growth in Housing and business fixed investment would likely be the most vulnerable sectors A stalling out of consumer demand can not be ruled out either Consumers have been increasing their spending by a larger percentage than their incomes have been rising over the past year and they could turn pessimistic about the future again. Indeed they have already done so several times in this business cycle expansion. An unexpected cutback in consumer spending would lead to higher than desired inventory levels which would in turn reverberate back through the economy in the form of lower orders and perhaps lower employment in manufacturing But economic growth could also exceed this forecast in the short run. The U.S. output gap widened sharply over the recession and the economy could grow faster than its noninflationary potential for a couple of years as part of a catchup process. Certainly growth of percent would not be unprecedented during such a phase. Among the factors that might contribute to faster than expected growth are a faster than expected rebound of economic growth in Europe Japan and the rest of the industrial world which would sharply boost U.S. exports ; oil prices remaining relatively low and giving a healthy boost to real disposable incomes ; and the possibility that Americans have more pent-up demand than realized for houses automobiles and other durable goods SOURCES OF LONG-RUN GROWTH The long-run rate of real GDP growth can be expressed as the sum of the individual growth rates of four components : ( ) the number of available workers in the economy ( the labor force ) ; ( ) the rate at which these workers are employed ( the employment rate ) ; ( ) the number of hours worked per year ( which is proportional to the average workweek ) ; and ( ) the quantity of goods and services produced by an hour of labor ( labor productivity ) Table details the contribution of each of these components to real GDP growth over several historical time periods and as projected for the rest of the decade. Because many of these components vary with the business cycle their growth rates are measured from cyclical peak to cyclical peak. Estimates in the fourth column are based on actual data through the fourth quarter of and forecasts by the Administration through The projected growth of nonfarm business product from the business cycle peak in the third quarter of to the end of is percent per year. Underlying this projection is a growth in output per hour of percent per year and growth in hours of per- TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GDP [ Average annual percent change ! I to I ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUS. Civilian labor force participation rate ) EQUALS ) PLUS ) EQUALS : ) PLUS : ployment ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Civilian labor force Civilian employment rate Civilian employment Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian em- EQUALS : Nonfarm business employment PLUS : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business sector ) EQUALS : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) PLUS : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) EQUALS. Nonfarm business output LESS : Nonfarm business output as a share of real GDP2 EQUALS : Real GOP IV to III III to III III to IV Line six translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government Note. Data may not sum to totals due to rounding Time periods are from business cycle peak to business cycle peak to avoid cyclical variation Source : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget cent per year. The share of nonfarm business in GDP is projected to grow at percent per year so the growth rate of GDP over this period is projected to be roughly percent per year The forecast for nonfarm hours assumes a civilian labor force growth rate of percent per year which is about a percentage point lower than labor force growth during the 1960s and 1970s Virtually all of this difference reflects the slower growth of the labor force. It also assumes no change in the average workweek The return of the economy to full employment by implies zero peak-to-peak growth in the civilian employment rate over the forecast period More than half of the predicted growth in real GDP results from an assumed rate of nonfarm labor productivity growth of percent per year. This rate is somewhat higher than the actual rate over the past two decades. While the sources of productivity growth are complex and the causes of the well-documented " productivity slowdown " of the 1970s remain under debate we believe there is justification for assuming an increase in labor productivity growth over the near term First the baby-boom generation which entered the labor market en masse during the 1970s has now been fully assimilated. The workforce of today is thus older more educated and more experienced than in previous years. Second capital deepening ( see above ) is likely to occur. As business continues to respond to low real interest rates the level of investment in the economy should rise leading to an increase in capital intensity. Third the Administration 's programs of promoting public investment including better transportation and communications infrastructure and human capital formation should enhance private sector productivity. The implication of all these factors is that some improvement in the rate of productivity growth over the next several years is likely CONCLUSION The performance of the U.S. economy was unsatisfactory from early until the second half of Job creation was lackluster unemployment was higher than it should have been and real output failed to manifest the gains that are usual for an economic recovery. Even today the economy is operating below its potential level of output. Some of the sluggishness over this period was payback for a decade of debt-financed growth. Over the 1980s and early 1990s the Federal Government ran massive budget deficits even in years of strong economic growth and the level of net Federal debt jumped from about $ billion in to about $ trillion in A key result was historically high real interest rates Corporations followed suit heavily leveraging their operations Even individuals got into the act and allowed debt levels to rise markedly. Meanwhile large budget deficits contributed to the remarkable transformation of the United States from a country that lent more to foreigners than it borrowed into the world 's largest debtor Many necessary corrections have now taken place including new more responsible fiscal policy. The Federal budget deficit should fall roughly in half as a share of GDP over the next years. This anticipated deficit reduction has already caused long-term real interest rates to tumble. With inflation likely to remain subdued these lower interest rates poise the economy for a period of sustained growth in the mid-1990s. This growth should be sufficient to generate million new jobs within years Lower interest rates should also boost the share of the economy going to investment. More investment should lead to capital deepening higher labor productivity and higher real American wages As the government share of the economy falls the net export share should increase. A higher level of exports should give a boost to real wages too partly because export jobs on average pay better wages than average U.S. jobs and partly because of increasing specialization by American industry. Real income gains in the final analysis are the ultimate payoff from economic growth CHAPTER Trends and Recent Developments in the U.S. Labor Market THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION has made increasing both the quantity and the quality of jobs its highest priority. Providing a stable macroeconomic foundation for private sector activity is essential to achieving this goal but it is not enough. Sound macroeconomic policies are necessary but not sufficient for the task at hand. They must be complemented by labor market policies to remedy a number of deep and longstanding impediments to the maintenance of high employment and to improvements in the quality of jobs. This chapter discusses these impediments and the Administration 's proposals for addressing them The recession and the first year of the recovery witnessed rising unemployment. Even though output and employment have since been increasing the news has been filled with stories of corporate downsizings and the increasing use of " contingent workers. " These reports have sharpened fundamental fears about the security of employment. Popular accounts of recent events also allege that technical change is reducing employment throughout the economy After rising steadily for several decades U.S. real wages have hardly grown since the early 1970s while the growth of total real compensation ( wages plus benefits ) has slowed considerably. At the same time the income gap between rich and poor has been growing so that the poor are worse off in real terms now than they were two decades ago. Incomes of those in the middle have stagnated. The unemployment rate both at peaks and troughs of the business cycle has tended to be higher in the last two decades than in the first half of the postwar period. Employment-to-population ratios have risen for women but fallen for men especially for black men whose employment prospects are particularly bleak Further although there is little evidence of any large increase in job instability turnover rates in the U.S. labor market have long been very high and job displacement is often very costly for those unlucky enough to lose a job they have held for many years. High turnover rates combined with rising inequality imply increasing uncertainty about future income for many Americans In response to these problems in the Nation 's labor market many of which have been with us for several years this Administration has set out a long-term work force strategy to help the economy create more jobs at least million over years. To reduce job insecurity the Administration aims to ease labor market transitions in a number of ways. By making sure that people have health insurance whether or not they are employed the Administration seeks to reduce the trauma of job loss. The strategy also includes plans to help young workers enter the labor market more smoothly by providing a bridge between school and work. The Work Force Security Act will help experienced workers who have lost jobs find new employment more quickly and will provide support for training for those who can not Finally and importantly the Administration 's strategy seeks to improve worker productivity and increase earnings. To this end the Administration is pursuing policies to increase investment in research and development to spur private investment in plant and equipment and to facilitate the spread of modern cooperative employment practices ( such as total quality management and quality circles ) These initiatives address the general problem of slow wage growth but growing inequality and real wage declines for the least advantaged are problems that require specific attention. Since growing inequality is due in large part to the growing mismatch between the demand for trained labor and its supply the Administration aims to provide more and higher quality training so that wages may rise particularly for the middle-class and the least advantaged. Income inequality has also been directly addressed by an increase in the earned income tax credit EMPLOYMENT GROWTH U.S. employment grew rapidly from to with the number of nonfarm jobs increasing on average by over percent a year. In contrast from the end of to the end of job growth was virtually nonexistent. During employment growth improved considerably to an annual rate of percent but job creation remains low compared with past recoveries. As of the fourth quarter of the U.S. economy had been in recovery for quarters. The unemployment rate fell from its postrecession high of percent in June to percent in December Yet despite these signs of recovery there has been widespread concern about the pace of job growth A SLOW RECOVERY Without question job growth has been relatively weak since the trough of the recent recession. During the quarters after the first quarter of nonfarm payroll employment grew by million an increase of only percent. In fact employment did not begin to rebound until the first quarter of In previous recoveries employment growth was much stronger. For example during the first quarters after the recession of nonfarm employment grew by percent. In seven previous postwar recoveries employment increased on average by percent over the first quarters of recovery and expansion A key difference between the current and past recoveries however is the extraordinarily slow pace of output growth. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) grew only percent during the first quarters of this recovery compared with an average increase of percent during the previous postwar recoveries. Possible reasons for the slow growth of output are discussed in Chapter They include balance sheet adjustments by firms and consumers cutbacks in defense purchases slow growth of construction spending the credit crunch and slower export growth due to weak economies abroad. Given the slow rate of output growth it should not be surprising that employment growth has also been slow Nevertheless the current recovery still stands out relative to other recoveries when one compares the ratio of total employment growth to output growth. By the 11th quarter of previous recoveries that ratio was about compared with in the current recovery ( Chart ) It is comparisons such as this that have led observers to claim that corporate restructuring and rapidly rising productivity have allowed output to grow without commensurate increases in employment. Some critics see deeper forces at work For example it has been argued that productivity growth strongest in the manufacturing sector is now proceeding at a rapid pace in the service sector as well. Historically job losses in manufacturing were offset by rapid growth in the service sector but with strong productivity growth in the service sector this is alleged to be no longer possible However simple comparisons of total labor force growth to total output growth miss an essential point. As output rises during the early stages of a recovery the ratio of employment growth to output growth is usually low. This is because employers keep more workers on their payrolls than are needed during downturns and therefore do not hire more workers until their existing work force is fully employed and they are confident of continued growth. Consequently employment grows slowly and may even continue to decline for the first few quarters after GDP begins to recover Chart compares the cumulative growth of employment and output during the most recent recovery with that in previous recoveries. The boxes show how output and employment have grown together historically. The circles show how output and employment Chart Changes in Output and Payroll Employment in First Eleven Quarters of Recovery The ratio of employment to output growth is much lower in the current recovery than in the past. Output growth is much slower too Percent H Year of th Quarter of Recovery Output Growth ( left scale ) I I Employment-Output Growth Ratio ( right scale ) Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor have grown together in the most recent recovery. Although the cumulative growth of output and that of employment have both been extraordinarily slow in this recovery the relationship between them is consistent with historical experience. Using the historical relationship between output and employment growth one can estimate what employment growth should have been during the most recent recovery given output growth. This exercise yields estimates of cumulative employment growth that are larger than actual employment growth during this recovery by as much as percent of total employment. This is a large difference but not a statistically significant one. In other words employment growth in the most recent recovery appears to have been at the low end of the range of historical experience but is nonetheless consistent with it A similar conclusion applies to the behavior of manufacturing employment. Analysis of past experience shows that the actual growth of manufacturing employment during the most recent recovery is not statistically different from what would have been predicted based on GDP growth and long-term trends. ( Manufacturing employment has been declining as a fraction of the labor force since and reached its postwar peak in ) This is surprising be- cause defense cutbacks have caused large job losses in manufacturing in the most recent recovery. Evidently growth in demand for manufactured goods in other parts of the economy was strong enough to offset the depressing effects of these cutbacks on manufacturing employment Chart Employment and Output in Recoveries Employment growth in the recent recovery is in line with past experience given the slow growth of output Cumulative employment growth ( percent ) Q1 m Q10 ^ s ^ Average Postwar Recovery # Q2 Q1 * " " : I \ v Current Recovery I I I I I Cumulative Output Growth ( percent ) Note : Recoveries are dated from the quarter of minimum real GDP Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor I I SOURCES OF JOB GROWTH Although much has been written about the sources of job growth it is hard to get an accurate picture from the pastiche of popular accounts. Are new jobs good jobs or bad jobs ? What does the future hold ? Industry and Occupation The service sector defined to include personal and business services but exclude trade and finance was the economy 's job engine in Although these industries account for less than percent of total employment they were responsible for more than percent of total job growth in that year. Many of these jobs about were created in the personnel supply industry ( mainly temporary agencies ) which represented almost percent of total payroll job growth. Other sectors registering strong job cre- ation over included retail trade ( more than jobs ) and construction ( about jobs ) In contast manufacturing employment declined by about during the year These sectoral patterns are not new however. Since January service sector employment has grown by million and has accounted for percent of total nonfarm job growth. And jobs in retail trade have accounted for an additional percent of all jobs created over this period. Since January construction employment has risen by but manufacturing payrolls have shrunk by A common misconception identifies manufacturing jobs as " good jobs " and service jobs as " bad jobs. " However growth in high-end services such as various kinds of business services have led to increased demand for high-level white-collar workers. During percent of the increase in employment occurred in the managerial and professional occupations. The large increases in these relatively well-paying occupations belie the criticism that most employment growth has been in " bad jobs. " The recent occupational pattern of employment growth is largely in line with the experience of the last years during which managerial and professional jobs accounted for percent of new employment. Both over the last year and over the last decade new employment has shifted toward better paying jobs requiring more skills and education not toward low-paid low-skilled jobs Outlook for the Future One of the major goals of this Administration is to increase employment by at least million jobs in years. Progress toward this goal has been moderate but steady. Between January and December nonfarm payroll employment grew by million jobs and the number of unemployed fell by lowering the unemployment rate from percent to percent. With a higher growth rate of output expected next year the pace of job creation should accelerate The Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) projects employment to grow between and percent per year through Most of this growth is expected in service-producing industries which the BLS expects will add between million and million jobs per year. Employment in manufacturing is expected to fall or to rise only modestly with losses or gains of fewer than workers per year. Many new jobs ( about a year ) will be in service occupations such as food service workers and home health aides but even more will be in the comparatively higher-paying managerial professional and technical occupations ( about a year ) UNEMPLOYMENT AND NONEMPLOYMENT The United States has a history of strong job growth and the outlook for job creation over the next decade is good. But how many new jobs are enough ? The best indicator of how well we are doing is how many of the people who want jobs are able to get them. The unemployment rate is one measure of this. The unemployed are defined as people who are not working but are either waiting to return to a job or looking for a new one. If jobs are sufficiently difficult to find however some people may give up looking. Then they are counted not as unemployed but as " discouraged workers. " Thus both unemployment rates and the employment-to-population ratio need to be examined to determine if the economy is providing enough jobs TRENDS The National Bureau of Economic Research the private organization that dates the beginning and endpoints of U.S. business cycles fixed the trough of the recession at March Yet unemployment did not reach its peak of percent until June Since then the unemployment rate has fallen steadily to percent in December ( In January the BLS began measuring unemployment in a new way : Box describes the changes ) This represents a considerable improvement but the economy has a way to go before unemployment reaches normal levels. Unemployment was below percent from April to January and from February to March After World War II and prior to unemployment topped percent for only three brief periods each of less than a year Chart shows the time path for unemployment since Besides the ups and downs that correspond to business cycles the outstanding feature is the apparent ratcheting up in the level of unemployment in the 1970s. Since the early 1970s unemployment has never returned to the levels typical of recoveries in the 1950s and 1960s and has peaked at much higher rates. It is widely believed that this long-term increase in unemployment is at least in part due to an increase in the minimum level to which unemployment can be reduced without causing increasing inflation the socalled natural rate of unemployment. The natural rate in turn is thought to depend on labor market frictions and skill and geographic mismatches between labor supply and labor demand There have also been changes in the incidence of long-term unemployment. As of December million workers comprising percent of the unemployed had been unemployed for weeks or longer. This is a reduction from September when the number of long-term unemployed reached million and comprised Box The New Current Population Survey The Current Population Survey ( CPS ) a national survey of U.S. households provides a monthly picture of the Nation 's labor force employment and the unemployment rate Beginning in January that picture is being taken through a new lens. For the first time since the CPS has undergone a major redesign. Changes in the patterns of employment by industry the increased labor force participation of women and several other factors have made the pre-1994 survey less accurate as a guide to the Nation 's work force. The new survey includes new and revised questions that reflect these changes and incorporates new procedures ( including the use of portable computers to conduct the survey rather than pencil and paper ) designed to lead to more-accurate and consistent responses Between July and December a pilot version of the new survey was conducted in parallel with the old CPS to determine the effects of the new questions and data collection procedures. Results of the parallel survey indicate significantly different estimates for key statistics including the unemployment rate. Specifically the unemployment rate as measured by the parallel survey averaged a half a percentage point higher than the estimates from the old CPS. In addition the use of new population weights increased the measured unemployment rate another percentage point. The unemployment rate is expected to rise for all demographic groups but particularly for women since the old CPS questionnaire may have tended to classify women who were unemployed as out of the labor force The new survey is expected to produce several other changes as well. For example measured labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratios are expected to rise for women and fall for men. Changes in the questions defining discouraged workers and people working part-time for economic reasons are expected to lead to a decline in numbers of discouraged workers of percent and part-time workers for economic reasons of to percent percent of all unemployed workers. There is still a sense however that long-term unemployment is unusually high today. The peak share of long-term unemployed workers during the current recovery was higher than during most previous postwar recoveries ( Chart ) In addition the share of long-term unemployment is high given the overall unemployment rate ( Chart ) Chart Civilian Unemployment Rate Unemployment rate peaks and troughs have been higher since Note : Quarterly data Source : Department of Labor While average unemployment rates have risen they have risen more for some groups than for others. The unemployment rate for women which used to be consistently above the unemployment rate for men is somewhat lower ( percent for women percent for men in December ) In contrast the black unemployment rate has risen more than the white unemployment rate ( percentage points for whites between and and percentage points for blacks and others ) Employment-to-population ratios show some of the same patterns of relative distress for different groups. While black women had a higher employment ratio than white women in the 1970s the reverse is now true ( Chart ) Both black and white men have had falling employment-to-population ratios since the early 1970s ; but the decline for black men has been larger than for white men ( percentage points for black men from to ; percentage points for white men ) The unemployment rate for teenage workers ( aged to years ) has always been higher than the rate for all workers and the current situation is no exception. While the unemployment rate for all workers during averaged percent the rate for teen- Chart Long-Term Unemployment as Share of TotaS Unemployment The share of the unemployed who have been out of work weeks or more approached historical highs in the last downturn Note : Quarterly data Source : Department of Labor Chart Long-Term Unemployment and the Unemployment Rate The share of long-term unemployment in total unemployment has been high recently given the unemployment rate Long-term unemployed ( percent ) s ^ ^ D1984 ry ' DiP ^ P rjn ^ D s ^ s ^ me D1980 I I I Unemployment Rate ( percent ) Source : Department of Labor I Chart Employment-to-Population Ratios of Women The employment rate of black women fell below that of white women in the last recession Percent Black Women r White Women J L Note : Quarterly data Source : Department of Labor agers was nearly three times as high at percent. Teenage unemployment rates were percent and percent for white males and females respectively. The unemployment rates for black teenage workers were more than twice as high at percent for males and percent for females. Over the last years the teenage unemployment rate rose along with the overall unemployment rate. Unemployment rates also differ by education. Chart compares the unemployment rates of those without a high school diploma high school graduates those with some college college graduates and those with advanced degrees According to popular accounts another distinguishing feature of recent labor market developments is the " white-collar recession. " That expression implies that the recent unemployment experience of white-collar workers relative to that of blue-collar workers has been significantly worse than in past recessions In fact as in the past the unemployment rate among white-collar workers has been significantly below that of blue-collar workers in the most recent recession and recovery ( percent versus percent in ) However the white-collar unemployment rate relative to the blue-collar rate has been rising ( Chart ) The ratio Chart Unemployment Rates by Educational Attainment March Unemployment is generally lower for more-educated workers No Diploma Some College Master 's Degree Professional Degree High School Diploma Bachelor 's Degree Doctoral Degree Note : Data relate to workers age Source : Department of Labor of the two rates in was the highest since The ratio of the number of unemployed white-collar workers to the number of unemployed blue-collar workers has been rising since the first year for which we have consistent occupational estimates. By the ratio of the number of white-collar unemployed to that of blue-collar unemployed was about one-third compared with only one-fifth in This happened both because the ratio of the white-collar to the blue-collar unemployment rate has increased as already noted and because white-collar workers now make up a larger fraction of the work force than they did before Just as the rate of overall employment growth is not out of line with past experience given output growth the level of unemployment in the most recent recession is within the bounds of what we would expect given GDP growth. Further as already noted unemployment has fallen by percentage points from its June peak with nearly a percentage point of the drop coming in However three concerns are raised by trends and recent experience The first problem is increasing disparities between black and white rates of both employment and unemployment. These changes Chart Ratio of White-Collar to Blue-Collar Unemployment Rates The ratio of white-collar to blue-collar unemployment rates has been rising but is still below historical highs Note : Data after are not strictly comparable with earlier years because of changes in occupational definitions Source : Department of Labor are linked to equally disturbing changes in the distribution of income and job security discussed later in this chapter. The second concern is the long-term increase in the average level of unemployment. The third concern is that recent high levels of long-term unemployment suggest that we may be seeing an increase in the share of unemployment caused by mismatches between workers ' skills and job demands. If this is the case it is argued it may be difficult to lower the unemployment rate much further without causing labor market bottlenecks. As we will see below little evidence can be found that skill mismatches have contributed much to recent increases in unemployment but they do seem to have been a major cause of growing income inequality IS THE NATURAL RATE OF UNEMPLOYMENT INCREASING ? How would we know if there had been an increase in what economists call the natural rate of unemployment ? A sustained increase in long-term unemployment might be one indication an increase in the number of people who have given up looking for work might be another and an increase in the fraction of job losers among the unemployed yet another. These are all indirect indicators of an increase in the natural rate of unemployment. The problem is that these indicators also respond to cyclical conditions they increase when the economy is in recession and they can be slow to decline or may even increase in periods of slow recovery Not surprisingly therefore concerns that mismatch unemployment is increasing are likely to develop in recessionary times. Less skilled workers are more likely to find themselves unemployed than better skilled workers. During recessions labor market slack makes it easier for employers to find better qualified employees allowing them to raise job qualifications without raising compensation. Thus recessions may create the appearance of increasing mismatch unemployment. Once a recovery is under way however more jobs of all types are created and the unemployment rate for the less skilled usually declines. Thus indirect indicators of increasing skill mismatch are not enough to determine whether the natural rate is increasing. We must consider additional evidence If most new jobs require skills that many workers do not have they might experience lengthening periods of unemployment as they wait for jobs appropriate to their skills to become available On the other hand the available statistical evidence does not rule out the possibility that relatively slow output growth since the recession trough in is the major reason why recent levels of long-term unemployment have been so high. Since high levels of overall unemployment have persisted for so long the number of people looking for work for a long period of time has also increased A statistical analysis relating the percentage change in the number of workers unemployed for weeks or more to the percentage change in output indicates that the behavior of long-term unemployment in the most recent period of recession and recovery is not statistically different from that during previous recession-recovery cycles. Although the recent behavior of long-term unemployment may not be different it is worth noting that the average number of long-term unemployed increased substantially during the 1970s and has remained high since then Another possible indicator of worsening mismatch unemployment is the number of discouraged workers. Because they have given up looking for work they are not counted as unemployed. Yet large increases in the number of discouraged workers might be taken as indirect evidence that many people are having a very difficult time finding jobs. Again however the slow speed of the recovery could also explain such an increase. Although the number of discouraged workers is up reaching million in the fourth quarter of compared with fewer than in the first quarter of the percentage increase in the number of discouraged workers is less than would be expected given its historical relationship with output growth In summary after taking into account the effects of slow output growth neither recent high levels of long-term unemployment nor recent increases in the number of discouraged workers suggest that there has been an abrupt worsening of mismatch unemployment or an abrupt increase in the natural rate of unemployment in the most recent period of recession and recovery A third indirect indicator of a changing natural rate of unemployment is the share of permanent job losers in total unemployment If unemployment is truly cyclical firms lay off workers for a while but recall them when conditions improve. However if mismatch is increasing one might expect to see more permanent job losers among the unemployed rather than individuals on temporary layoff. Indeed the share of permanent job losers among the unemployed hit an all-time high of percent in the second quarter of and has fallen only slightly since then. However this number must be interpreted with caution. Despite the image of cyclical unemployment as due to temporary layoffs the fact is that the share of permanent job losers among the unemployed rises in every recession. Recessions bring not only temporary interruptions in employment due to slack demand but also business failures and forced restructurings that cause permanent job loss at a higher rate than during normal times A statistical analysis relating the number of permanent job losers to output growth indicates that the relatively large number of permanent job losers in the most recent period of recession and recovery can be explained by relatively slow output growth. Thus there is little evidence of any recent increase in the natural rate of unemployment in this relationship either. The predictions of this analysis for earlier periods do suggest that there was an abrupt increase in the number of unemployed permanent job losers in the early to mid-1970s compared with what would have been expected given business conditions. This is consistent with other data which suggest an increase in the natural rate around that time DIRECT MEASURES OF THE NATURAL RATE Traditionally economists have used two methods to identify the natural rate and two additional methods for evaluating how it might be changing. The simplest way to identify the natural rate is to look back and see at what unemployment rate the last acceleration of inflation began. Alternatively a statistical model of inflation that embodies the assumption of a natural rate ( an accelerationist " Phillips curve " ) can be used to estimate the natural rate Ill Changes in the natural rate have been identified in two ways Since different demographic groups have different unemployment rates it has become a common procedure to assume that the natural rate changes whenever the composition of the work force changes. More recently several authors have looked at the relation between unemployment and proxies for job vacancies. If increases in the natural rate are caused by an increasing mismatch of workers and jobs then the job vacancy rate should be rising along with the unemployment rate All these approaches have serious shortcomings. Many factors other than the tightness of the labor market influence the rate of wage and price inflation. Taxes raw material prices exchange rates expectations and a host of other factors all come into play Thus determining the natural rate by looking back to see what the unemployment rate was the last time inflation picked up works only if inflation was caused by labor market tightness Some economists argue however that the principal causes of inflation since the early 1970s have been factors other than tightness in the labor market for example oil and other commodity price increases in the 1970s and the falling value of the dollar in the late 1980s. If this is true estimating the natural rate by estimating models of inflation is a misleading exercise unless all causes of inflation besides tightness in the labor market are adequately controlled for. Moreover even estimates of the natural rate obtained in this manner may be very sensitive to assumptions about the form of the Phillips curve relation. Without direct evidence of a rapidly increasing rate of inflation below a particular unemployment rate estimates of a changing natural rate from statistical models of inflation are suspect at best Determining how the natural rate has changed by looking at demographic changes also poses problems. In the 1970s the apparent increase in the natural rate was attributed in large part to increasing labor force participation of women and teenagers both of whom had higher than average unemployment rates at the time However as women have changed their attachment to the labor force their unemployment experience has also changed. In the recent past women have had a lower unemployment rate than men Should we therefore believe that the increased labor force participation of women has tended to decrease the natural rate below what it was prior to the surge in their participation ? The share of teenagers in the labor force has also fallen in the last decade and this too should have reduced the natural rate Further why focus on these particular demographic changes to the exclusion of others ? Black male labor force participation rates have been falling over the last two decades. Since black men have higher unemployment rates than white men should we conclude that the natural rate is falling ? More important people with college educations have a much lower rate of unemployment than those with less education and their share of the labor force has increased considerably over the last two decades. Again this would suggest that the natural rate should be lower today than in before the ratcheting up of the unemployment rate Finally although the U.S. Government does not collect the data on job vacancies that would allow us to examine directly whether there is an increasing mismatch of jobs and workers the Conference Board does publish an index of help-wanted advertising The relationship between this index and the unemployment rate has changed over time but there is no evidence of any increase in the level of help-wanted advertising given the unemployment rate in the last decade. There is however a higher level of help-wanted advertising at all levels of unemployment since the early 1970s The increase in help-wanted advertising could be interpreted as evidence of an increase in mismatch unemployment but many other things affect the level of help-wanted advertising. Different types of employers advertise in different ways for different types of jobs. Changes in the industrial and occupational mix of employment make an advertising index a questionable measure of longterm changes in job vacancies. Changes in advertising prices the structure of media markets and legal requirements for advertising certain jobs also change the relationship between vacancies and advertising in ways that call into question the meaning of any longterm changes Altogether the various pieces of statistical evidence examined in the preceding discussion suggest that the increase in the unemployment rate since has been largely cyclical in nature. There is some evidence of an increase in the natural rate possibly due to an increase in mismatch unemployment in the early 1970s but little evidence of any increase since then. The evidence also suggests that today 's unemployment rate exceeds the natural rate by a significant amount. Therefore wage-push price inflation is unlikely to be a factor constraining economic growth in the near future THE MAGNITUDE AND COSTS OF JOB LOSS The U.S. economy is constantly in flux and while there is no evidence that the rate of churning in the labor market has increased in recent years ( see the discussion of job stability below ) normal rates of structural adjustment are quite high and impose significant costs Estimates of the number of jobs created and destroyed each year in the United States are staggering. Data from various sources suggest that on average more than percent of all jobs disappear every year while even more new jobs are created. Luckily not every job that is lost forces someone to become unemployed. Companies reducing the size of their operations can often do so using normal attrition quits and retirements. When they can not workers given advance notice of an imminent layoff can sometimes find work before they lose their old job allowing a seamless transition with no unemployment. But for the many workers who do not make such easy transitions the costs of dislocation can be high Between and about million full-time workers per year lost their jobs. These workers spent an average of nearly weeks unemployed and of those who found new employment about a third suffered earnings losses of more than percent Wage losses were most severe for those who had been with their employers the longest. For example those with or more years of tenure on their previous job were nearly four times as likely to see their earnings fall by percent as to see them rise by percent in their new jobs. They were also less likely than other displaced workers to find new employment at all. One set of surveys asking about job loss found that percent of all job losers had obtained new jobs but only percent of those with or more years of job tenure had found new work The special problems of workers with long job tenure are understandable. Those who work for the same employer for a long time build up skills that are most valuable to that employer. Further many employers reward long job tenure with higher wages as a way of motivating employees and ensuring their loyalty. The loss of a job when one has obtained the privileges of long tenure can be particularly devastating SLOWING WAGE GROWTH AND WIDENING INEQUALITY In the last two decades family income growth has stagnated and incomes have become more unequally distributed. In fact the real incomes of the bottom percent of American families were lower in the early 1990s than for the analogous families at the end of the 1970s. Underlying the rising disparity in the fortunes of American families has been a rise in labor market inequality that has shifted wage and employment opportunities in favor of the more educated and the more experienced. Less educated workers suffered substantial losses in real earnings during the 1980s. Here we consider the dimensions and some likely causes of slow income growth and widening inequality SLOW INCOME GROWTH Income trends have been discouraging for about two decades the median family today has virtually the same real income as the median family years ago. This stagnation is a marked departure from the substantial income growth that occurred over previous generations From to the real income of the median American family increased by a robust percent a year more than doubling In contrast from to the income of the typical American family was essentially stagnant rising by only percent a year after adjusting for inflation. ( The trend from to roughly equivalent years in the economic cycle is similar. ) At the pace of income growth from to it would take centuries for real median family income to double Although the labor force participation decisions of women and changes in the composition of families have affected family income the major trends in family income are dominated by trends in real wages. Chart shows the changes in wages and total hourly compensation adjusted for inflation since Both wages and compensation suffered abrupt slowdowns in growth rates around GROWING INEQUALITY Families have been affected unevenly by recent income trends Real incomes at the top have increased smartly real incomes at the middle have essentially stagnated and real incomes at the bottom have fallen. Box discusses the implications of these developments for employment and unemployment From to the average real income of the upper percent of families rose percent or about percent per year. This is well below the rate for the 1950s and 1960s but far better than for the rest of the population. Between and the average income of the middle percent of families rose a paltry percent in real terms. Lower income families fared even worse. Among the bottom percent of families mean real income fell by percent from to Chart shows the growth of mean family incomes for different income groups over the periods before and after It makes clear just how abrupt the changes in the distribution of income growth have been. A trend toward greater equality in the 1960s and toward greater inequality in the 1970s and 1980s is apparent in both income and consumption measures of economic well-being. Rising inequality of family incomes during the 1980s is apparent in both pretax and posttax income measures Chart Real Hourly Compensation and Wages The growth of real compensation per hour and of real hourly wages has declined since dollars Hourly Compensation Hourly Wages j I I | | | I | Note : Compensation and average hourly earnings deflated by CPI-U-X1 Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor | | | Box Growing Inequality of Employment and Unemployment The falling relative wages of those with less experience and schooling may explain at least in part some of the observed changes in employment-to-population ratios for certain demographic groups. The black and teenage populations tend to have less schooling than the average for all Americans. Consequently the wages they command have fallen making work less attractive. To the extent that the shift in demand away from less-educated workers is manifest in fewer available jobs instead of lower wages these groups face higher unemployment rates as well EXPLAINING SLOW WAGE GROWTH Stagnant wages and slow total compensation growth since the early 1970s largely reflect a substantial slowdown in productivity growth. From to productivity rose at a compound annual rate of percent and inflation-adjusted compensation per hour Chart Average Annual Growth of Mean Family Income by Income Quintile Family incomes in alt income groups grew more or less evenly but slightly faster for lower income groups before Average annual percent change n Lowest Second } " Fourth Third Quintile Highest I I I I Second Third Quintile Fourth Highest Source : Department of Commerce grew at a similar rate. From to the rate of productivity growth fell to an average of percent a year and compensation growth fell with it. Since the productivity growth rate has picked up only slightly averaging percent on an annual basis Chart shows the close relation between productivity and real compensation. Boxes and discuss some of the other effects of productivity growth The productivity slowdown has been intensely studied. Many partial explanations have been given but no complete accounting has been made EXPLAINING THE GROWTH OF INEQUALITY Several factors have contributed to widening inequality. One major factor is increasing returns to education and experience. The college-high school wage premium increased by over percent for workers aged to between and while increasing percent for all workers years old and over ( Chart ) In addition among workers without college degrees the average wages of older workers increased relative to those of younger workers Since the relative supply of educated workers has increased at the Chart Productivity Growth and Price Reductions Productivity growth in an industry leads to lower relative prices Average annual percent change in relative prices s Construction Other services F E ^ \ ^ I R H Mining Retail trade Transportation Wholesale trade Agriculture Manufacturing Average annual percent change in productivity Note : FIRE = finance insurance and real estate Source : Department of Commerce same time that wage disparities have grown the demand for educated workers must have increased faster than their supply. Some have suggested that increasing trade has undermined demand for less educated workers in the United States since they are plentiful elsewhere in the world. So far however several studies have been unable to discern any substantial impact of trade on wage inequality however. If increased trade were the cause of growing wage inequality the relative prices of goods that use highly educated labor would be rising relative to those of goods that use less highly educated labor. But studies have found no evidence of such a change in relative prices. Similarly if increased trade were responsible for increased wage inequality the growth of wage differentials would lead firms in all sectors to substitute less educated labor for more educated labor. Instead studies find that virtually all manufacturing industries have increased their relative use of educated labor despite growing wage differentials. Rising wage differentials with greater use of educated labor suggest that demand for skilled labor has been rising broadly in the economy. Thus it appears that most of the demand shift toward highly educated workers must have originated domestically Box Consequences of Productivity Growth Rising productivity has been shown to have a variety of beneficial effects : The prices of goods produced by industries that have had rapid productivity growth have fallen relative to those of goods from industries with slower productivity growth Chart shows average productivity growth and price changes by industry for the period Periods of rapid productivity growth have been accompanied by increases in real wages. The prices of products in industries experiencing productivity growth also decline relative to wages. This decline in product prices means that real wages tend to rise during periods of rapid productivity growth Periods of rapid productivity growth have also been periods of low inflation. Productivity growth allows nominal wages to increase without putting pressure on prices Periods of rapid productivity growth have not been associated with large increases in unemployment In periods when productivity growth was more rapid such as the 1960s unemployment rates have tended to be low. In contrast periods with slow rates of productivity growth such as the 1970s have been periods of relatively high unemployment Since the use of more-educated labor has increased in all industries a logical explanation of this trend is technical change. For example one study shows that people who work with personal computers earn a substantial wage premium over those who do not and that this can account for half of the increasing gap between the wages of college and high school graduates Although changes in labor demand induced by changes in the composition of trade do not appear to explain much of the increase in income inequality the internationalization of the U.S. economy may affect wages in other ways. For example the threat of increased import competition or of the relocation of a factory to another country may undermine worker bargaining power or cause a decline in the number of workers employed in unionized firms. At this time no reliable studies have properly quantified how important such effects have been. In addition there is no guarantee that the future will resemble the past. Trade could become a more important factor in bringing down the wages of less educated workers in the future. On the other hand technical change could move in Box Why Productivity Growth Does Not Cause Unemployment Productivity growth need not cause an increase in unemployment because as productivity rises more goods can be produced with the same number of workers. This means a cost saving which must result in either increased profits increased wages or lower prices. If profits or wages increase those benefiting from the increase will increase their spending. If prices fall consumers ' incomes will go further and they will buy more. In any case the increased spending will lead to the purchase of more goods and services which will create new jobs offsetting losses from the productivity increase. If the new jobs created are not equal in number to the jobs lost there will be a tendency for wages to change to equate supply and demand for labor. Nonetheless in the short run some workers are likely to have to change jobs. As the discussion of the costs of job loss makes clear this can be a traumatic experience for the established worker the direction of economizing on educated labor and making better use of less educated labor In addition to rapidly increasing demand for educated labor two institutional factors seem to have contributed to rising wage inequality : the decline of unions and the erosion of the minimum wage by inflation. In the early 1970s percent of the work force were union members. By that fraction had declined to percent and it has probably fallen further since. Several studies conclude that this decline can account for about percent of the increase in wage inequality In the minimum wage was percent of the average hourly wage of private production and nonsupervisory workers. By it had fallen to percent of the average. This erosion of the minimum wage has allowed a substantial fattening of the lower tail of the wage distribution and contributed to increasing wage inequality. The effect of the minimum wage on the distribution of income is less obvious since it is possible that the decline in the inflationadjusted minimum wage may have caused an increase in employment of low-wage workers Immigration has increased the relative supply of less educated labor and appears to have contributed to the increasing inequality of income but the effect has been small. A study of the effects of immigration between and found that it explains less than percent of the change in the college-high school wage differential. Although immigration flows were considerably larger in the late 1980s than the early 1980s this study makes it seem un- likely that immigration could explain more than a few percent of the total change in this differential JOB QUALITY The Administration is concerned about increasing the quality as well as the quantity of jobs in the American economy. Job quality encompasses a number of factors beyond wage levels including job security employer-provided benefits such as pensions and health insurance and hours of employment HOURS OF WORK Average weekly hours in manufacturing were consistently higher through December than during most previous recoveries since ( excluding the short recovery in ) and they reached a post-World War II high of hours per week in November This was slightly above the previous peak of hours per week reached in February ( Chart ) Factory overtime hours also reached a record in November at hours per week the highest level since the data series began in Chart Average Weekly Hours of Production and Nonsupervisory Workers Average weekly hours in manufacturing are at a postwar high while average hours for all industries show a long-term decline Hours Manufacturing Total Private Nonfarm I I ! I I I I I I L I I I Source : Department of Labor In contrast over the past half-century average weekly hours worked by production and nonsupervisory employees on nonfarm private payrolls have declined significantly from hours per week in to hours per week in The patterns of average weekly hours of all private sector workers and those in manufacturing have diverged over the last years In keeping with their long-term trend average weekly hours of all private nonfarm workers have been lower since the trough of the last recession than during comparable periods following the three previous recessions after Average hours typically rise during recoveries as employers respond to rising demand by using their existing work forces more intensively before they begin significant hiring of new employees. The increase in average hours since the recession trough has generally been in line with previous recoveries since although in recent months the increase in hours has been higher than in recent recoveries Popular accounts have suggested that Americans are working more. How can this be if hours worked on the average job are declining ? The answer is that women 's labor force participation is up so that average hours of paid work per person are up. How do workers feel about their hours of work ? Most studies find that on average people would like to work more hours if they were paid their hourly rate for the additional hours JOB STABILITY The slow pace of job creation and the relatively high unemployment rate in the current recovery along with continuing corporate downsizing and increased use of part-time and temporary workers have led to the perception that employment is becoming less stable than in the past. The fear is that a decline in permanent employment will lead to a largely " contingent " work force meaning that there will no longer be an understanding between worker and employer that a job will last for a long time. Is the current sense of less stable employment the result of the recent recession or are long-term forces at work ? There are several different approaches to measuring the stability of employment. To some extent growth of the contingent work force can be measured directly. We can also look at how likely individuals are to stay with an employer at the dynamics of firm size and at changes in the industrial composition of employment No official statistics are kept on the number of workers employed on a contingent basis. One study that examined employment practices at a number of large firms in found that slightly less than percent of the labor they used was explicitly hired on a temporary basis We do however know how many workers are employed in the personnel supply industry ( largely temporary workers ) This number has increased dramatically since the early 1970s and particularly rapidly in the current recovery. From the trough of the recession in March to December employment in the personnel supply industry grew by workers. This was percent of all employment growth over this period Taking a longer perspective employment in the temporary help industry has grown from less than one-third of percent of total employment in the early 1970s to nearly percent today ( Chart ) While growth has been explosive the fraction of the work force employed on a contingent basis is probably still less than percent Chart Help Supply Industry Employment as Share of Total Employment Temporary workers are a small but increasing share of total employment Percent I I I J I L .._ Note : Values before are estimated from the relationship between help supply industry employment and personnel supply industry employment after Source : Department of Labor Another potential indicator of declining job stability is the growing use of part-time workers. Like temporary workers part-time workers usually do not receive pension and health benefits and tend to have a weak attachment to their firms. Several authors have included them when enumerating the contingent work force Between August and December part-time employment increased by percent compared with only a 1.7-percent increase for full-time employment. But part-time employment always expands during recessions and the increased use of part-time workers during this recession is not significantly different from the pattern of past recessions given sluggish output growth. Over the last several decades however there has been a small secular increase in the fraction of the labor force working part-time but it has not been a steady increase. The fraction grew considerably from the late 1960s through the early 1980s reaching a peak in It then declined through the rest of the 1980s and increased moderately in the recession. The fraction of workers working part-time by choice has remained nearly constant since the early 1970s ( Chart ) Chart Part-Time Employment : Total and Voluntary Since the late 1960s the use of part-time workers has grown but the number working part-time by choice has not Percent of employment / \ Total * s ' Voluntary I ! o I I I I I I I I Source : Department of Labor What accounts for the secular shifts toward temporary and parttime employment ? One possibility is that the underlying demand for goods and services has become more volatile leading firms to desire less permanent work forces so that they can more easily respond to shifting needs. If this were so we should observe greater volatility in the industrial composition of employment or in firm size. Such evidence is lacking however. Data from the Census of Manufactures show no long-term increase in variability of firm size. No data are available on volatility of firm size in the rest of the economy A simple measure of the amount of reallocation of labor between industries is the sum of changes in the share of each industry 's employment in total employment for those industries that are increasing their employment share. ( This is equal to the absolute value of the sum of the decreases in the share of employment in each industry with a shrinking share. ) When total employment is constant this measure is simply interpreted as the fraction of the work force being reallocated between industries. According to this measure the rate of change in the industrial structure across all industries increased in and which is typical for a recession. The rate of change in industry composition typically declines during recoveries and the current recovery fits this pattern with churning declining in and ( Chart ) Chart Reallocation of Employment Between Industries The rate of reallocation of employment between industries follows business conditions but shows no upward trend Percent of nonfarm employment Note : The series measures one half the sum of the absolute value of changes in industry employment shares Source : Department of Labor Has the rate of change of the industrial composition of employment trended upward over time ? Chart shows that the answer is no. There is a big spike in after the first oil shock but no trend. Over the entire period the average rate of reallocation was percent per year. Recent experience appears consistent with the past. Since the average rate of reallocation has also been percent per year How are we to reconcile what we know to be major changes in the industrial composition of employment ( such as those due to defense cutbacks ) with the fact that there has been no apparent increase in the rate of industrial change ? Evidently the economy is typically experiencing significant changes in its structure. Just as horseshoes gave way to tires and mechanical adding machines gave way to electronic calculators industries today continue to grow and die If job instability is increasing it does not appear to be because of changes in the volatility of firm size or industry demand. If there are significant changes in job stability apparently they are happening at the individual level. If individuals ' attachments to their jobs are becoming more tenuous we should observe a drop in the length of time workers spend with each employer and an increase in the probability that a worker will leave his or her firm in any given year. But analysis of the Current Population Survey shows the fraction of workers holding jobs for years or more to have been percent in and percent in and A constant fraction of workers holding long-term jobs might hide changes in the experience of individuals. For example older workers are more likely than young workers to stay with the same employer. The aging of the work force might therefore have brought about an increase in average job tenure even if individuals at any particular age were experiencing greater job instability. Two studies that have attempted to examine this question provide mixed evidence. Both find that employment for nonwhites and college graduates has become less stable but both also find that employment stability for some groups has increased. No strong trend toward increasing overall instability can be found in either study. It is impossible to rule out increasing overall instability on the basis of these studies but if there has been an increase it is either too recent or too subtle to be reflected in the aggregate tenure statistics discussed in the previous paragraph Whether or not job security is decreasing two things are clear First there has aiways been a great deal of instability in the U.S labor market. Second there is no question that there is a perception that job security is decreasing. This may be due entirely to the normal increase in job losses during the recent recession to media accounts of mass layoffs at companies that used to offer unusually stable jobs or to increases in job instability that simply are not reflected in aggregate statistics. Alternatively a constant rate of job loss combined with greater income inequality has meant an increase in income ( as opposed to employment ) insecurity BENEFITS One of the concerns raised by the growing use of contingent workers is that fewer workers will be covered by employer-provided health insurance and retirement income programs. In fact there is some evidence that this has occurred at least for some recent periods. The timing of these changes however does not appear to correspond to the timing of increases in temporary or part-time work but the changes are troubling nonetheless After rising for several decades the fraction of workers covered by employer-provided health insurance has fallen since the mid1980s. However it is likely that this fall represents less than percent of all workers. Nonetheless since the fraction of the population covered by job-related health insurance has remained roughly constant ( around percent ) Evidently the decline in coverage per worker is being offset by the increase in the number of households with more than one person working Retirement income is another area where different surveys suggest different conclusions. Business tax records show no decline in the fraction of workers covered by retirement income programs ; however studies examining defined-benefit pension coverage find a decline in the late 1980s. The difference is at least in part due to the growth of tax-exempt retirement savings plans provided by employers. These tend to be less generous than defined-benefit retirement plans so that there has at least been a decline in the quality of retirement security plans if not in the quantity. Even here the story is mixed. At least one recent study finds that pension coverage has begun to increase again in the 1990s TOWARD A COMPREHENSIVE WORK FORCE POLICY The labor market has changed. Although there is little evidence of any recent abrupt changes in the fundamental behavior of the labor market three aspects of the longer term picture are worthy of concern : ( ) the slow growth of incomes and increasing income inequality ; ( ) increasing unemployment and nonemployment particularly for certain groups ; and ( ) the high rates of job loss and dislocation that are normal for our economy Real income has grown very slowly since the early 1970s and the real incomes of the least well-off have actually fallen. The Administration 's policies address these problems at four levels First the primary source of income growth is productivity growth. To increase productivity growth we must invest more in research and development of new technologies. To take advantage of technical progress we must invest more in new plant and equipment. Second U.S. employers have learned new ways to organize work that make better use of the vast pool of talent in our work force. These participatory techniques are particularly effective in organizations adapting to rapid technical change but have wider applicability as well. Third to deal with the problems of income growth and inequality we must invest more and invest more equitably in education and training for our work force. Finally in order to promote investment and to ensure that incomes grow with increasing productivity the Administration 's macroeconomic policies aim to encourage full employment built on a sound fiscal foundation The Administration 's main vehicle for encouraging investments of all sorts has been to reduce Federal borrowing so as to make room in credit markets for private borrowers. As noted in Chapter deficit reduction has resulted in much lower interest rates making it easier for firms and individuals to undertake productivity-enhancing investments. As the recovery continues we expect to see more individuals and firms taking advantage of these opportunities. Funding for research is also a high priority for this Administration In addition to promoting capital formation and technical change the Administration aims to increase the productivity of the work force by helping employers make better use of their workers through increased worker participation. Numerous studies have now demonstrated that cooperative techniques increase productivity substantially in a wide range of enterprises. By helping to disseminate information on what successful firms have been able to accomplish the Administration hopes to speed the adoption of these practices throughout the economy Improvements in education and training to boost the skills and enhance the flexibility of the U.S. work force are top priorities. To this end the Administration is increasing spending and reorganizing programs to increase effectiveness. From increasing funding for Head Start to proposals for developing " lifelong learning " the Administration hopes to address education and training needs everywhere in our society. The Administration 's Goals : Educate America Act and the Improving America 's Schools Act aim to ensure a quality education for all students first by guaranteeing all students a safe environment for learning and then by setting national standards for students and teachers. To ensure that all postsecondary students have access to the means to finance their higher education the Congress has passed legislation proposed by this Administration establishing a direct lending program where the rate at which the loan will be paid back will depend on the recipient 's income Recognizing the need to coordinate education and job training the Departments of Education and Labor have joined in an unprec- edented partnership to develop a number of new programs. Government programs have traditionally provided extensive support for those going to college. The School-to-Work initiative of the Departments of Education and Labor will help those who begin their careers with a high school diploma to obtain meaningful work-based training. This training will go hand in hand with a new system of skill standards and certification which will make the skills workers learn more portable and consequently more valuable. The Administration 's Workforce Security Act will provide training and job search assistance to dislocated workers who are having difficulty finding new work. The aim is to transform our unemployment system into a reemployment system. The Administration 's proposed welfare reform plan will provide funds for training to some of the most disadvantaged in our society : mothers and fathers with children in poverty Another part of the Administration 's answer to the problem of growing inequality is the substantial increase in the earned income tax credit that has been put in place. This tax credit primarily for low-wage workers with children along with the full range of other government transfer programs will lift many families with a fulltime worker out of poverty. It is described in detail in Chapter Increased productivity growth is the answer to stagnant real wages and improved training and education particularly for the least advantaged is a major part of the solution to growing inequality. But we can not expect firms to purchase new equipment unless there is demand for more products and we can not expect workers to train for jobs that do not exist. Therefore an integral goal of the Administration 's economic policies is the return to full employment Maintaining a high rate of economic growth is also essential for dealing with the second major labor market trend of the last two decades : increased unemployment. The analysis presented above suggests that most of the increase in average unemployment over the 1970s and 1980s was due to slack aggregate demand. There is also some indication of a permanent increase in the natural rate of unemployment in the 1970s. Whatever the cause of the increase in the natural rate the Administration 's Workforce Security Act should help reduce the natural rate by facilitating a more efficient matching of workers and employers An initial step toward the establishment of a reemployment system was taken last fall with the passage of legislation extending Federal emergency unemployment benefits. That legislation put in place for the first time a system of worker profiling to help identify workers who are likely to experience long-term unemployment and to provide them with a package of job search assistance services Several controlled experiments have now shown such services to be effective in reducing the duration of unemployment. Once fully in place the Workforce Security Act will provide both job search assistance and long-term training to those who lack the skills necessary to secure good employment. This will help reduce mismatch unemployment and the natural rate of unemployment Existing training programs for dislocated workers have been criticized as ineffective. The new programs proposed by the Administration address this problem by emphasizing long-term training and continuing postsecondary education. The large human capital literature shows substantial potential benefits from this approach to increasing worker skills Dislocated workers have always faced problems with income security and health care. With growing income inequality the normally high rates of dislocation in our economy mean greater income insecurity. The Administration is moving to make job transitions easier for displaced workers in a number of ways. The Workforce Security Act will help ease transitions and help those who need it with retraining for a new career. The Administration 's health care plan will provide universal coverage relieving one of the major worries of a dislocated worker what to do if a family member becomes ill after health coverage from the lost job has lapsed Overall the labor education health and welfare programs proposed by the Clinton Administration hold out the hope of lower unemployment rates reduced inequality and stronger income growth for American workers and their families CHAPTER Health Care Reform THE UNITED STATES SPENDS far more per capita on and devotes a much larger share of its income to health care than does any other country. In one out of every seven dollars that Americans spent percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) went to health services. In the most recent year for which comparable international data are available the United States spent percent of GDP on health care while no other industrialized country spent more than percent. Indeed the average for all the industrialized countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) was only about percent Yet despite this massive commitment of resources the United States insures a much smaller fraction of its population than do most other industrial countries and ranks comparatively poorly on such important overall indicators of health outcomes as life expectancy and infant mortality. Tens of millions of Americans remain uninsured and live in constant fear of bankruptcy should they become ill. Tens of millions more have inadequate insurance or risk becoming uninsured if they lose their jobs For the lucky Americans who have comprehensive benefits and little worry about becoming uninsured the current system buys care of high quality and provides genuine health security. For others less fortunate the system works less well or not at all. And even the lucky suffer from the shortcomings of the current system as the costs of covering services for the uninsured and some of the costs for those served by government programs are shifted onto hospitals and other providers and ultimately onto private sector insurance premiums Health care spending is not only high but growing rapidly. In almost every year of the last three decades health care costs have increased at more than twice the rate of total income. In the 1980s real per capita health care spending increased at an annual rate of percent in the United States compared with an average of only percent in Canada France Germany Japan and the United Kingdom. Current projections indicate that without reform the United States will devote nearly percent of its GDP to health care by the turn of the century At the level of the individual the family and the firm the inexorable growth in health care spending means ever-increasing insur- ance premiums and ever-higher medical bills. And at the level of Federal and State and local governments rising health care costs mean that health expenditures claim larger and larger budget shares with less left over for essential competing demands like public safety infrastructure maintenance and expansion and improvements in education and training. Despite a sustained reduction in real discretionary spending the Congressional Budget Office projects that escalating health care costs will be the dominant force pushing Federal budget deficits back up as the 20th century nears its end The facts speak for themselves : The United States faces a health care crisis that demands a solution both for the health of its citizens and for the health of its economy over the long run For analytical purposes this crisis can be divided into four separate but interrelated parts. First the current system fails to provide health security for millions of Americans both insured and uninsured. Insured Americans do not have health security when they face the prospect of losing their coverage if they lose or change their jobs. Some estimates suggest that such worries may reduce job mobility by as much as percent. The health security of the uninsured is still more precarious : Even when they do manage to obtain care the evidence indicates that they receive less treatment are sicker and suffer higher mortality rates than the insured. It is simply not true as some claim that all Americans get decent care when they need it Shortcomings in private insurance markets are a second and related problem. Under the current system people who are less healthy pay more sometimes much more for insurance than people who are healthy. Insurance for those with preexisting conditions is often either unavailable or available only at prices that put it out of reach for many Americans. And many insurance policies simply do not cover a variety of large financial risks exactly the kinds of risks that insurance is designed to address in the first place The third problem in our current health care system is the lack of effective competition which in turn weakens the incentives for both providers and consumers to make cost-conscious decisions. Inadequate competition is a major reason why the costs of the American health care system are so high. Studies suggest that a variety of common procedures are often performed in circumstances where they are inappropriate or of equivocal value on purely medical grounds. Fee-for-service providers clearly have an incentive to provide more care including care that is inappropriate because they are generally reimbursed for each additional test or procedure they perform. Consumers often do not have the information they need to evaluate whether a particular service is indicated and some do not have the choice among providers that might allow them to make cost-conscious decisions. In addition many consumers have weak incentives to choose among health care services on the basis of cost and among health care plans on the basis of price. Finally because many insurance policies do not cover preventive care consumers may underutilize cost-effective services at earlier stages of medical need The fourth problem with our current system is the burden it places on public sector budgets. Large and growing public health care expenditures force governments to make painful choices among cutting other spending programs increasing revenues or increasing budget deficits each of which can have adverse consequences for long-term economic growth None of these four problems can be solved in isolation. For example in the absence of systemwide reform arbitrary caps on Federal health care programs which some have proposed would simply shift still more of government program costs onto the private sector. According to one recent estimate uncompensated care and government programs that reimbursed hospitals below market prices shifted $ billion onto the private sector in Caps on government programs would simply aggravate this problem. Similarly any attempt to provide universal coverage without complementary measures to improve competition and sharpen the incentives for more cost-conscious decisions would mean even more dramatic increases in systemwide costs. And reforms designed only to address the most glaring shortcomings of private insurance markets would not solve either the problem of providing health security for all Americans or the problem of escalating public health care bills In short a piecemeal approach will not work. Health care reform requires a comprehensive solution. At the same time it requires a solution that preserves what is good about the current system and that maintains choice at all levels. This is indeed a daunting challenge but one that the Nation can ill afford to ignore UNIVERSAL COVERAGE AND HEALTH SECURITY Providing universal health coverage and security for all Americans is an essential objective of health care reform. Chart shows the sources of health insurance for the American population According to the Current Population Survey over percent of Americans nearly million people were uninsured throughout That is one of the highest shares in the industrialized world While some people remain uninsured for long periods of time many more experience brief episodes during which they lack coverage for instance when they lose a job. The Survey of Income and Program Participation ( SIPP ) found that over three times as many people are uninsured at some time during a given year as are uninsured throughout the year. The SIPP estimates that more than one in four Americans were uninsured at some point in a 28-month period from to Chart Distribution of Population by Source of Health Insurance Coverage : Most Americans receive health insurance through their employers. Fifteen percent of Americans are uninsured Employment Based % m& Uninsured % Other Private % CHAMPUSandVA Medicare % % Medicaid % Note : Detail does not sum to percent due to rounding Source : Employee Benefit Research Institute The fact that so many people are uninsured at least some of the time means that the prospect of being uninsured may influence the behavior of a large number of Americans. As long as people can lose their health coverage simply by changing employment health insecurity will remain a barrier to changing jobs or starting new businesses. An important rationale for universal coverage is therefore to increase mobility and employment opportunities for those who already have insurance but do not have health security Similarly many people remain on welfare because they will lose their medicaid coverage if they take a job. Some estimates indicate that up to one-quarter of recipients of aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) would take a job if private health insurance equivalent to that provided by medicaid were available to them. A second rationale for universal coverage is thus to reduce the number of people on welfare and to further the Administration 's goal of welfare reform A third rationale for universal coverage is to improve the health of the uninsured. The uninsured do use health care they do not simply do without. It is estimated that those without insurance for all of will consume about $ of medical care per capita percent of which will be paid for by governments and private payers not by the uninsured themselves ( Chart ) This expenditure is roughly half the over $ per capita consumed by those who are currently insured Chart Sources of Payment for Health Care by Insurance Status : Estimates About percent of care for the uninsured is financed by governments other private payers bad debt free care or workers ' compensation Uninsured All Year Any Private Insurance ( Per capita spending = $ ) ( Per capita spending = $ ) $ [ J Out-of-Pocket \ /A Insurance | | | Government $ j _ J Bad debt free care and workers ' compensation Source : Department of Health and Human Services While the uninsured do receive care it is often neither timely nor appropriate. The uninsured are more likely than the insured to receive care in the emergency room are less healthy when they are admitted to a hospital and receive less treatment than people with similar diagnoses once admitted. Some studies indicate and common sense suggests that the health of the uninsured suffers as a result Indeed without reform the problem of adverse health outcomes for the uninsured is likely to worsen over time. Historically governments and private payers have shouldered the burden of financing care for the uninsured. As health care costs continue to esca- late however these payers may become less willing to bear this burden Perhaps surprisingly providing universal health insurance to cover those currently uninsured will not require a large increase in total health expenditures. While the uninsured are poorer than the population as a whole they are also younger and healthier. Almost all of the elderly already have insurance through medicare Among the nonelderly population percent of those with employer-sponsored insurance are between the ages of and compared with only percent of the uninsured. Only percent of the privately insured are between the ages of and compared with percent of the uninsured. And while uninsured adults often perceive themselves to be in poorer general health than the population as a whole they are less likely than the insured to have chronic conditions ( Table ) Estimates that account for these demographic and health factors generally find that insuring the uninsured would increase national health spending by less than percent TABLE Health Perception and Health Status by Type of Insurance Coverage [ Percent ] Insurance coverage Characteristic Private employment related Uninsured Self-reported general health perception : Fair Poor Any chronic condition Note The sample is composed of adults aged to Source : Department of Health and Human Services A fourth rationale for universal coverage is to solve the " free rider " problem. At least some of the uninsured could afford to purchase insurance but choose to go without because they feel they do not need it and because they know that if they do become sick they will be cared for on an emergency basis at little cost to themselves For some relying on such " free " catastrophic insurance can be more attractive than purchasing insurance in the private market By requiring that all individuals pay something for coverage health reform can help eliminate this problem Finally as discussed below universal coverage is essential if everyone in the population is to share equally in the costs of insurance ( Box ) Box Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection All insurance markets face two potential problems. The first called moral hazard involves incentives. Insurance may encourage those who are covered to use insured services more than they otherwise would or it may discourage the insured from taking steps to lower their need for such services. Insurance against any kind of risk including health risks always involves some element of moral hazard. When people use health services more than they would without insurance the total amount insurers must pay increases and they in turn must increase their prices. Furthermore because individuals pay less than the full social cost of the services they receive too much of society 's resources will be devoted to such services The second problem is adverse selection. People who know that they are more at risk than others of falling ill are more likely to purchase health insurance. Therefore insurers who set their prices at the average cost for the population as a whole are likely to discover that their prices do not cover their costs because their customers are on average sicker than the population at large. To address this problem insurers have incentives both to charge prices that exceed the cost of covering the average person and to select risks as best they can. The higher prices of insurance that result from adverse selection have the perverse effect of discouraging some healthy people from purchasing insurance. Because of the adverse selection problem all people must be required to purchase insurance if each of them is to be charged the average cost of providing insurance INSURANCE MARKET REFORM Private insurance markets have a number of shortcomings that impede the realization of universal coverage INSURING MAJOR RISKS AND PREEXISTING CONDITIONS Economic theory suggests that at a minimum well-functioning insurance markets should insure against the expenses that accompany large medical risks because those are precisely the ones that cause the most financial hardship to individuals and families are the least susceptible to moral hazard and have the lowest administrative costs as a share of benefits. In our current system however private insurance markets often fail even when judged against this minimal standard About percent of conventional health insurance policies have limits generally ranging from $ to over $ million on the amount that the insurer will pay over the policyholder 's lifetime Many insurers also initially exclude coverage of " preexisting conditions " health problems that exist before the policy takes effect. A typical rule for example is to exclude for months a condition that was present in the months prior to joining a plan. Some estimates suggest that up to million Americans have preexisting conditions that could be excluded from any new coverage or would require payment of a higher premium Both the exclusion of coverage for preexisting conditions and the limitations on maximum lifetime payments are ways that insurers respond to the adverse selection problem discussed in Box Such practices also reflect the fact that insurers who know in advance about the likely health status of their potential policyholders can choose which risks they are willing to insure and which they are not and can choose to charge different prices to different individuals based on this assessment Such common insurance practices may be privately optimal for individual insurers but they are not socially efficient. People with preexisting conditions and people who have exhausted their lifetime insurance limits may still require care and someone must bear the costs. If they can not obtain private insurance and they have exhausted their own funds either they will get insurance through public sector programs such as medicaid or the costs of their care will be shifted onto the premiums of those who are able to obtain insurance. By compelling all insurers to cover preexisting conditions and by eliminating limitations on lifetime payments the government could reduce the adverse selection problem in private insurance markets and thereby improve how they function COMMUNITY RATING A second essential component of insurance reform is " community rating " charging everyone in a large group the same price regardless of individual differences in demographic or health status. Currently health insurance is often experience rated the price for members of a particular group is based in whole or in part on that group 's expected utilization of insured services. However there are strong reasons for requiring community rating The rationale for any kind of insurance is to spread costs throughout the insured population. Complete health insurance would spread the cost of care across everyone in the population regardless of their health status. Similarly complete insurance would guarantee that the price paid by each individual for coverage would be the average cost of such coverage for the population. In contrast experience rating means that the price one pays for insurance var- ies depending on one 's health status. But at least for those health problems and their associated costs that individuals can not influence by their behavior experience rating is at odds with the basic function of insurance to insure against risk In principle of course one can distinguish between those health risks that individuals can influence and those that they can not and apply experience rating to the former. In practice however this is often difficult to do because it would require detailed monitoring of personal behavior. In addition many major health risks with the obvious exception of those associated with smoking are linked quite imperfectly to individual behavior or the medical profession 's understanding of the linkage remains rudimentary. Based on these considerations community rating of health insurance and continued public programs to deter smoking are appropriate elements of health insurance reform However community rating is difficult to enact without complementary reforms. The adverse selection issue described in Box is one potential problem which universal coverage could address by requiring people to have coverage. A related problem stems from the fact that insurers who are compelled to charge a community rate will have incentives to seek out the healthiest consumers because they can be covered for the lowest cost and thus are likely to yield insurers the highest profits. This risk selection may involve high administrative costs for example in determining the medical history of each member of a group. Resources devoted to this activity increase the overall costs of health care without providing any additional health benefits Several steps could be taken to minimize the possibility of such selection. First a system of " risk adjustment payments " could be designed monetary transfers from plans that have a healthier mix of enrollees to plans with a sicker mix of enrollees. If risk adjustment perfectly compensated for true differences in health risk it would eliminate the incentives for selection on the part of insurers Second all insurers could be required to offer the same package of benefits thereby eliminating the opportunity to use the variations in the benefits package to attract better risks. Finally " guaranteed issue " and " guaranteed renewability " of insurance could be required that is people could not be denied the right to enroll initially or renew enrollment in a health plan because of demographic or health status REDUCING ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS In part because of the experience rating practices of insurance companies there is insufficient standardization across insurers Providers must deal with different insurers using different claim forms and covering different sets of services. Lack of standardiza- tion results in high administrative expenses. In over percent of all health care expenditures went for administrative expenses. This exceeds total spending on all public health service programs Standardizing benefits and billing procedures and increasing the automation of bill payment could produce substantial administrative savings. Grouping small firms and individuals into larger purchasing pools would have the same effect. As Chart shows the administrative load charged by commercial insurers for small groups ( to employees ) averages about percent of claims paid in contrast to only about 5V2 percent for large groups ( over employees ) Chart Administrative Expenses of Commercial Insurers as Percent of Claims Paid Administrative expenses are much higher in proportion to claims paid for small groups than for large groups Percent illlli mi I Group size Source. Hay/Huggins Company Inc CREATING A MORE EFFICIENT MARKET AND CONTAINING COSTS The third problem with the current health care system is that it appears to be far from efficient. As already noted the United States spends a larger share of its GDP on health care than any other industrialized nation. If Americans valued medical care more than people in other countries do this might not be cause for concern. But the facts suggest otherwise Although the fraction of national resources devoted to health care in the United States is partially explainable by our higher income Chart reveals that the United States is an outlier we spend considerably more per capita on health care yet achieve a somewhat lower life expectancy than our higher income would predict Nor can these differences be explained away by the age of the American population. In fact the percentage of the population over is lower in the United States than in most of the other OECD countries. Since older people tend to use more medical care than younger people the age distribution of the American population suggests that the United States should spend a smaller rather than a larger fraction of GDP on health care than do other industrialized countries Chart Health Expenditure and Life Expectancy in Industrial Countries The United States spends more on health care yet has lower life expectancy than would be expected given its level of income Deviation from predicted life expectancy ( years ) D Better outcome higher expenditure Better outcome lower expenditure Greece # # Japan Ireland # < * U.K Luxembourg t # A J Canada France Italy U.S Germany Worse outcome higher expenditure Worse outcome lower expenditure I Turkey Deviation from predicted health spending per capita ( dollars ) Note : Health spending and life expectancy are deviations from what would be expected given per capita income The sample consists of the member countries of the OECD Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the World Bank It has been suggested that sociodemographic factors such as the greater prevalence of violence in American life may explain why health care spending in the United States is comparatively high Existing research based on partial estimates suggests however that violent crime may add only about percent to national health expenditures. No comparative studies have assessed whether violence is a more important determinant of health care spending in the United States than elsewhere At least part of the higher health care costs in America stem from inefficiencies of various sorts. First there are the administrative inefficiencies in the insurance market discussed earlier. Inadequate competition among providers and inadequate incentives for cost-conscious behavior by both providers and consumers are a second major source of inefficiency in the current health care system Traditional fee-for-service plans which pay providers for each test and procedure they perform are used by percent of private sector employees who receive health insurance through their employers. Such plans have built-in incentives encouraging providers to perform more care than may be appropriate. These incentives are sometimes reinforced by self-referral arrangements whereby providers prescribe tests or other services from laboratories or clinics in which they have a direct financial interest. For example one study found that doctors who performed and charged for their own radiological tests prescribed them at least four times as often and charged higher fees than did doctors who referred their patients to unaffiliated radiologists Providers sometimes have an incentive to overprescribe tests and procedures because they fear malpractice suits. Available estimates suggest that such " defensive medicine " accounts for about percent of total health spending Even when there are many providers in a particular health care market competition among them is often weak. Only percent of people insured through an employer for example can choose among alternative health care plans and often the choice of a capitated plan such as a health maintenance organization ( HMO ) is not available. Many small firms do not offer multiple policies One study found that only percent of workers in firms with less than employees were offered any choice among health care plans. As a result many consumers have only limited choices among both plans and providers. Consumers also may not have a choice of hospitals since hospital selection is usually left to doctors who choose on the basis of where they practice and may not choose on the basis of price Moreover effective consumer choice depends on adequate consumer information. But many consumers rely primarily on their providers for advice about what services are indicated in a particular situation. Consumers often do not even know the prices of medical goods and services and they seldom have the information they would need to evaluate the quality of the services they receive This means that providers are often in a position to influence both the supply and the demand sides of their markets. In short con- sumers are ill equipped to bring strong competitive pressures to bear on providers to make cost-conscious decisions Nor do consumers themselves have strong incentives to exert such pressure. Even when they have a choice consumers usually face weak incentives to opt for a low-cost health care plan. Many employers pay a fixed percentage generally percent of whatever plan an employee chooses. Thus when an employee selects a less expensive plan cents of each dollar saved goes to the employer and only cents to the employee As the earlier discussion of moral hazard suggested the current system of insurance may also encourage some consumers to use more care or more-expensive care options than they would if they were forced to pay higher out-of-pocket costs for services. On the other hand if consumer copayments or deductibles were increased to reduce utilization some of the value of insurance would be lost Higher copayments might also discourage utilization of preventive services with potentially adverse effects on health outcomes. Furthermore even drastic increases in deductibles would provide only limited incentives. Table shows that even if all families had a $ deductible only percent of health dollars would be spent by individuals or families paying the full marginal cost of care TABLE Distribution of Population and Health Spending by Spending Category Estimates for Percent of spending Percent of population Annual health spending ( dollars ) Over Note. Health spending is in dollars. The estimates pertain to the noninstitutionalized population under the age of excluding people who receive aid to families with dependent children or supplemental security income. The distribution presented is for health insurance units Source : Department of Health and Human Services Available evidence indicates that the weakness of effective competition in the health care marketplace results in substantial fraud and abuse as well as inappropriate care or care of equivocal value Some estimates suggest that fraud and abuse may account for about percent of total health care spending. And as noted above and summarized in Chart as much as one-third of some common procedures may be performed in cases where they are inappropriate or of equivocal value on medical grounds Chart Estimates of Inappropriate Care for Five Common Procedures Studies have shown that as many as one-third of some procedures may be inappropriate or of equivocal value Coronary Bypass Surgery Coronary Angiogram Pacemaker Insertion H | Appropriate j | Equivocal \ _j Carotid Artery Surgery Inappropriate Upper G.I. Endoscopy Source : The RAND Corporation There are often large differences in the amounts of medical care that people receive in different regions of the country and even in different areas within the same region. These geographic differences may be evidence of resource misallocation. In for example medicare physician payments per capita were percent higher in Detroit than in New York City. Other research has found that the level of use of hospital beds in a community is determined primarily by the number of beds in that community. People in areas with more hospital beds are not any healthier than people who live in areas with fewer beds but they are more likely to die in a hospital EXPLAINING COST INCREASES Not only are the costs of the American health care system high but they are rising rapidly as well ( Box ) Several factors have been identified as possible sources of cost growth including the aging of the population ; the growth in incomes and the reductions in cost sharing by consumers ; slow productivity growth in most health care services ; and technological change By itself the aging of the population can explain about to percent of the growth in health care spending. Some estimates of individual behavior based on controlled experiments suggest that roughly another quarter can be explained by more-rapid income growth and the reduction in the cost-sharing component of heaUh insurance over the last years Health care costs may also have risen rapidly because so much medical care consists of personally provided services rather than goods. On average over long periods of time the prices of personal services rise faster than the prices of goods because productivity advances more rapidly in goods production than it does in services Unfortunately there is no reliable estimate of the magnitude of this factor. If there were no productivity growth at all in the health sector the relative price of health care would be expected to rise on average at the economy-wide productivity growth rate about I to IV-2 percent per year in recent years which is about one-quarter to one-third of the observed increase in relative prices. There is however almost certainly some productivity growth in health care so the so-called cost disease factor can not account for even this much extra health inflation Finally many health economists believe that technological change itself drives health care costs upward. Once again however no reliable measures of its quantitative importance are available In theory the introduction of a new technology may increase or decrease health care costs depending on whether it substitutes for or complements existing methods of treatment and if the former on whether it costs more or less than the technology currently available. In addition some technological change may consist of applying previously existing technologies to different diagnoses Technology 's influence on future trends in health care costs is difficult to predict. Medical science is on the brink of new technologies made possible by the revolution in genetic research and these may prove to be less costly substitutes for existing technologies. In addition as historians of technological progress have demonstrated technological change is not entirely exogenous its form depends on the incentive environment in which it occurs. A health care reform that encourages more cost-conscious decisions by providers and consumers may in fact encourage new technologies that are more cost effective. Finally an increase in competitive pressure in health care markets will exercise greater price discipline on both existing and new technologies and thereby moderate their effects on the growth of health care spending WHO PAYS FOR HEALTH CARE ? Table shows who paid for health care in and where the money was spent. The largest amount of health care spending ( Box Recent Reductions in Health Care Inflation The rate of inflation in the health sector slowed in largely as a result of slower growth in prices for health services including physicians and hospital care : Year ending December ( percentages ) Inflation rate of : Average Total CP1 Health care Excess of health care inflation over total Source : Department of Labor Historically health care inflation tends to move in parallel with inflation in the rest of the economy but at a higher average level. In the gap between health care inflation and overall inflation narrowed somewhat but the change does not appear to be statistically significant Some have argued that the recent slowdown in health inflation is a sign that reform of the health care system is not required. But despite the slowdown the relative price of health care continues to increase : The medical care component of the consumer price index grew at twice the rate of total consumer price inflation in Moreover this argument overlooks several other important motives for health reform : the lack of health security and universal coverage the failures of the insurance market and the burden of health care expenditures on government budgets. The cost problem will not be solved without reforms that increase competition in the health care marketplace percent ) is for hospital care. Payments to physicians and other health care professionals are the second-largest category at percent of total spending. The remainder of personal health care is for home and nursing home care ( percent ) and drugs and other personal care outside of hospitals and nursing homes ( percent ) The costs of insurance administration are estimated at percent of health spending. Finally public health activities and research and construction total percent of spending Health spending is financed in four principal ways. Businesses pay for health care directly through health insurance premiums ( $ billion in ) and workers ' compensation and disability insurance ( $ billion ) Total business spending ( $ billion ) was about percent of total health spending and percent of total TABLE Sources and Uses of Health Care Funds [ Billions of dollars ! Private spending Household Business Uses of funds Government Total Workers ' compensation Premiums ' Outofpocket Premiums Nonpatient revenue Medicare Employer Medicaid Other Total Hospital care Physician care Cther professionals dental visits Home health and nursing home care Drugs vision other personal care Administration Public health Research and construction Includes household and employer premiums Source : Health Care Financing Administration compensation. Households pay for health care through insurance premiums ( $ billion in ) and out-of-pocket expenses ( $ billion ) Total household spending of $ billion was percent of national health spending. The average household spent about $ on health care in The health care industry receives additional nonpatient revenues of $ billion ( percent of total spending ) from such activities as parking lot receipts Finally governments pay for percent of all health spending ( $ billion ) most of it for medicare and medicaid. There is additional spending on health insurance for government employees and on activities of the Department of Veterans Affairs the Department of Defense and the Public Health Service. About percent of Federal Government revenues and over percent of State and local government revenues are devoted to health care Governments also subsidize health care indirectly by excluding employer-provided health insurance from taxable income. In this tax expenditure cost the Federal Government an estimated $ billion in individual income taxes. The government lost Social Security revenues as well although Social Security payments in the future will also be somewhat lower Chart shows the evolution of these payment sources over time. Between and payments by health insurers medicare and medicaid increased from percent to percent of total health care spending. Other government spending fell from to percent and out-of-pocket spending declined from percent to percent of the total. The dramatic extension of insurance coverage in both the public and the private sectors may be both a response to and a cause of increased costs Chart Sources of Health Care Financing as Percent of Total Expenditures Health insurance and government-financed expenditures have been rising as a share of total spending while out-of-pocket expenditures have been falling Source : Health Care Financing Administration While Table shows who is responsible for paying for health care it does not show the economic incidence whose income is ultimately reduced because of high health care costs. In response to higher costs businesses have several options : They can reduce health benefits ; lower workers ' wages or other benefits so that total compensation does not rise ; reduce employment ; lower returns to shareholders ; reduce payments to other factors of production ; reduce investment in plant and equipment or research and development ; or raise prices to their customers Economic theory suggests that most of the increase in health care costs will be reflected in lower wages. The reason is simple Firms are indifferent between spending a dollar on wages or on health premiums. But since wages are taxed while health insurance premiums are not employees should be willing to " buy " increased health insurance by sacrificing wages until the marginal dollar of health insurance is worth one dollar of after-tax wages or about to cents for a typical family. At this point the worker should also be indifferent between contributing more to health insurance or to wages Empirical research suggests that the dominant long-run response of businesses to rising health care costs has indeed been to lower the rate of increase of workers ' wages. Between and percent of increases in health care spending appears to be reflected in lower wages. As noted in Chapter the share of wages in total compensation has been falling since while the share of business health insurance spending has increased markedly When firms slow wage increases to offset rising health insurance costs they limit the increase in their total labor costs and thus limit the job losses that might otherwise result. The slower wage growth due to rising business health expenditures has led to slower increases in incomes than would otherwise have occurred. If business spending on health care were the same share of compensation today as it was in wages per employee could be over $ higher If increases in business spending on health insurance are not entirely balanced by reductions in other forms of labor payments total compensation will rise. In this case some other business decisions are likely to be affected such as employment pricing or investment decisions. Empirical research however has not explored such alternative responses in any depth In summary the economic literature on the incidence of health care costs suggests that employees eventually pay for most of their employer-provided health coverage by taking home lower cash wages. Reforms that enhance the efficiency of the health care market will allow employees to have both more health care coverage and higher take-home pay at the same time. Greater efficiency will therefore translate into an improvement in living standards for society as a whole HEALTH CARE AND GOVERNMENT BUDGETS The final problem in the current health care system is the growing burden it places on government finances. Because governments pay for such a large share of health spending increases in health costs contribute directly to pressures on Federal State and local budgets. Public sector spending on health care grew over percentage points faster than private sector spending in the 1970s and at about the same rate as private sector spending in the 1980s. The result has been an increasing share of health spending by governments. In addition as was pointed out in Chapter health spending is growing four times as rapidly as any other component of the Federal budget. Over the two decades ending in Federal health spending increased from percent to percent of total Federal revenues ( Chart ) Similar changes have occurred in State and local government spending Chart Government Spending on Health Care as Percent of Total Government Revenues Federal and State and local spending on health care account for increasing shares of total government revenues Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health and Human Services The Federal Government has responded to increasing health care costs in part by attempting to limit the reimbursement rates paid by public programs to health care providers. This approach in turn has resulted in the substantial shifting of costs to the private sector described earlier. In the absence of systemwide reform the imposition of caps on Federal health care programs would either further aggravate the cost-shifting problem or gradually limit access to care Without health care reform escalating health care costs will continue to confront the Federal Government as well as State and local governments with painful choices among additional taxes cuts in spending on education and other programs that promote economic prosperity or increases in budget deficits. As already noted projected increases in Federal spending on medicare and medicaid are the main force behind a projected increase in the Federal deficit toward the end of this century THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HEALTH SECURITY ACT The Administration 's approach to health care reform while bold and comprehensive builds on the strengths of the current marketbased system. The Administration considered but rejected radical approaches such as a single-payer system or government-set health care prices in favor of restructuring the current system and relying on the forces of market competition. The Administration 's framework preserves and expands consumer choice among providers and preserves the current employer-based system of health insurance The Administration 's plan also allows large firms to continue operating self-insured plans. Such firms generally provide comprehensive benefits and many have managed to control health care spending. Indeed the Administration 's plan reflects many of the lessons learned from the experience of such firms ELEMENTS OF REFORM To address the Nation 's health care problems meaningful reforms must address the four interrelated issues identified in the preceding discussion : universal coverage and health security ; reform of the private insurance system ; efficiency improvements and cost control ; and sustained deficit reduction. The Health Security Act which the Administration proposed in contains reforms that simultaneously meet these objectives. The principal features of the Administration 's reforms are outlined in this section and discussed in greater detail in the remainder of this chapter Universal Coverage The Health Security Act guarantees all Americans a health insurance package with a comprehensive set of benefits. The medicare program will be left largely unchanged and medicare will remain the insurer for most Americans over the age of Most medicaid recipients under will be absorbed into the new system With very few exceptions all other Americans will receive their health insurance from the " health alliances " described below Universal coverage is essential for the reasons noted earlier Comprehensive benefits are equally important if health security for all Americans is to be achieved. Some reform proposals promise universal coverage but guarantee coverage only for catastrophic expenses. In practice people with high incomes may be able to afford additional coverage beyond catastrophic but many other Americans can not. Plans that guarantee only catastrophic coverage leave many people without genuine health security subject to the risk that their insurance coverage will deteriorate if they lose their jobs just when their incomes are falling Since the Administration 's comprehensive benefits package includes a prescription drug benefit for the under-65 population the Administration 's proposal also calls for a comparable drug benefit to be added to the medicare program. In addition the proposal includes funding for long-term care services primarily to expand the amount of home- and community-based care Reforming Insurance Markets Under the Health Security Act individuals and families will receive coverage through regional or corporate " health alliances " pools of individuals who purchase from a set of health plans. No insurer will be able to impose restrictions on preexisting conditions or lifetime limitations on insurance benefits or to deny people the right to initiate or renew enrollment because of demographic or health status. Insurers will have to charge a community rate to everyone in an alliance Because there will be only one regional alliance in each geographic area and coverage will be universal healthy people in each area will naturally be pooled with sicker people. Pooling health risks makes insurance affordable for everyone. It also provides the healthy with the knowledge that their insurance premiums will not rise if they or a family member become ill Eliminating exclusions for preexisting conditions and lifetime limitations on benefits guarantees that large financial risks will be covered. Providing for guaranteed issue and guaranteed renewability allows individuals to exercise their choices among health plans Efficiency Improvements and Cost Savings To encourage cost-conscious decisions the Health Security Act allows consumers a choice among several plans with identical benefits gives them information about the quality of competing plans and their customers ' satisfaction and allows them to receive more of the savings if they choose a less expensive health plan. In addition the act sets a limit on the growth of premiums in the alliances Promoting choice among health plans is essential to controlling costs. By encouraging plan choice the act attempts to create a more efficient health care delivery system and thus lower overall spending The act 's proposed limits on the allowable growth of premiums are intended to guarantee control over the growth of costs in case enhanced private incentives fail to have the anticipated effect These limits are an important safeguard because they reduce the risk to the government of runaway health spending Deficit Reduction Over time cost savings from the provisions just described and from reimbursement changes in public programs will provide budg- etary savings for the Federal Government. As noted above longrun success in keeping the Federal deficit under control is directly tied to success in reducing the growth rate of Federal health care spending. In the short term the Health Security Act entails some new Federal costs discounts for the poor and for small and lowaverage-wage businesses a new drug benefit for medicare and coverage of long-term care. The savings from slowing the rate of growth of health care spending start right away but they are small at first. Over time these savings grow larger and deficit reduction increases accordingly Maintaining Choice The Health Security Act allows families doctors firms and States to make significant choices about the nature of their involvement in the new health care system Households will get to choose their own doctors and many families that currently have no choice over their health plan will be given several options. Doctors will get to choose the plan or plans in which they work and may remain in the fee-for-service sector if they wish. Large firms may choose to form corporate alliances or to join regional alliances. And each State will be allowed to adjust its health care system to its particular circumstances including the establishment of a single-payer system if it so chooses PROVIDING COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS All health plans organized under the Health Security Act must offer the same set of comprehensive benefits. These benefits include hospital services ; services of health professionals ; clinical preventive services ; mental illness and substance abuse services ; family planning services ; hospice care ; home health care ; extended care services ; ambulance services ; outpatient laboratory radiology and diagnostic services ; outpatient prescription drugs and biological agents ; outpatient rehabilitative services ; durable medical equipment and prosthetic and orthotic devices ; vision care ; and pediatric dental care. The guaranteed benefit package to be in effect through the year provides the level of benefits currently offered by a typical medium-sized to large firm. In the year the benefit package expands to include services not fully covered previously principally adult dental benefits and broader coverage for mental illness and substance abuse Health plans will offer one of three forms of cost sharing. The first is a " higher cost-sharing " option similar to those in traditional fee-for-service plans. There is a general deductible of $ per year for a single individual and $ per year for a family with separate deductibles for mental illness and substance abuse treatment prescription drugs and dental services. After the deductible is met the insured individual pays percent of the cost of most services The second option is a " lower cost-sharing " option similar to those in HMOs. This option has only a $ copayment for most services a $ copayment for prescription drugs and higher copayments for services such as hospital emergency room services inpatient mental illnesses services outpatient psychotherapy and orthodontic care. Preventive services are covered without cost sharing under either schedule. The final option is " combination cost sharing " similar to that in preferred provider organizations ( PPOs ) This option follows the lower cost sharing for services provided inside a network and the higher cost sharing for services outside of the network. Under all cost-sharing schedules out-of-pocket payments will not exceed $ per year for a single individual or $ for a family. All of the cost-sharing limits are in dollars and are indexed in subsequent years to the rate of premium growth ORGANIZING THE INSURANCE MARKET The organizing mechanism for health insurance under the Health Security Act is the health alliance. The alliance is the " broker " between consumers and plans negotiating with health plans and offering choices to consumers and accepting premium payments from consumers and distributing them to plans The act creates two types of health alliances : regional alliances and corporate alliances. Regional health alliances are designed for workers in firms with fewer than employees nonworkers and most medicaid recipients. Each State will have one or more regional alliances but alliances may not overlap geographically Boundaries of the regional alliances may not be drawn to segregate people with high expected health care costs in one area. Firms with over employees will have the option to form a corporate alliance but they must provide the guaranteed package and will not receive any discounts on their premium contributions The alliance structure is designed to enhance competition and thus produce efficiency savings. Within an alliance consumers have a choice of health plans. Plans will be either fee-for-service PPOs or HMOs. HMOs must offer consumers the opportunity to purchase a point-of-service option allowing them to use care outside the HMO as in a fee-for-service plan if they choose. All plans will offer the same set of benefits so individuals will not fear changes in covered services if they switch plans There will be an annual open enrollment period during which consumers can switch from one health plan to another without loss of coverage. To increase consumers ' ability to evaluate competing plans the alliance will also publish price and quality data about the different plans. Consumers are required to pay the cost of the plan they select less the amount their employers are required to contribute. Employers are allowed to supplement their required contribution within limits. Outside of collective bargaining agreements employers must offer the same supplementation to every worker in a given rating pool ( rating pools are described in the next section ) The supplementation can not cause the total employer contribution to exceed the premium of the highest cost plan for that rating pool in the alliance. Employers who choose to contribute more must give full rebates to employees who choose a plan that costs less. Thus the consumer will realize the full savings ( subject to taxes ) from choosing a less expensive health plan Individuals may also use after-tax dollars to purchase health coverage for benefits beyond the guaranteed package or for supplemental policies to reduce out-of-pocket payments. The Health Security Act specifies a floor for coverage below which individuals should not fall rather than a ceiling on the generosity of health benefits an individual can receive On the provider side the health alliance solves many of the problems inherent in the current market. As a requirement for selling insurance in an alliance plans must agree to community rating guaranteed issue and guaranteed renewability and must cover individuals with preexisting conditions. The health alliance must accept all qualified health plans into the alliance with the exception that the alliance can exclude plans that charge over percent of the average premium Some economists have argued that the Federal Government should tax employer contributions for health insurance as if these benefits were paid as wages. Such a tax change would raise the price to consumers of more-expensive health plans thereby providing an incentive to limit health care spending. There are several ways to reform the tax treatment of health benefits. First employees could be prohibited from contributing pretax dollars to health insurance under certain employee benefit arrangements called " cafeteria plans. " This limitation is a part of the Health Security Act Second employer payments for covered services beyond the guaranteed benefit package whether in reduced cost sharing or in additional services could be considered taxable income. This limitation is scheduled to occur in the year under the Health Security Act. Finally all or part of the cost of a guaranteed benefit package above some level could be considered taxable income. This change is not part of the Health Security Act PAYING FOR INSURANCE The Health Security Act classifies people into four rating pools : singles couples with no children families with children and one adult and families with children and two adults. Table shows the estimated premiums in for policies for these four pools For a two-adult family with children for example the national av- erage premium in is estimated to be $ The actual premiums will vary by region of the country as health spending does currently TABLE Estimated Premiums in the Regional Alliance Payments by Rating pool Average premium Employer Family ( percent ) Per-family requirement ( percent ) Average number of workers per family Per-worker requirement $ $ $ $ Couples ( no children ) One-adult family Two-adult family Singles Note Premiums are national averages. Actual premiums will differ from alliance to alliance. Employer payments for one-adult and two-adult families are pooled Source : Administration estimates Employers are required to pay percent of the average premium for each family. Single individuals are considered to have one worker per family. An employer of a full-time single worker therefore pays percent of the $ premium cost or $ In the case of childless couples there are on average in the United States about workers per family. Since percent of the premium for childless couples is $ the amount per worker is only $ divided by the number of workers per family or $ Employers must pay this amount for each worker. Workers in families with children whether the family has one adult or two are pooled. The alliance computes total requirements ( $ per family ) and divides this by the number of workers per family ( about as a national average ) The employer payment for a full-time worker in a family with children is therefore $ Because these amounts are independent of the number of workers in a family employers do not have to coordinate payments with employers of other family members. This system is thus relatively simple to administer Employer payments for part-time workers are prorated based on the percentage of a 120-hour month ( about hours per week ) that the person works. If the employee works hours per month the employer would owe one-half of an employer premium. No employer payment is required if the individual works fewer than hours per month. Thus an employee who worked at two 60-hourper-month jobs would be credited with two half-payments or one full-time payment. An employee who did not work at any job for at least hours per month is treated as a nonworker Self-employed people will make their own employer payments as they do now. However if a self-employed worker also has wage and salary income payments from the employer will be credited against the amount owed on the worker 's self-employment income. Thus a worker who earns wages or a salary for half the year and is selfemployed for the other half would owe only half of an employer payment on his or her self-employment earnings with discounts available for those with low self-employment earnings. In addition self-employed people will be able to deduct all their payments for health insurance in computing taxable income compared with the 25-percent deductibility under current law The equivalent of at least one employer premium must be collected for each family. In cases where no family member receives employer coverage or the family members worked less than fulltime months in a year the balance of the premium is the responsibility of the family. If the family members worked full-time months for example the family would owe one-half of an employer share the employer having paid the other half Finally each family owes any difference between the employer contribution and the price of the plan they select ( but low-income families will be eligible for discounts on their share ) For the average family this difference will be percent of the total premium or $ in the case of a family with children. If the family chooses a more expensive plan it will pay the additional cost. If the family chooses a less expensive plan it will keep the savings PROVIDING DISCOUNTS The government provides discounts on the cost of insurance to small and low-wage businesses and low-income families. There are five types of discounts in the Health Security Act which are detailed in Table : discounts to families on their 20-percent share of the premium ; discounts to families that ( for reasons just explained ) owe some of the employer payment ; discounts to early retirees ; discounts to firms ; and discounts to low-income families facing high out-of-pocket payments. The cost of providing these discounts is made up by government payments Low-income families in the regional alliances receive a discount on their 20-percent share of the premium. No payment at all is required on the first $ of income. The discount phases out at percent of the poverty line about $ for a family of four in Income for these purposes is defined as adjusted gross income plus tax-exempt interest income. The $ disregard and the poverty line are indexed to the consumer price index Additional discounts are provided for families that owe part of an employer payment. No payment is required if nonwage income is below $ and full payment is expected if nonwage income is greater than percent of the poverty level or about $ for a family of four in Nonwage income is defined as adjusted http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/1 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE Discounts Under the Health Security Act in [ Billions of dollars ] Discount Employer Household Nonretiree Purpose Amount Limit firm payments to percent of payroll or less Limit payment for percent share of premiums and for time spent not working Nonworker discounts to re- Limit employer payments for time spent not working tirees Eliminate remaining employer payment Early retirees Lower cost sharing for poor families Out-of-pocket Allowance for behavioral effects and unfavorable economic circumstances Cushion Total Source : Administration estimates gross income less unemployment compensation and wage and salary and self-employed income ( up to $ per year ) and including tax-exempt interest. Labor income is excluded from this calculation because it is assumed that families have already " paid " for their employer 's contribution through lower wages and salaries Beginning in if a retired individual is between the ages of and has less than $ in income and meets the Social Security earnings test the government pays the entire employer share of the retiree 's premium. This discount supplants any payment for the employer share that the individual or his or her employer would have made. The largest benefit to corporations with early retirees however will come not from this special provision for retirees ( which will save firms about $ billion ) but from community rating of premiums which will save about $ billion. From through firms that are currently providing health insurance to their retirees must pay the government percent of the savings they realize from this provision Total household discounts are expected to be $ billion in the year This total includes $ billion in nonretiree discounts $ billion in low-income discounts given to retirees and almost $ billion in additional discounts to early retirees Some firms will also receive discounts on their required payments. Contributions from each firm in the regional alliances are capped at percent of payroll. If a firm 's required payments would be greater than percent of payroll the government pays the overage. Small low-wage firms are capped at even lower percentages of payroll as detailed in Table Employer discounts total $ billion in ( Table ) about three-quarters of which are for firms with fewer than employees Finally low-income individuals can receive discounts for their out-of-pocket payments if they live in areas where there are no TABLE Caps on Premiums by Firm Size [ Percent of total payroll ] Firm size ( number of workers ) Average wage ( dollars ) and over Over Less than Less than Source : Administration estimates health plans that offer lower cost sharing or that charge premiums at or below the average-cost plan. These discounts end at percent of the poverty level. The total cost of these discounts is estimated to be $ billion in the year Numerous behavioral effects could influence the discounts the government is obligated to pay. For example firms that have high average wages and therefore pay the full premiums for their workers may find it in their interest to contract out for low-wage services from firms that receive discounts. To allow for this and other behavioral reactions the projected discounts were increased by percent above the static estimate or $ billion in the year USING SAVINGS TO GUARANTEE HEALTH SECURITY AND REDUCE THE DEFICIT At the broadest level the Health Security Act is designed to finance new spending and deficit reduction out of savings from reduced expenditures relative to the no-reform baseline. Savings are expected to result from reduced administrative costs consumers switching to less expensive plans and lower costs from improved incentives Insurance reform will save money through lower underwriting costs. On net the cost of insurance administration should decline by about percent of claims paid. Since current premiums for the population that will be included in the health alliances are about $ billion the savings from the insurance reforms in the health alliances should be about $ billion annually There are also likely to be savings from consumers switching to lower cost plans. Several studies have found that managed care arrangements have lower health spending than open-ended plans The most comprehensive forms of managed care group and staff model HMOs save an estimated percent on health spending by for example finding alternatives to hospitalization A number of governments and corporations have experimented with paying a fixed amount for health insurance regardless of the plan the employee chooses and have found that these payment rules have a large effect on individual choices. The State of Minnesota for example implemented a fixed-dollar contribution for public sector employees in Between and the share of employees in the highest cost plan fell from to percent while the share in the lowest cost plan increased from to percent. The State of Wisconsin implemented a similar system for its public employees in In one year enrollment in HMOs increased by over percent. Similar responses have been observed in several private companies Finally there is the case of California which passed laws in the early 1980s increasing the ability of plans to contract selectively with providers. Since then growth in health care costs has been much lower in California than in other States. Between and real per capita costs for hospitals physicians and prescription drugs increased percent annually in California compared with percent annually in the rest of the United States. As a result California 's per capita costs fell from percent above the average State in to percent above the average in As a backup to the market incentives it provides the Health Security Act places a limit on the growth of premiums in regional and corporate alliances. Up to the year growth in total premiums is constrained to the growth of inflation and population plus an adjustment factor ranging from percent in to zero in and ( Table ) This reduction in growth rates is in anticipation of one-time savings in health expenditures. After the growth rate of spending is expected to increase but not to the level in the current system TABLE Allowed Growth Rates of Alliance Premiums [ Percent ] Growth rate Baseline Reformi Adjustment factor Projected average annual growth rates. Some alliances may experience higher annual growth rates prior to Adjustment factor added to inflation plus population growth to find reform growth limits Source : Baseline projections are from Congressional Budget Office updated for higher estimates of inflation by the Administration. Reform projections are Administration estimates Each year plans will submit bids on the premiums they propose for serving the alliance population. If an alliance 's expected weighted-average premium is above the premium limit and plans do not voluntarily reduce their bids the premiums of the plans that exceed the limit will be reduced so that the cap is met An example will illustrate the process. If the average premium in one year is $ and the target growth rate is percent the allowed increase in the average premium in the next year is $ Suppose there are two plans with equal enrollments one of which wants to increase the premium by $ and the other by $ Under the cap the second plan would be allowed to increase its premium by only $ so that the average increase would be $ Finally if more people than expected join high-cost plans so that actual premiums exceed the target the premium target is reduced in the next years to recoup the overage Chart shows the projected change in national health expenditures under the act. Spending initially increases because of the extension of coverage to the uninsured. By when universal coverage is complete spending is above baseline by percent of GDP. Over time however the savings from the market reforms or as a backstop from the caps on premium growth rise and spending falls relative to the baseline. In and spending is projected to grow at almost the rate of nominal GDP so that health care as a share of GDP rises by only percentage point By the end of the decade health expenditures with reform are projected to be below the level estimated to occur without reform Both the new Federal health spending and deficit reduction are financed out of savings in the existing system ( Table ) Spending rises with the implementation of universal coverage but the slower growth of costs generates savings to the government. Health reform is essentially deficit-neutral in the first years and deficitreducing thereafter. By new Federal spending is projected to be $ billion and savings are projected to be $ billion yielding deficit reduction of $ billion The new spending comes in five principal areas detailed for the year in Table First net premium and other discounts total $ billion. These discounts are the difference between $ billion in gross spending and $ billion in medicare and medicaid " offsets " as people leave these programs and receive coverage in the alliances instead. There is additional spending for the Department of Veterans Affairs public health ( including WIC [ women infants and children ] expansions and funding for academic medical centers ) administration ( $ billion ) the prescription drug benefit to the medicare program ( $ billion ) and long-term care. Finally allowing 100-percent tax deducibility of health insurance premiums for the self-employed will cost $ billion in forgone revenues These new costs are financed by seven sources of funds. First a tobacco tax will raise $ billion and a 1-percent payroll assessment on corporations that choose to form their own corporate alliances will raise $ billion. There are also savings in public sector Chart Health Expenditures as Percent of GDP Health expenditures will increase in the short term but will fall below baseline by the end of the decade Percent IO Without Reform \ ^ T ' * ' With Reform ,-' ' ^ ^ I I I i I I i Note : Baseline is from the Congressional Budget Office updated with Administration economic assumptions Source : Administration estimates TABLE New Federal Spending and Savings Due to Reform [ Billions of dollars ] Item Mew spending Savings Change in deficit Note. A negative number for change in deficit denotes a reduction in the deficit Source : Administration estimates programs. Medicare savings are projected at $ billion in the year These savings result from specific changes ranging from lower hospital payment updates to increased premiums for the high-income elderly. Medicaid savings are projected to be $ billion in due to lower payments for hospitals that treat the uninsured ( since everyone will be covered ) and slower growth of costs for medicaid beneficiaries in the health alliances resulting from the improved incentives. Other programs such as those of the Department of Veterans Affairs the Department of Defense and the Federal Employees Benefit Program are projected to realize sav- TABLE Sources and Uses of Federal Funds Under Reform [ Billions of dollars ] Source Tobacco tax Corporate assessment. Medicare Other Federal programs Other revenue effects Debt service Gross spending Offsets Net Veterans Administration Public Health New Administration Medicare drug benefit Long-term care percent tax deduction for self-employed Total Amount Discounts : Medicaid Use Amount Total spending Deficit reduction Source : Administration estimates ings of $ billion from slower cost growth the provisions related to early retirees and the increase in payments from private payers Additional revenue amounting to $ billion comes from a combination of factors including additional tax revenue from the reduction in employer health care costs over time removing health insurance premiums from " cafeteria plans " offered by employers payments from corporations with early retirees dedicated premium revenue for academic health centers and other tax changes. Finally the plan generates $ billion in lower debt service as a result of deficit reduction in years prior to To protect the Federal budget against open-ended commitments the Health Security Act sets a ceiling on discounts that can be paid ( Box ) Authorized discount payments that are not utilized in any one year can be carried forward into future years to increase the maximum payment. This reduces the probability that the limits will be exceeded ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF THE HEALTH SECURITY ACT The Health Security Act is certain to have impacts both on the overall American economy and on the health care sector in particular MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS One important concern about health care reform is its effect on employment. Because employer mandates to provide insurance may initially increase labor costs to firms that are not now providing or Box Capped Entitlements Both the premium discounts and the new long-term care program are " capped entitlements. " The long-term care program is an entitlement to States not to individuals. The amount of money that States may receive is specified explicitly. Federal liability is limited to that amount even if demand is greater than predicted. Similarly there is no authority to pay for premium discounts beyond what is provided in the Health Security Act. In the event that spending is projected to exceed the amount in the legislation the President must submit to the Congress a plan for addressing the issue. The Congress will then act on this plan through an expedited process The notion of a capped entitlement is not new. A number of Federal entitlement programs operate under a budget limit including the social services block grant and payments to States for AFDC work programs. The legislated appropriation sets a limit on how much can be spent in total. Then if spending is expected to be above projections the government must change the eligibility requirements change the benefits or pass a supplementary appropriation are underproviding insurance fears have arisen that labor demand might decline as a consequence of reform In fact however changes in employer-paid health insurance costs can have several effects on workers other than changes in employment. As noted earlier the dominant effect of increases in health care costs in the past has been a reduction in the real wages received by employees Chart shows projections of total employer health insurance payments with and without health reform. While reform will have different effects on different firms total employer spending is essentially unchanged through and then declines relative to the baseline. This pattern reflects the balance of spending increases from the employer mandate and spending reductions from cost savings. Through these effects are roughly equal resulting in little additional business spending. Between and the savings increase but there is no increase in spending. The result is a net savings in employer payments There are many things employers can do with the savings from reform : They can hire more workers pay higher returns to shareholders or increase employee compensation. Empirical evidence suggests however that as total employer payments fall over time the likely result will be a corresponding increase in workers ' wages By the year wage and salary compensation could therefore Chart Business Spending on Health Insurance Business spending will increase slightly after reform but will fall below baseline by the end of the decade Billions of dollars Without Reform With Reform ^ ^ > I I I I I l l Note : Business spending is for services and populations that will be in regional or corporate health alliances Source : Administration estimates increase by $ billion to $ billion or about percent of payroll Although reform is unlikely to lead to a large reduction in the demand for labor it could affect the supply. Some individuals who work mainly to obtain health insurance may voluntarily leave the labor force after health reform is passed. Evidence from continuation of coverage ( COBRA ) laws passed by the Federal Government and many State governments suggests that the number of people deciding to retire is about percent higher when they have the option to purchase coverage through their former employer after retirement. These estimates must be raised to account for the lower price of insurance under reform ; with this adjustment it is estimated that about to additional people will be retired as a result of the provisions in the Health Security Act On the other hand some welfare recipients are likely to decide to enter the labor force when health benefits become universal. A welfare recipient currently receiving medicaid benefits who then takes a job incurs a " tax " of two-thirds or more on earnings because of the resulting reduction in AFDC benefits food stamps and medicaid benefits. Once health care is guaranteed universally the loss of income associated with leaving welfare should fall by up to percentage points. A number of studies suggest that many more welfare recipients will decide to work in response to these lower implicit tax rates Weighing all this evidence several private sector economists have concluded as has this Council that the net effect of health reform on employment is likely to be small : at most plus or minus one-half of percent of total employment. The reason is that a number of offsetting factors are in the plan some of which will increase employment and some of which will reduce it. On net these factors are likely to cancel out SECTORAL EFFECTS Health reform will affect different firms differently ( Table ) Firms that are not now providing insurance will face increased costs after reform. Firms that are currently offering coverage however will on average enjoy cost reductions. These gains come from spreading the cost of universal coverage over everyone in the population from premium discounts and from slower growth of costs over time. Putting these two groups together the average firm will experience cost reductions of about $ per worker in There will also be changes in the distribution of spending across industries. Industries that have traditionally provided generous benefits to much of their work force such as manufacturing will see expenditure reductions compared with industries in which most firms do not currently provide insurance TABLE Employer Payments for Health Care : Baseline and Reform Insurance status of firm Number of workers ( millions ) Average spending per worker ( dollars ) Reform Baseline Change Currently offers insurance Does not offer insurance All Source : Urban Institute Employment is expected to increase in the health sector in the short run because of increased spending on the uninsured and underinsured. Universal coverage by itself will increase health-related employment by more than jobs although employment will not increase uniformly throughout the sector. Resources are likely to shift from administration to providing care. As the growth rate of health spending falls employment in health care will grow less rapidly than without reform. The number of employees will still increase over time however Health care reform should set the stage for increased productivity growth. As administrative expense and inappropriate care decrease and the health care industry becomes more productive the economy should be able to produce more output than it would have without reform. As a result Americans will be able to consume health services of the same or better quality as before as well as more of other goods and services. This productivity increase will raise living standards which is the principal objective of this Administration 's economic policies CONCLUSION Reforming the Nation 's health care system is integral to the health of both our citizens and our economy. One-seventh of the Nation 's economy is currently characterized by weak competition inadequate information and inappropriate incentives. The Administration 's health care reform proposal builds on the strengths of the current system while correcting its shortcomings. It preserves consumer choice and our employer-based private insurance system It relies on enhanced market competition and improved incentives to provide health security for all Americans slow rising health care costs and address our long-run budget deficit problem CHAPTER Microeconomic Initiatives to Promote Efficiency and Productivity AS WORKERS AND CONSUMERS we conduct our economic affairs through markets. These markets provide us with a vast array of products and services to purchase and a host of different ways to earn our livelihoods Yet markets are not flawless. They may for example become controlled by monopolies generate excessive pollution or lead to insufficient investment in research and development. Through collective action we can sometimes correct such " market failures " and thereby improve the ability of private markets to serve social goals. When targeted microeconomic policies are successful they reduce the costs of production and distribution place goods and services in the hands of those who value them most and maximize the increase in social well-being that derives from trade in the private marketplace. For these reasons well-chosen government initiatives are as important for microeconomic policy as they are for macroeconomic policy The United States has a long history of employing targeted microeconomic policies to improve the performance of private enterprise in significant industries. Roughly three-fourths of the Nation 's investment in canal construction before the Civil War was publicly financed. Land grants and other subsidies encouraged the development of intercontinental railroads during the second half of the 19th century. Since the Extension Service of the Department of Agriculture a cooperative venture of Federal State and local governments has vastly improved the Nation 's agricultural productivity by spreading information about modern farming techniques. Our massive national commitment to create high-technology industries critical to our defense such as computers and jet aircraft dates from the Second World War. Targeted microeconomic policies such as these have been employed throughout the history of the Republic regardless of the political party in power The Administration 's initiatives described in this chapter are aimed at both correcting failures of private markets and improving the functioning of the Federal Government. The initiatives are organized around three themes : promoting efficiency in the public and private sectors addressing environmental externalities and promoting technology PROMOTING EFFICIENCY IN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS In all modern industrialized nations some goods and services are provided directly by the government others almost entirely through unregulated private markets and still others by the private sector through regulated markets. Because none of these methods of conducting our economic affairs is flawless it is important to develop ways of improving the performance of each. For this reason the Administration has developed initiatives to promote a more effective government more competitive markets and more efficient regulation CREATING A MORE EFFECTIVE GOVERNMENT Governmental activities however well-intended are not always performed as efficiently as possible. There are two important sources of what might be termed " government failure. " First as recognized by both the framers of the Constitution and modern scholars of public choice all political systems provide interest groups with an incentive for " rent seeking " that is manipulation of collective action for private benefit. Rent-seeking behavior can bias public actions away from maximizing aggregate social welfare. It can for example lead government agencies to make decisions that benefit a particular interest group even though they are costly to society as a whole Second the government in providing services to citizens in hiring and managing personnel in procuring supplies and in making investments generally does not face the same competitive pressures as private industry to serve customers well and minimize costs. Competition among the political parties ; oversight by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) by the Congress and by heads of agencies ; and public scrutiny through the media provide a partial but incomplete substitute for market competition. Frequently internal governmental regulations such as personnel and procurement rules or reporting requirements are introduced to address these problems. But these are blunt instruments that may create significant managerial inefficiencies of their own The Administration has placed a high priority on governmental reform or " reinventing government. " A major objective is to improve the performance of government by introducing market-like mechanisms and benefit-cost tests wherever possible. Such mechanisms are designed to reduce rent seeking and the governmental inefficiencies resulting from the lack of competitive pressures The National Performance Review The National Performance Review ( NPR ) directed by the Vice President took a fresh look at the way the Federal Government performs its tasks with less emphasis on the related issue routinely considered in the budgetary process of whether those functions should be performed at all The NPR identified ways that the Federal Government could save money without reducing the level of service and indeed often while improving governmental performance. Its report concluded that by shifting to a market-like focus on customer service by introducing competition where possible and by streamlining internal government processes to facilitate better management we could have a government that " works better and costs less. " The Administration has moved rapidly to introduce the NPR reforms. One important element is a set of recommendations to improve the procurement process. These include changing laws and regulations to make it easier for the government to buy commercially produced goods and services to raise the threshold for the use of simplified acquisition procedures and to amend contract protest rules to streamline contracting and discourage frivolous protests. These reforms can be accomplished while preserving oversight by the Congress and OMB which is necessary to protect against fraud and abuse. Other NPR recommendations identify ways to streamline management control ; improve customer services ; shift to mission-driven results-oriented budgeting ; improve financial and human resource management ; integrate information technology into the business of government ; and improve the functioning of every executive branch department ( Box ) In a similar effort the Defense Department has conducted a " bottom-up " review of its activities A New Framework for Regulatory Review The President 's Executive Order on Regulatory Planning and Review provides a framework for developing regulations that serve the best interests of the American people without imposing unreasonable burdens on business. The order directs agencies to promulgate only those regulations made necessary by law or compelling public need such as correcting market failures. The regulatory philosophy that underlies the order calls on agencies to assess all the costs and benefits of the available alternatives when deciding whether and how to regulate including the alternative of not regulating. Further the order requires that to the extent permitted by statute agencies select a regulatory approach that maximizes the net benefits to the public ( benefits less costs ) Applying this test to public regulation will lead affected firms in the private Box Selected National Performance Review Recommendations Allow agencies to create innovation capital funds from retained savings to invest in innovations that can improve service and provide a return on investment Provide line managers with greater budget flexibility to achieve results by expediting the reprogramming of funds within agencies Use electronic funds transfer to pay and reimburse expenses for all Federal employees to make payments to other agencies and to pay for purchases from the private sector Create competitive enterprises within the government to manage real property on a fee basis and give Federal managers the authority to choose their source of property management services Establish a corporation to provide air traffic control services sector to roughly mimic what a properly functioning market would do absent the market failure that necessitates regulation In conducting benefit-cost analyses of regulatory alternatives the order directs agencies to consider all the benefits and costs those that are easily measured as well as those that are not. This approach addresses one major criticism of centralized regulatory review in previous Administrations : that the use of a benefit-cost test was subject to bias against appropriate regulations whenever the costs of regulation were more readily quantified than the benefits which happens frequently In addition the order encourages agencies to act to limit any economic distortions their regulations cause. Agencies must for example design regulations to achieve their objectives in the most cost-effective manner. To the extent feasible agencies must specify performance standards rather than specify a behavior or manner of compliance. Agencies must also consider alternatives to direct regulation that provide economic incentives to encourage the desired behavior This framework does not apply solely to new regulatory initiatives. The Executive order also sets forth a procedure for review of existing regulations to ensure that they too maximize the net benefits to society. This wide-ranging review of old and new regulations alike promises to improve the performance of the public sector by making regulation more effective PROMOTING COMPETITION Competition among the providers of goods and services is the most effective method ever devised for organizing most economic activity. Competition simultaneously leads to low production costs innovation in product design and production techniques low prices for consumers and the allocation of goods and services to those who value them most. For these reasons our economy must rely upon competition to the maximum extent possible and the government should act to promote and strengthen competition throughout the private sector. When market failures necessitate public regulation or public provision of services the resulting public policies should rely on market-like mechanisms to the extent feasible in order to realize the benefits of competition Antitrust Enforcement For more than a century the antitrust laws have been in the words of the Supreme Court " a comprehensive charter of economic liberty aimed at preserving free and unfettered competition as the rule of trade. " The antitrust laws address market failures arising from the exercise of market power ( Box ) These laws are enforced directly by the Department of Justice the Federal Trade Commission the States and private plaintiffs Over the past dozen years Federal antitrust enforcement has emphasized challenges to mergers among competitors in concentrated industries and the prosecution of bid-rigging schemes by government contractors. Frequently the defendants were small firms. Federal antitrust enforcement efforts are now being refocused to encompass harmful conduct by large firms affecting broad sectors of the economy through means in addition to merger or bid rigging For example the Justice Department is vigorously pursuing a court case charging the major domestic airlines with widespread price fixing from to The conspiracies were allegedly accomplished in a novel way : through the computerized exchange of prospective fare information. In terms of the magnitude of the violation and the size of the firms involved this alleged price-fixing scheme recalls the electrical equipment conspiracy of the 1950s The government 's actions to promote and protect competition go beyond filing lawsuits. When appropriate government agencies issue guidelines that will encourage procompetitive behavior and minimize the private costs of understanding and complying with the law. Merger guidelines are the best examples but the two Federal antitrust agencies have also recently promulgated enforcement guidelines to promote competitive behavior among health care providers Box * Market Power Firms are said to exercise market power when they reduce output below what a competitive industry would sell in order to raise prices above competitive levels. Firms may achieve market power collectively for example through an agreement among competitors to raise prices or unilaterally as by engaging in practices that inhibit the ability of current or potential rivals to compete. Firms may also obtain market power through government action as when imports are blocked by tariffs or quotas The exercise of market power is harmful for several reasons First an industry in which market power is exercised produces less and employs fewer workers than would a competitive industry. Second sellers who exercise market power in effect tax buyers unfairly forcing them to pay more for their products than they would have paid under competition. Finally firms exercising market power may tend to innovate less than competitors because they recognize that a successful new product could cannibalize their existing market share and decrease the value of their capital. ( In some industries however large firms exercising market power may be more likely than small or competitive firms to take the risk of investing in large-scale innovations. ) Although market power is costly to society these problems are of limited concern in markets in which new competition can quickly and easily appear. Then the exercise of market power is likely to be nonexistent or temporary and new entrants attracted by the opportunity to share monopoly profits will tend to shift resources into their most socially valuable uses. In some circumstances moreover society accepts some exercise of market power in order to achieve another economic benefit otherwise unavailable. For example since the founding of the United States the award of a patent monopoly as a prize for a successful invention has been the cornerstone of government policy to encourage research and promote innovation The antitrust guidelines for health care respond to the concern that health providers may have delayed cooperative cost-cutting arrangements because of uncertainty about antitrust restrictions. To give providers some security the guidelines establish a number of " antitrust safety zones " which describe circumstances under which the government will not normally challenge cooperative ventures One example is a safety zone for hospital mergers if either of the merging hospitals averages fewer than beds and less than patients per day over a 3-year period. Another is a safety zone for physician networks ( such as preferred provider organizations or PPOs ) that comprise no more than percent of the doctors in each specialty in the relevant geographic market so long as the network members share substantial financial risk. Mergers or joint ventures by physicians that fall outside the safety zones are not necessarily antitrust violations but will be evaluated individually to determine their legality. The two Federal antitrust agencies have also committed to reduce uncertainty by providing advice to health care providers on an expedited basis Other government agencies have also taken steps to limit the exercise of market power. For example a widely reported investigation by the Department of Transportation helped ensure that an established air carrier would not use anticompetitive practices to exclude a new entrant Government can go beyond simply preventing anticompetitive practices ; it can act to stimulate competition directly. Thus the Department of Transportation has provided new airlines with assistance in complying with its regulations. Partly as a result of the department 's actions to promote competition new cargo charter and scheduled passenger carriers began service during and more new carriers are awaiting certification to begin passenger jet service Spectrum Auctions As the Transportation Department 's efforts to foster new air carriers suggest competition can be promoted by encouraging entry The Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) will soon seek to promote competition in this way by allocating portions of the electromagnetic spectrum for telecommunications services. Legislation enacted in August authorizes the FCC to auction most of the new licenses to use spectrum and requires the FCC to begin issuing licenses for personal communications services ( PCS ) by May The allocation of spectrum to PCS will encourage competition between new firms offering PCS and existing cellular providers The auction mechanism will ensure that the spectrum goes to those private parties who place the highest value on it. The auction will also raise billions of dollars for the government by selling the right to the use of a scarce public resource instead of giving it away MORE EFFICIENT REGULATION OF NATURAL MONOPOLIES Economists have long recognized that competition will perform poorly in certain industries that are " natural monopolies " ( Box ) In Europe natural monopolies have often been turned into government enterprises. The traditional U.S. response is to impose rate regulation. For example State public utility commissions typically regulate the local distribution of electricity water natural gas and telephone service and Federal agencies regulate interstate pipelines and long-distance telephone service Box Natural Monopoly An industry is a natural monopoly if a single firm can serve the market at lower total cost than two or more firms. A natural monopoly may result when an industry 's production technology is characterized by economies of scale that is when average production costs decline as output rises. A natural monopoly may also have economies of scope in which two or more related products can be produced more cheaply by a single firm than by separate firms. The size of the market interacts with the production technology in determining whether an industry is a natural monopoly. For example if most of the cost reductions from producing at scale are achieved at low levels of output relative to market demand the market is not likely to be a natural monopoly In an unregulated market some natural monopoly industries would be served by a single firm that exercises market power Entry would be deterred even though the incumbent firm charges a price in excess of its long-run average cost. Potential entrants tempted by the opportunity to undercut the incumbent 's price would refrain from doing so because they would recognize that the incumbent would lower its price in response and could sustain that lower price profitably while the entrant could not. One way to avoid the exercise of market power in such a case is to regulate the natural monopolist 's prices Oil Pipeline Rate Regulation For nearly years the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ( FERC ) and its predecessors have regulated rates charged by interstate oil pipelines. Over this period many if not most pipelines have likely been natural monopolies. Pipeline rates were set through a cost-of-service methodology similar to the approach that State public utility commissions typically employ to determine rates for electricity gas water and telephone service Under the cost-of-service approach the regulated firm is allowed to earn enough revenues to cover its expected costs of operations plus a fair return on capital to its investors. The regulator sets prices on the regulated firm 's individual services in such a way that the firm 's expected revenues ( based on forecasts of buyer demand ) will reach the permitted level. Although this method is generally successful at preventing regulated firms from charging mo- nopoly prices it has been criticized on several grounds. Cost-ofservice rate setting can be expensive to administer as the regulatory commission typically engages in a trial-type hearing before determining rates. In addition if the regulator adjusts rates rapidly when operating costs change the regulated firm may lack a strong incentive to keep costs low reduce costs further or innovate Incentive methodologies for setting rates promise to reduce inefficiencies created by the cost-of-service methodology. One form of incentive regulation is a " price cap. " The regulator sets a maximum price ( or a price path often set to decline over time ) for a collection of regulated services and permits the firm to set whatever rates it chooses for individual services so long as the price cap is not exceeded. If the regulator and the firm are willing to live by a price cap for a long time the administrative costs of regulation are greatly reduced. In addition the regulated firm is given a strong incentive to reduce costs and to innovate : As long as the price cap is not revised downward the firm gets to keep any additional profits that result from cost savings. Finally if the price cap applies to the average rate for a broad collection of services this form of incentive regulation permits the regulated firm to exercise significant discretion in rate design. The resulting rates may distort consumer choice less than those set by regulators. For such reasons in the FCC adopted price cap regulation for the longdistance telephone rates charged by American Telephone and Telegraph Co. ( AT&T ) In FERC replaced cost-of-service rate setting for oil pipelines with an incentive methodology. The new approach generally starts with cost-of-service-based rates and caps rate increases for pipeline services at percent below the increase in the producer price index for finished goods. Moreover wherever the scope of the natural monopoly has narrowed permitting the pipeline to demonstrate that it lacks significant market power the regulatory constraint may be removed in favor of relying on competition to determine prices and output Telecommunications Regulation The rapid pace of innovation in telecommunications is creating new industries transforming old ones and promising to change the way we live and work. In the coming years American households and businesses will have access to a National Information Infrastructure ( Nil ) an interconnected web of networks linking computers databases consumer electronics and communications devices that will put vast amounts of information at every user 's fingertips. The technologies to create manage manipulate and use information will fuel economic growth promote the international competitiveness of U.S. industry and create challenging high-paying jobs Many of the innovations that are creating the new information infrastructure are also shrinking the scope of natural monopoly in the provision of telecommunications services. Microwave technology made competition in long-distance telephone service possible. The development of low-cost private branch exchange ( PBX ) technology has carved out a competitive market for carrying telephone calls within office buildings. For many business customers the local telephone monopoly now ends at the street rather than continuing into the building. Competitive access providers now sell alternative high-capacity services that allow some business customers to complete calls while bypassing some or all of the local telephone company 's network. It is now feasible and increasingly practical for telephone lines to carry video programming for cable lines to carry telephone calls and for wireless providers to carry both. If and when these developments end the natural monopoly in local telephone and video service altogether competition can replace regulation as the best economic mechanism for setting prices and providing telecommunications services to buyers The information highways that will be central to the emerging information infrastructure will be built in part with fiber optic lines coaxial cable and copper wire and in part through wireless technologies such as cellular telephone PCS and direct broadcast satellites. The private sector will make the necessary investments and the government will promote those investments by encouraging competition. In consequence the market will determine to the extent possible which technologies provide the most value relative to cost and accordingly how the information highways will be built The Administration 's regulatory policies will promote competition among the firms that build and operate the information highways and among the firms that sell their services and programming through the network. Under the Administration 's legislative proposals for example local telephone monopolies will be required to unbundle the services they offer and to interconnect with new entrants on a nondiscriminatory basis. This will facilitate new competition in local telephone service by allowing new providers to combine for example switching provided by the telephone company with their own transmission facilities. The legislative proposals will also set forth a process by which local telephone companies will be permitted to provide new competition in the interstate longdistance telephone market. The Administration 's proposals will identify safeguards that will protect against regulatory evasion through transfer pricing ( strategic pricing of goods and services sold to affiliates ) and the abuse of monopoly power until the time that competition in local telephone service makes rate regulation unnecessary Rapid developments in technology and the marketplace will create new challenges for telecommunications regulation. Old regulatory structures based on the natural monopoly paradigm are not appropriate for a market now characterized by mixed elements of competition and monopoly. Accordingly the Administration will propose adding a new title to the Communications Act of specifying a flexible regulatory framework for this new environment. The new framework can adapt to technological and marketplace developments to protect consumers from monopolies without discouraging investment innovation or the growth of competition In addition the Administration 's legislative initiative will give the FCC broad power to forbear from regulating when markets become effectively competitive and the power to preempt State and local regulation made unnecessary by the emergence of competition The Administration 's policies will also promote universal service to avoid creating a permanent class of information " have-nots " and open access to the network to allow all service and information providers to reach potential customers. The government will also encourage research and development designed to create new technologies and new applications as discussed below along with other technology initiatives ADDRESSING ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES The notion of tradeoffs is among the most fundamental in economics : nothing is free ; everything has an opportunity cost. In private markets tradeoffs are handled automatically as consumers choose among alternative goods and services and producers choose among alternative inputs. Prices guide these decisions. Tradeoffs involving the environment can not be made so easily however because use of the environment is generally unpriced. As a result firms and individuals in their marketplace decisions do not always make the best tradeoffs from the standpoint of society as a whole. The effects of failing to price environmental goods and services are examples of externalities ( Box ) When externalities are significant the government can often design policies that improve the functioning of markets and thereby increase aggregate social welfare The Administration has sought to encourage the development of environmental technologies to mitigate tradeoffs and foster economic growth. Improvements in the technologies for preventing and treating pollution and efforts to spread knowledge about technologies already available can free resources for other socially ben- Box Externalities An externality or spillover is a type of market failure that arises when the private costs or benefits of production differ from the social costs or benefits. For example if a factory pollutes and neither the firm nor its customers pay for the harm that pollution causes the pollution is an externality. In the presence of this negative ( harmful ) externality market forces will generate too much of the activity causing the externality here the factory 's production and too much of the externality itself here the pollution. In the case of beneficial externalities firms will generate too little of the activity causing the externality and too little of the externality itself because they are not compensated for the benefits they offer. For example the development of laser technology has had beneficial effects far beyond whatever gains its developers captured improving products in industries as diverse as medicine and telecommunications. Too little research and development and other activities generating positive externalities will take place in the absence of some governmental intervention To remedy market failures and induce the market to provide the efficient level of the externality-causing activity the private parties involved in the activity must face the full social costs and benefits of their actions. Policymakers may employ a variety of tools to accomplish this result such as taxes user fees subsidies or the establishment or clarification of property rights eficial purposes or permit the attainment of higher environmental goals without increasing the burden on the economy. Given the worldwide explosion in environmental regulatory activity in the Far East in eastern Europe in Mexico and elsewhere the development of more-effective and lower cost pollution control technology can also increase our export competitiveness. In fact we already enjoy considerable success in this area. The United States is now the world leader in exports of environmental equipment. In a global market for environmental technologies of $ billion in the $ billion U.S. share is the largest by far. Our trade surplus in pollution control equipment has been increasing and was $ billion in The Administration has also sought to improve the " technology " of regulating the use of natural and environmental resources. This effort involves seeking a better balance among conflicting interests in the use of natural resources and developing approaches to regulate pollution that rely more on economic incentives and eliminate the economic distortions of some current regulations. Examples of improving the technology for regulating the environment are found in the Administration 's plan for managing the old growth forests of the Pacific Northwest in its approach to grazing on Federal lands in the Climate Change Action Plan and in the Administration 's position favoring the reauthorization of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act better known as " Superfund. " To better assess where interventions to improve the environment will benefit the economy the Administration is also engaged in efforts to define sustainable development and develop " green " GDP accounts MANAGING RESOURCES ON FEDERAL LANDS The Federal Government owns vast tracts of land primarily in the West. These lands contain natural resources of economic importance to both local communities and the Nation including timber and other forest products forage for grazing livestock and mineral deposits. They are also sources of extremely valuable environmental amenities such as open space for recreational uses like wildlife viewing scenery camping hiking and hunting ; fish and wildlife ( including endangered species ) habitat ; watershed protection ; and many others Improving the " technology " of regulating the use of these Federal lands is a centerpiece of Administration policy. Two principles guide that policy : ( ) reducing inefficiencies caused by improper pricing and regulatory restrictions and ( ) ensuring that both pricing and regulation will achieve a better balance among competing uses of these resources particularly between extractive ( timber grazing mining ) and environmental uses. These principles can be seen at work in the Administration 's plans for managing old growth forests in the Pacific Northwest and for rangeland reform Old Growth Forests Spotted Owls and Timber The controversy over logging in the old growth forests and spotted owl habitat of the Northwest provides a case study in reconciling environmental and economic objectives and illustrates how a careful balancing of competing interests can result in progress on all fronts The forest products industry is a major industry in the Pacific Northwest where it is heavily dependent on timber from Federal lands. Much of the Federal land on which this logging has taken place consists of mature forest stands. Referred to as " old growth " this mature forest is the habitat of the northern spotted owl a threatened species and many other plants and animals For several years Federal forest policy in the Northwest failed to take appropriate account of impacts on environmental quality and biodiversity. In particular timber harvests on Federal lands were accelerated substantially in the mid- and late 1980s : Such harvests in the habitat of the spotted owl rose from billion board feet ( bbf ) in to bbf in According to experts these levels were too high to be sustained indefinitely. Legal challenges to Federal timber policy resulted in injunctions blocking the sale of timber on Federal forest lands in the spotted owl region in part because agencies within the Federal Government had failed to work cooperatively to comply with environmental and forest management laws. The injunctions had a severe impact on the timber industry albeit in large part because harvest levels had been extraordinarily and unsustainably large The Administration put a high priority on resolving the problems associated with forest management policy in the Pacific Northwest Accordingly in July the Administration announced a " Forest Plan for a Sustainable Economy and a Sustainable Environment. " The plan attempts to end the uncertainty caused by legal wrangling and confusion and ameliorate the impact of economic dislocation while achieving full compliance with existing laws. It also seeks to maintain and improve the ecosystem as a whole balance the interests of competing uses of the ecosystem for environmental and economic purposes and create a political consensus to avoid economic instability The plan provides for the maximum legally defensible harvest from Federal forests in the spotted owl region ( about bbf annually ) The process of adjustment to the new lower harvest levels will be smoothed by an economic adjustment plan that is expected to create more than new jobs and retraining opportunities in the region in Many of the new jobs will be in enterprises that improve water quality expand the prospects for commercial fishing and improve forest management in the region The plan focuses on maintaining and improving the environmental quality of watersheds in the region recognizing how the complex interactions of flora fauna and human activities affect that ecosystem. It establishes old growth reserves and protects over million acres of old growth forest ( about percent of existing old growth ) It also establishes " adaptive management areas " for experimentation into better ways of integrating ecological and economic objectives Rangeland Reform The Federal Government owns extensive rangelands throughout the West. While these lands are used primarily for grazing cattle and sheep increased demand for environmental uses has fueled controversy over Federal management. The controversy over rangeland reform shows the importance of integrating pricing with regulation to use the Nation 's resources more efficiently and strike a better balance between economic and environmental objectives A central point of contention involves the fees that the Federal Government charges ranchers to graze animals on Federal land These fees should reflect both the value of the forage used by an additional animal and the external environmental costs of grazing an additional animal ( such as the value of reductions in recreation or water quality ) Charging ranchers the marginal value of forage the first component encourages efficient use of the range. By preventing overgrazing it protects the condition of the range for future grazing uses. It also promotes long-run efficiency in the livestock industry : Prices for forage that are too low encourage excessive investment in the industry. Forage value varies from tract to tract because of differences in forage productivity location proximity to roads and other transportation rainfall and access to water But it can still be measured easily and reliably using the value of private rangelands in nearby locations. The second component the external costs of grazing can not be determined from private market transactions. But economists have developed ways of inferring the value of open space or other environmental amenities from the costs people willingly incur to use them or from sophisticated survey methods Current Federal management policies are relics of an earlier era when the Federal Government used resource subsidies to encourage settlement of the West. One result is that grazing fees on Federal lands average only to percent of the value of grazing on comparable private lands. Moreover the formula used to calculate Federal grazing fees has kept those fees from increasing along with private grazing lease rates. Promoting efficiency thus means both increasing grazing fees and ensuring that Federal grazing fees change from year to year in accordance with changes in rent on private grazing land. The Administration 's plans for rangeland reform do both. The current proposal calls for phasing in a new fee structure that more than doubles current fees and for using an updating formula that will adjust Federal fees at the same rate that private fees change Pricing reform must be accompanied by changes in regulation For example Federal grazing permits have " use-it-or-lose-it " provisions under which decreases in the number of animals grazed may result in the loss of a grazing permit or a reduction in the number of animals that the permitholder may graze in the future. This policy prevents ranchers from temporarily reducing the number of animals grazed to improve range condition. The Administration 's plan allows the terms of grazing permits to be rewritten to allow ranchers to vary the number of animals they graze in response to changes in weather or economic conditions. The plan also includes provisions to strengthen environmental management CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN Certain gases emitted into the atmosphere by industrial automotive and other combustion have been implicated as a threat to the global climate : By preventing reflected solar radiation from escaping into space these " greenhouse gases " may be causing a generalized warming of the planet. For this reason an international agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions the Framework Convention on Climate Change was signed in The previous Administration had adopted what was called a " no regrets " policy ; it was willing to take steps to reduce emissions only if those actions would be beneficial for other reasons that is even if greenhouse gas emissions were ultimately found unrelated to changes in the global climate. In contrast this Administration sees cost-effective policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as appropriate " insurance " against the threat of climate change. Accordingly the President in his Earth Day speech on April issued a " clarion call " for the creation of a cost-effective plan to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions to levels by the year The President 's call resulted months later in the Climate Change Action Plan containing nearly initiatives that cover reductions in all significant greenhouse gases and will affect most sectors of the economy. The plan was based on the understanding that the climate change threat results from all greenhouse gases that it depends on net emissions ( after accounting for greenhouse gas " sinks " such as forests and oceans ) and that the problem is global. The strategies adopted to address the externalities associated with greenhouse gas emissions were chosen on the basis of a qualitative assessment of the cost-effectiveness of the alternatives in part by selecting policies that make markets work better Some of the strategies expand upon initiatives of this and previous Administrations to promote energy-saving technology. For example the Green Lights program improves the diffusion of technology by providing consumers and firms with information about environmentally friendly products such as energy-saving lights that promise to reduce electricity generation and the resulting emissions. Other strategies reduce emissions by making government more efficient. Two examples are ( ) reform of regulations that block the seasonal use of natural gas ( a low-polluting alternative to coal ) by electric utilities and ( ) removal of regulatory impediments to private investments in upgrading Federal hydroelectric facilities Parking Cashout Greenhouse gas emissions will also be reduced by improving the pricing of activities that generate externalities. The parking cashout policy attempts to correct a distortion in private incentives resulting from the tax treatment of employer-provided parking Currently the Internal Revenue Code allows employers to deduct any costs for employer-provided parking as a business expense and lets workers exclude the benefits from their taxable income ( up to $ a month ) As a result percent of automobile commuters receive free or subsidized parking more than half of them in central business districts. All told U.S. companies claim $ billion per year in parking-related deductions from this free or subsidized service The Climate Change Action Plan proposes that Federal tax laws be modified to require that firms offer employees the option of taking the cash value of their employer-provided parking benefit as taxable income rather than accepting their free parking space. The program would apply initially only to those firms with more than employees that make monthly cash payments for their employees to park in lots owned by third parties. Thus only about percent of employer-provided parking would be covered at first although the program would expand later as new parking leases are negotiated This policy change should reduce the overuse of automobiles for commuting resulting from the current parking subsidy by making commuters face more of the social costs of driving. As consumers shift to carpools and public transportation greenhouse gas emissions other pollutants and traffic congestion should all be reduced Other distortions of the choice between commuting by car and by public transit will remain uncorrected however to the extent that current regulation of automobile emissions does not fully capture their environmental congestion and health costs International Strategies for Greenhouse Gas Reductions One hundred and sixty-one countries signed the Framework Convention on Climate Change in agreeing that it is necessary to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that will prevent " dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. " Because this is a global problem the Climate Change Action Plan addressed what is termed " joint implementation " the cooperative effort between countries or entities within them to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The plan recognizes that there may be enormous cost savings to meeting global goals for greenhouse gas reductions if acceptable international strategies can be developed to reduce emissions where it is cheapest to do so rather than have each country pursue its emissions reduction goals on its own. Some important questions need resolution however such as how reductions are to be identified monitored and enforced. To begin testing the joint implementation concept the plan creates a pilot program that evaluates investments by U.S. firms and government assistance to foreign countries for new greenhouse gas emission reductions ; measures tracks and scores these reductions ; and in gen- eral lays a foundation for broader more formal policy initiatives in the future SUPERFUND REAUTHORIZATION : THE ADMINISTRATION POSITION The Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act better known as Superfund was enacted in and amended in in response to widespread concerns that improperly disposed-of wastes threatened human health and valuable natural resources such as groundwater aquifers. The act has been unsatisfactory in addressing this problem. Fewer than percent of the disposal sites on the priority list drawn up by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) have been fully " cleaned up " although separate actions have been taken to remove wastes posing an immediate threat to health At the same time the costs of the program have been substantial running almost $ billion per year. This figure includes direct draws on the Superfund trust fund collected from the oil and chemical industries to pay for EPA expenses ( including $ billion in spending on cleanups where no private parties can be assigned responsibility ) $ billion in spending by Federal agencies that own or contributed to hazardous waste sites and $ billion in spending by private parties much of which goes to lawyers ' fees and other transactions costs in an effort to escape or reduce liability. Some estimates put the total cost of cleaning up the sites projected to be on the EPA 's National Priority List ( NPL ) over the next to years at $ billion to $ billion with $ billion to $ billion more needed for Federal facility cleanups In response to the poor cost-effectiveness and slow pace of this program the Administration has proposed several significant reforms. The two most important involve the standards and processes governing the cleanup strategy chosen at a site and the process for assigning and financing liability Remedy Selection Under the current law remedial measures at Superfund sites are chosen with a preference for treatment and permanent cleanup of soil and water. They are also selected to meet high standards of cleanliness : land generally must become suitable for residential use and water often must achieve drinking quality. Costs have little weight in remedy selection ; they come into play only to identify the cheapest of the set of remedies meeting other criteria The Administration 's position establishes more-reasonable goals and processes for cleanup decisions. It sets uniform national goals for health and environmental protection to guide remedy selection It substitutes a concern for long-term reliability as a factor to consider in remedy selection in place of the preference for treatment and permanence ( except for treatment of " hot spots " ) It explicitly recognizes containment as a legitimate cleanup strategy. It limits the use of State and Federal standards designed for other pollution contexts. Finally it introduces greater flexibility and community input into the determination of appropriate land use for the site permitting some sites to be designated for industrial use with appropriately lower levels of cleanup required The Administration 's proposal also offers a streamlined approach to remedy selection at individual sites. With EPA approval parties will be able to avail themselves of a set of cost-effective " generic " remedies established by the EPA that apply to certain frequently encountered types of waste disposal problems. Alternatively they can formulate designs that meet national cleanup levels that are based on realistic assumptions and practices concerning risks. If the party liable for cleanup believes it can devise an even cheaper remedy that can meet the national health standards it can perform a site-specific risk analysis to make its case to EPA. This option allows parties to propose remedies based on the ultimate goal of protecting health and the environment rather than on the " intermediate " targets of reductions in soil or water concentrations and helps tailor remedies chosen for a site to its particular features Most important a factor in the remedy selection process at individual sites will be a comparison of the reasonableness of costs against several measures of effectiveness. This approach introduces discipline transparency and recognition of tradeoffs into the remedy selection process while retaining consideration of other factors such as community acceptance and meeting the primary criterion of protecting health and the environment. Cost will also be considered in decisions on whether to defer final cleanups for cases where a new technology is on the horizon to replace a current one that has disproportionately high costs The Liability System The transactions costs associated with cleanups especially litigation expenses have been massive under current law. One study found that these costs account for to percent of all Superfund costs. Transaction costs are substantial in part because liability under current law is strict joint and several and retroactive : A party that contributed waste to a site used by others can be held liable for the entire cost of cleanup and a party is liable for the results of its dumping even if its action was legal at the time. As a result potentially responsible parties ( PRPs ) have strong incentives to contest their liability ( resulting in high enforcement costs to-the EPA ) to sue other PRPs to recover costs and to sue their insurance companies when the latter refuse to pay related claims The Administration 's proposal seeks to limit these transactions costs by streamlining the liability allocation process and making it more fair. The new allocation process is based upon nonbinding arbitration in which PRPs are assigned a share of liability based on factors such as the volume and toxicity of their wastes. PRPs who settle for their assigned shares would surrender their rights to pursue other PRPs for contribution be protected from suits by other PRPs and be offered for a fee protection from future liability arising from remedy failure or undiscovered harms. As an added incentive to settle the EPA would pay settling parties for their share of the " orphan shares " the share of liability attributed to an identified but insolvent party but nonsettling parties could still be held liable for all or part of the " orphan share. " The Administration proposal also addresses the growing problem of Superfund-related insurance litigation. The problem arises because insurance contracts written before Superfund was enacted did not expressly allocate Superfund liabilities. Subsequently courts in some States have interpreted those contracts to require insurance companies to assume most Superfund liabilities but courts in some other States have held the opposite. The scope of insurers ' liability in most States is undecided. Building on a proposal originally suggested by the insurance industry the Administration proposal calls for creation of an Environmental Insurance Resolution Fund financed through fees and assessments on property and casualty insurers. If the PRPs can show sufficient insurance coverage before the fund would be used to settle their insurance claims for cleanup and restoration costs at pre-1986 NPL sites as well as some costs at non-NPL sites at rates determined simultaneously for all of a PRP 's sites. The combination of the allocation process and the insurance settlement process should substantially reduce transactions costs and increase fairness SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND GREEN ACCOUNTING According to the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development sustainable development is that which " meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. " In short future generations must be able to attain a quality of life in both economic and environmental terms equal to ours if they desire. To make this possible the present generation must leave the future with the wherewithal the " social capital " consisting of human natural and physical ( manmade ) capital to create our kind of life or a life of at least equal quality to ours. Although this definition is widely accepted its interpretation remains subject to debate One controversy concerns the extent to which the three types of capital can substitute for one another given the underlying scientific principles and economic behavior while keeping the resulting development sustainable However this controversy is resolved it will be necessary to measure social capital and the value its use brings in order to understand whether a growth path for the economy is sustainable This is the province of " green accounting " an idea first raised in Much of the recent research effort to augment the national income and product accounts to incorporate previously unmeasured aspects of social welfare focuses on identifying the net change in the stock of social capital resulting from environmental externalities. This research effort seeks to identify the loss ( depreciation ) of social capital caused by pollution the value of the reduction of finite resources ( such as fossil fuels and minerals ) the loss from overharvesting of renewable resources ( such as forests and fisheries ) and the value of the environmental services ( e.g. clean air ) derived from investments in pollution control equipment The President has made it a priority of his Administration to augment the national accounts to incorporate these aspects of social capital. In his Earth Day speech the President directed that " green " gross domestic product ( GDP ) measures be developed to improve existing national income and wealth accounts that ignore the cost of pollution or the loss of natural resources. In the first phase of fulfilling this mandate the Commerce Department 's Bureau of Economic Analysis will publish modified GDP accounts in to reflect the depletion of selected natural resources and will continue to explore measures that incorporate additional environmental values. This effort will be aided by the Department of Interior 's forthcoming National Biological Survey an effort to inventory the biological and ecological resources of the Nation PROMOTING TECHNOLOGY Technological progress fuels economic growth. It creates new industries and reinvigorates old ones. It can enable small businesses to do high-quality design and manufacturing work that previously required the resources of big business. It can help big businesses achieve the speed flexibility and closeness to customers that once were a defining characteristic of small business. Technology helps to make our work force more productive and in doing so improves the Nation 's standard of living. Every recent generation has seen its dreams turn into technological marvels new products from new industries that have transformed the way we live and work : from the telephone radio airplanes and x-rays to television xerography computers and magnetic resonance imaging equipment. Ad- vances in technical know-how have accounted for at least one-quarter of our Nation 's economic growth over the past half-century During the past two decades powerful trends have altered the environment for American technology development. Commercial technology has become increasingly science-based and interdisciplinary. International competition has intensified as other nations have advanced in wealth and technological sophistication. The Nation 's defense capability has become increasingly dependent on technologies developed and applied first in commercial markets. A microelectronics-based revolution in production has transformed the organization of office and factory work increasing the need for a well-trained and flexible work force By the end of the 1980s many analysts believed that these trends required a reexamination of the existing approaches of government and industry for supporting technology development and diffusion. Accordingly in its first year the Administration has supported tax incentives for investments in research and development ( R&D ) and new businesses liberalized export controls shifted Federal resources toward basic research and civilian technology invested in worker skills and promoted defense conversion. In addition the Administration 's technology initiatives such as the promotion of the National Information Infrastructure discussed above the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles and the creation of a Manufacturing Extension Partnership rely on an alliance of government and industry. They also require rigorous attention to the economic rationales for cooperative efforts and then to the details of project design and assessment to ensure that market failures are corrected not made worse by government action PRINCIPLES OF TECHNOLOGY POLICY The Administration 's technology initiatives aim to promote the domestic development and diffusion of growth- and productivityenhancing technologies. They seek to correct market failures that would otherwise generate too little investment in R&D with programs that avoid " government failure. " The Economics of Appropriability New technologies often fail to attract sufficient private sector investment because their technical risk is high or because of limited appropriability that is the new technologies create economic and social benefits beyond what the investing firms can capture for themselves. Indeed despite intellectual property protection the social returns to innovation have been estimated to exceed the private returns by between and percent The most important innovations generate spillover benefits for interconnected sectors creating economic gains well beyond any that eventually accrue to their inventors. These innovations include risky " pathbreaking " technologies that pay off in the creation of new industries ( or the transformation of existing industries ) and lower risk " infratechnologies " that can enhance the productive performance of a broad spectrum of firms and industries but that receive low levels of investment because of barriers to appropriability and implementation. For example the development of refrigerated steamships at the end of the nineteenth century increased the availability of perishable agricultural products throughout the world. Most of this benefit ultimately accrued to farmers and consumers rather than to the inventors of refrigerated steamships Similarly the principle of interchangeable parts in manufacturing originally developed for the production of firearms soon was adopted for use in the fabrication of clocks hardware sewing machines and other manufactured products The appropriability problem is not limited to basic research but frequently extends to so-called precommercial technology development and eventual commercial applications. Indeed technological progress is full of feedbacks where developments downstream alter the course of behavior upstream as well as the degree of ultimate market success. A sharp distinction between basic research and precommercial development activities is difficult to draw. Investments that are necessary to the utilization and adoption of research results investments in information gathering work force training or the integration of new production equipment into automated systems can also create spillover benefits that the investing firm can not perfectly appropriate. In addition new manufacturing processes that lower cost or improve quality may not be patentable and new ideas embodied in computer software can often be imitated rapidly without violating the originators intellectual property rights. In all of these cases public actions can offset the effects of underinvestment by the private sector that is caused by limitations on appropriability Avoiding " Government Failure " The goal of technology policy is not to substitute the government 's judgment for that of private industry in deciding which potential " winners " to back. Rather the point is to correct a genuine and significant market failure underinvestment in basic research and in precommercial R&D resulting from the divergence between private and social returns to those activities. A complementary goal is to design the technology investments that the government itself makes in public goods national security public health education a clean environment an efficient transportation system in ways that maximize the potential external benefits for the Nation 's commercial technology base. In both cases technology policy enhances the Nation 's economic and social welfare Investments in R&D are risky. Like all risky investments public or private government-supported explorations sometimes drill dry holes such as the efforts during the 1960s and 1970s to develop synthetic fuels a supersonic transport and a fast breeder reactor Yet even research that never delivers an enormous economic payoff for itself often contributes useful technical knowledge and lessons for the future. And when the drilling strikes oil as with government support of R&D for computers and integrated circuits jet engines and airframes and biotechnology and medical equipment the initial gusher can generate an entire field of newly productive wealth-enhancing job-creating economic activity. For this reason the success of government R&D policy must be measured by the rate of return on the entire portfolio of R&D investments supported by the public We can learn from both the gushers and the dry holes about how to design programs to promote investments in basic and precommercial R&D to maximize their prospects for success. Federal R&D investment programs leading to successful commercial products tend to share certain design features : They are insulated from the demands of distributional politics ; they subject potential projects to rigorous technical and economic evaluation ; and they recognize that product specifications must be developed with an eye toward manufacturability and a balance between product performance and cost that will be acceptable to commercial customers. Accordingly the Administration 's efforts to promote innovative technology contain design features that are meant to limit the possibility of " government failure " in the implementation of technology policy : To ensure that R&D funded by the government in cooperative ventures with the private sector has direct market applications participating firms must bear a significant share of program costs. In most cases the Administration 's technology partnerships require that private firms cover at least percent of the costs To ensure that both the timing and the content of government investments in technology-based infrastructure impart maximum leverage on industry 's competitive efforts research frameworks for collaborative R&D should be initiated and designed by private industry and should be closely coordinated with industry investment patterns To insulate publicly supported R&D efforts from political pressures exerted on behalf of special interests evaluations of competing R&D proposals should be conducted by independent experts in the relevant scientific technological and economic fields. Political considerations should not be allowed to influ- ence a project 's technical objectives the location of R&D facilities or the way that management of the project is structured Investments in a broad array of technical fields including materials sciences manufacturing product and process technologies biotechnology and biomedical sciences and telecommunications and computer-related technologies should compete for a finite flow of funds. This competition will help to ensure that expanded Federal support for precommercial R&D does not get captured by the champions of any particular technology or by any particular set of firms Government investments in basic and precommercial R&D should be reviewed while in progress to determine whether funding should continue. Such reviews are difficult because the success of an R&D project is often not apparent for many years but rigorous assessments can nevertheless be made by independent expert panels at regular intervals A New Approach An enduring American approach to promoting technology development and diffusion evolved just after the Second World War. The United States channeled public investment into basic research at universities and government laboratories then supported the initial application of the results in products and production processes procured by public agencies. New technologies first developed for ( and procured by ) the Department of Defense the Department of Energy or the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) or supported by the National Science Foundation or the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) would then diffuse or " spin off " into commercial use. In this manner the Federal Government supported the development and diffusion of jet aircraft and engines semiconductor microelectronics computers and computercontrolled machine tools Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology advanced energy and environmental technologies advanced materials and a whole host of other commercially successful technologies This system worked well as long as military systems represented the leading-edge applications of new industrial technologies and as long as foreign competitors with direct support from their own governments did not pose a significant competitive challenge. In many areas of basic research supported outside the defense establishment including biomedical research and the development of pharmaceuticals biotechnology and medical diagnostic devices the system continues to work well. But the circumstances that allowed the United States to rely primarily on a defense-led model have changed. With the end of the cold war demand for new defense systems is now less than it was. Commercial product spinoffs from military research have also diminished from their heyday of the 1950s and 1960s and American companies face intense international competition from increasingly capable foreign firms. On the other hand these changes also create exciting new opportunities : Innovative defense technologies are now more likely to emerge first in commercial products and production techniques and American companies are taking advantage of expanded opportunities in foreign markets. Accordingly the Administration 's technology initiatives are shifting the composition of Federal R&D from military to civilian concerns and the composition of military R&D toward the development of so-called dual-use technologies those with applications to both military and commercial products THE ADMINISTRATION 'S TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVES The Administration 's investments in growth- and productivityenhancing technologies encompass a wide range of physical and human resource priorities. They finance basic research and leverage private funds for technology development and commercialization. They promote the diffusion and adoption of advanced manufacturing technologies by U.S. industry. They facilitate defense conversion by easing defense suppliers into civilian markets focusing military R&D on dual-use technologies and freeing the Pentagon to purchase commercial products and processes. They seek to promote the development of a national telecommunications infrastructure for the information age. Finally they create partnerships with industry and academia to ensure that the government 's investments to solve pressing problems in energy transportation and the environment simultaneously work to promote the Nation 's economy and overall standard of living Basic Research The Administration worked with the Congress to increase budget authority for basic research in all categories to $ billion in fiscal year This includes a 7.2-percent increase in the National Science Foundation 's budget to a total of $ billion. The National Science Foundation will continue to provide strong support for fundamental research critical to manufacturing advanced materials environmental technologies and biotechnology. It has also doubled its support for modernizing academic research facilities and instrumentation. In addition basic space science research is continuing at NASA representing an investment of $ billion in fiscal The Department of Defense has been appropriated $ billion for basic research in fiscal ; the Department of Energy will support an additional $ billion in basic research in areas including materials science chemical science engineering and geoscience high-energy nuclear physics and nuclear fusion. Finally the Administration continues to support basic research conducted through the National Institutes of Health which account for over per- cent of federally sponsored basic research. NIH is projected to spend nearly $ billion for basic research in fiscal exceeding last year 's level by almost $ million ( or percent ) Technology Development and Commercialization Through the Commerce Department 's Advanced Technology Program and through the hundreds of cooperative research and development agreements that have been signed between private firms and researchers at many of America 's Federal laboratories the government is investing in industrial projects to develop and to promote commercialization of technologies with high payoff potential. The Nation 's antitrust laws have also been clarified to avoid discouraging beneficial private research collaborations The Advanced Technology Program ( ATP ) The ATP is administered by the Commerce Department 's National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) In four competitions completed over the past years the ATP has made awards to companies and joint ventures. The projects receiving awards have included ventures to develop a way to control personal computer programs through " natural language " instructions ; a pen-based characterrecognition system for the Chinese language with the goal of enhancing software exports to Chinese-speaking companies ; and a technology for preserving patients ' bone marrow during chemotherapy The ATP is designed to avoid government failure. Government acts as the catalyst but the ATP relies on industry to define and carry out its R&D projects. Independent expert panels select projects through rigorous competitions based on both technical and business merit. The ATP provides technology development funds under cooperative research agreements. It requires single-company applicants to pay their own indirect costs and joint ventures to provide matching funds. In general award recipients may patent inventions or copyright software developed under an ATP award but the government retains a nonexclusive license The total of ATP awards plus private sector funds over the life of the first awards amounts to over $ million. The Administration has proposed to increase the ATP budget from $ million in to $ million in and $ million has been appropriated for the program in In addition to announcing about new awards to industry in fiscal the ATP will embark on a set of " strategic " program competitions. These competitions will focus on particular technology areas recommended by industry as having especially significant potential to generate large economic and social payoffs Cooperative Research at Government Laboratories. The Nation 's Federal laboratories especially the three large multiprogram nuclear weapons laboratories ( Los Alamos and Sandia in New Mex- ico and Lawrence Livermore in California ) offer a repository of vast technical expertise that can be leveraged to enhance the competitive performance of American industry. As part of its plan to alter the balance between military and civilian objectives in the Federal R&D budget the Administration has authorized the weapons labs to redirect at least to percent of their defense program budgets to commercial technology-transfer activities with industry. The Department of Energy 's laboratories which employ over scientists and engineers and perform $ billion in civilian and military research annually already have in place over cooperative research and development agreements ( CRADAs ) with private firms totaling $ billion in combined public and private funds. CRADAs are also used to structure public-private partnerships involving laboratories at NIST and the Department of Defense. A similar program is in place at NASA Using CRADAs Federal laboratories have already begun or strengthened jointly financed collaborations with companies and industry consortia in a number of research and production prototyping projects. These have covered semiconductor production equipment flat panel display technology new technologies for textile manufacturing the investigation of new polymer blends biosensors new aerospace alloys and microscopic-sized machines known as microelectromechanical systems. These partnerships may begin a longer term process of redirecting the defense-oriented labs ' missions toward civilian needs ranging from the development of energy-efficient and environmentally sustainable industries to the invention of new medical manufacturing and transportation technologies while utilizing the labs ' expertise in such fields as highperformance computing communications and new materials Collaboration in Research and Development. Competition promotes R&D but collaboration can also promote both research and the effective commercialization of research results. When firms have complementary skills or information an R&D joint venture among them may speed the development and commercial adoption of a new technology. And when firms have similar skills or information an R&D joint venture may avoid costly duplication of effort. Yet allowing collaboration in R&D risks facilitating undesirable cooperation in the firms ' other activities. For example it may make it easier to engage in price fixing or other anticompetitive practices in the sale of the products manufactured by the firms collaborating on research. This risk is small if collaboration is limited to early-phase R&D however The Congress balanced these concerns in when it passed legislation guaranteeing that collaborative research would violate the antitrust laws only if the collaboration were found unreasonable. That legislation also provided that research joint ventures could register with the government and thereby limit their antitrust exposure to actual damages rather than face the usual treble damage penalty for antitrust violations. Legislation enacted in extends these protections to production joint ventures thereby removing a barrier to collaborative efforts to implement new manufacturing techniques and production processes. Because these aspects of the production process can be understood as research into product commercialization this extension serves a purpose similar to that of the legislation Development and Diffusion of Advanced Manufacturing Technology Anecdotal examples abound of technologies developed in the United States such as numerically controlled machine tools that were commercially exploited first or more successfully abroad These anecdotes point to market failures other than imperfect appropriability that also contribute to insufficient adoption and utilization of research results. For example firms may face unnecessarily high transactions costs for obtaining information and firms with good ideas but limited sources of collateral or internal finance may find themselves unable to raise funds in the capital markets The effort to commercialize a new technology often presents firms with an array of organizational challenges : New manufacturing processes and distribution channels must be developed workers must be retrained and new suppliers and perhaps even new customers must be identified. In meeting these challenges firms develop a great deal of valuable information from manufacturing know-how to marketing insights some of which can not be protected as intellectual property or trade secrets On the other hand firms sometimes have difficulty gaining access to other types of technological know-how developed inside other companies and the ways different firms have met implementation challenges. Adoption of advanced manufacturing technology is typically a " systems " problem. Suppliers must be able to sell components that fit into complex automated production systems Buyers must be assured of compatibility among machines robots transfer lines and the like or they will not adopt the technology To help remedy these market failures and so promote more rapid and extensive commercialization and diffusion of important new technologies the Administration is expanding NIST 's Manufacturing Extension Partnership ( MEP ) program. Manufacturing Technology Centers ( MTCs ) form the backbone of the program MTCs offer impartial advice to small and medium-sized manufacturers from people with extensive industrial experience. This advice is backed by hands-on technical assistance. MTCs will be linked among themselves to a set of smaller Manufacturing Outreach Centers ( MOCs ) geared to areas with smaller concentrations of industry. MOCs will be affiliated with technical colleges vocational schools and State technical assistance centers. Together MTCs and MOCs will help firms to identify evaluate install adapt and then commercially exploit appropriate advanced technology in their manufacturing and business operations. The Administration anticipates that centers will be established nationwide by up from at the outset of this Administration Linkages have also been formed between the MEP and other Federal agencies with roles to play in the delivery of technical assistance work force training and small business support services These agencies include the Department of Energy NASA the Small Business Administration and the Department of Labor. In addition the Department of Energy dedicated over $ million to advanced manufacturing-related technologies in fiscal and has under way or in negotiation more than advanced manufacturing cooperative projects involving over companies. One of these is the AMTEX Partnership a model collaboration between the Department of Energy 's national laboratories and the American textile industry. Finally the deployment portion of the Administration 's defense conversion Technology Reinvestment Project ( discussed below ) includes an additional $ million for manufacturing extension programs Telecommunications Infrastructure for the Information Age All Americans have a stake in the construction of the advanced National Information Infrastructure described earlier in this chapter. Private industry is already developing and deploying the Nil and as explained above it is the private sector that should build and own the Nil of the future. There nevertheless remain essential roles for the government to play in ensuring the growth of an affordable and universally accessible telecommunications infrastructure. Many of the key breakthroughs in telecommunications and computing stemmed from research funded by the Federal Government. For example the Internet and laser technology both grew out of government-sponsored research The Administration will continue the High-Performance Computing and Communications program which funds R&D into morepowerful computers faster computer networks and more-sophisticated software. A key objective of this program is the application of computers to economically important problems. The Department of Energy has funded several collaborations among national laboratories universities and industry applying these computing technologies to materials chemistry energy and environmental problems. Beyond that the Administration has created a new component of the program emphasizing information infrastructure technologies and applications. This program will develop and apply high-performance computing and high-speed networking tech- nologies for use in the fields of health care education libraries manufacturing and provision of government information. Additional research on information technologies and applications will be conducted by the Department of Energy 's national laboratories Finally the government is supporting an array of Nil pilot and demonstration projects. Federal matching grants will be awarded on a competitive basis to school districts libraries State and local governments health care providers universities and other nonprofit entities to connect institutions to existing networks to enhance those networks and to permit users to interconnect among different networks. The program is presently funded at $ million per year and is planned to grow in coming years to $ million annually. Its goal is to ensure that every school and library in the country is connected. In addition NASA has launched the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite an experiment to test pioneering concepts and technologies that promise to advance on-demand flexible communications services Transportation Energy and the Environment : New Technologies for Growth Environmental improvements have traditionally been viewed as something we trade off for increased economic performance. Yet as noted earlier in this chapter a strong environmental policy framework can encourage innovation strengthen key competitive industries and improve our environment simultaneously. Environmental policy can create new demand for the goods and services of the environmental protection industries which then increase employment and production to meet this demand. Policies that call for leadingedge environmental solutions can induce U.S. industry to respond with novel world-class technologies. This response positions U.S industry to meet the rapidly growing world demand for advanced " green " technologies providing additional economic and environmental benefits for U.S. consumers and producers Accordingly this Administration is developing an environmental policy framework whose objective is to maintain and strengthen environmental protection while also promoting economic and technological development. The Administration is working with the U.S business and research communities to promote the development and deployment of new technologies that simultaneously prevent pollution increase energy efficiency and the efficiency of the Nation 's transportation infrastructure and promote economic growth Clean technologies such as energy-efficient light bulbs and motors alternative fuel vehicles computerized traffic management systems and advanced steelmaking reduce many kinds of pollutants. Such technologies can also reduce the energy needs of U.S companies trimming costs and improving international competi- tiveness. Again the hoped-for result is both enhanced environmental quality and greater long-term economic growth Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles. This initiative begun in September is a joint effort of the Federal Government and the three leading domestic automobile manufacturers The initiative aims to develop the technologies necessary to create a new type of automobile one that is both safer and up to three times more fuel efficient than today 's cars. In both its goals and its implementation the program is characteristic of this Administration 's technology policy. It focuses on developing technologies that may generate technological progress in two important areas : in making U.S. automobile producers more technologically competitive in the international marketplace and in reducing air pollution. The initiative is structured as a set of public-private partnerships in R&D. One such partnership seeks to develop a " hybrid " vehicle that combines electric propulsion with conventional heat engine systems to increase efficiency and meet tight emission standards The Environmental Technologies Initiative. The EPA has launched the Environmental Technologies Initiative to stimulate technological innovation to meet the Nation 's environmental objectives. The initiative aims to create a more productive environmental technology marketplace and works toward incorporating environmental considerations into the design of new technologies and into upgrades of existing technologies. This program is also designed to aid the Administration 's defense conversion effort by facilitating the use of military bases for demonstrations of environmental remediation or " cleanup " technologies. In addition the EPA and the Commerce Department are jointly developing environmental technology programs at NIST regional technology centers ; and the EPA has undertaken a new collaborative venture with the Small Business Administration to help small businesses access information on pollution prevention. These and other domestic initiatives also support the Administration 's strategic framework for environmental technologies exports which engages U.S. environmental businesses in the design and implementation of market-specific export assistance and export financing strategies The NICE3 program ( National Industrial Competitiveness through Energy Environment and Economics ) jointly administered by the EPA and the Department of Energy aims to promote innovative technologies that simultaneously improve energy efficiency reduce waste generation and increase economic competitiveness and productivity. The program also seeks to improve cooperation between State agencies and industry. In addition the President has directed the Department of Energy and the EPA to accelerate the commercialization of advanced energy-efficient technologies through the formation of partnerships with key market players. These partnerships may include contests for new technology introductions ; working with government procurement agencies to leverage their purchasing power to acquire qualifying products ; and working with utilities to coordinate incentives for markets for new technologies. For instance the Department of Energy together with the EPA and utilities is using such partnerships to create a new market for manufacturers of chlorofluorocarbon-free refrigerators ( chlorofluorocarbons have been implicated in degradation of the atmospheric ozone layer ) Finally the Department of Energy is engaged in developing and deploying innovative environmental remediation and cleanup technologies to deal with the cleanup of military bases slated for closure as well as of contaminated facilities and sites administered by the Energy Department itself Other Transportation Technology Initiatives. The Department of Transportation has begun a series of outreach seminars entitled " Promoting Transportation Applications in Defense Conversion and Other Advanced Technologies. " In addition the department has initiated studies aimed at having a prototype demonstration of an automated intelligent vehicle highway system by The Defense Department 's Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) has selected six regional coalitions in Hawaii Sacramento Los Angeles Indianapolis Atlanta and Boston to work on electric and hybrid electric vehicle technology and infrastructure. A team of officials from the Departments of Defense and Transportation is also investigating how to augment the existing satellite-based global positioning system for use in improving air navigation and collision avoidance. The Department of Energy 's Clean Cities program makes use of the Federal Government 's purchasing power to accelerate the introduction of alternative fuel vehicles ( and an alternative refueling infrastructure ) into urban areas in order to reduce emissions. Finally the Administration is continuing to fund research into an array of next-generation transportation technologies including high-speed ground transportation advanced subsonic planes and supersonic air transports Facilitating Defense Conversion The share of gross domestic product ( GDP ) devoted to national defense is expected to shrink from percent in to percent in This decline in defense spending resulting from the end of the cold war is smaller relative to the size of the economy than the cutbacks that followed World War II and the Korean and Vietnam wars and much more gradual. Yet the impact on particular regions such as southern California is severe and three additional factors work to make the economic adjustment this time more difficult. First the economy 's recovery from the recession of was weaker than the average postwar recovery while ef- forts to cut the massive Federal budget deficit leave little room for fiscal expansion to stimulate economic growth. Second many defense firms and workers are more isolated from commercial market practice than during earlier builddowns because the defense procurement system that has evolved over time has erected a wall between commercial sectors and defense. Third technological innovation and the economic growth it generates may be hard hit by the defense retrenchment because nearly percent of Federal support for domestic R&D was defense related and because roughly one-fifth of the Nation 's engineers work in defense-related areas The end of the cold war was an unanticipated event with serious economic consequences for several domestic economic sectors. Our Nation has long accepted a collective responsibility to ease the transition for those most heavily affected by major economic shocks for example by providing unemployment insurance and disaster relief. This principle readily extends to transitional assistance when the shock results from a large and unanticipated structural economic change particularly when government is effectively the agent of that change For workers the problem of large regionally concentrated economic dislocations is made worse by a capital market imperfection It is often difficult for workers to borrow for retraining and relocation because their human capital can not serve as collateral. Such capital market transactions are particularly difficult to arrange for people who have just lost a job or who have incurred a capital loss on their home a frequent consequence of geographically concentrated defense cuts. Moreover dislocated workers may have a difficult time learning about job opportunities in other regions or occupations Defense conversion is also difficult for firms. Although many defense contractors have access to knowledge production facilities and skilled workers that could be valuable if channeled to commercial applications the many years spent designing their organizations to serve the needs of one customer the Defense Department often leave them without crucial skills or the right organizational configuration to serve the commercial marketplace. To the extent that these firms lack internal funds to finance new investment and to the extent they are unable credibly to demonstrate to lenders and other capital providers their potential to serve other lines of business these resources will not be able to move to their most efficient uses The Administration 's 5-year $ billion Defense Reinvestment and Conversion Initiative addresses these problems of the post-cold war transition Workers. The initiative provides $ billion over years for worker adjustment including funding for retraining displaced defense workers and early retirement benefits for military personnel with at least years of service. In addition the Administration is sponsoring pilot programs to train defense workers and personnel leaving the military for national service as teachers health care workers and law enforcement personnel Communities. The Administration is also expanding the Defense Department 's Office of Economic Adjustment so that communities affected by scheduled military base closures have the resources and technical assistance necessary to plan a smoother adjustment to new economic activities. More resources are being devoted to the Commerce Department 's Economic Development Administration to target help to communities hardest hit by the defense industry drawdown. Meanwhile the Defense Department is working with the EPA and other public and private bodies to make sure that the process of environmental cleanup and restoration at closed military bases does not hamper local economic recovery Technology : The Technology Reinvestment Project. The Administration 's Technology Reinvestment Project ( TRP ) is an effort to promote the development of dual-use ( commercial and military ) technologies and to help small defense firms make the transition to commercial production. The TRP is jointly implemented by a sixagency council representing the Departments of Commerce Energy Transportation and Defense NASA and the National Science Foundation and is chaired by an official from ARPA. Onehundred and sixty-two projects had been selected for TRP support as of early December totaling nearly $ billion in combined public and private funds ( the Federal share is about $ million ) The TRP funds three types of projects : technology development ( projects ) technology deployment ( ) and manufacturing education and training ( ) Examples include construction of a highway bridge from composite plastics development of a new jaws-oflife rescue device powered by pyrotechnic cartridges and the exploration of medical uses for a noninvasive diagnostic device that measures oxygen levels in the blood. The TRP is also funding the development of a new manufacturing engineering curriculum at a State college a manufacturing technology center to help defense suppliers adapt to other fields and a project to retrain laidoff defense engineers in pollution-prevention and remediation MARITECH. The Defense Department 's MARITECH ( maritime technology ) initiative a defense conversion program focused on shipbuilding is structured similarly to the TRP. This 5-year $ million program will supply matching funds to help U.S. shipyards shift production from military to commercial markets TECHNOLOGY POLICY GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS Government must work with American industry to provide a sound communications and transportation infrastructure and a solid science and industrial technology base. These are among the prerequisites for economic growth. Yet to be effective in a market economy technology policy must leverage private investment not direct it. It must be sensitive to those reasons why markets by themselves may lead to insufficient investment. The Administration 's technology initiatives take their inspiration from a long American history of public-private partnerships from the Agricultural Extension Service to the Arpanet ( now the Internet worldwide computer network ) These initiatives seize strategic opportunities inherent in the shifting composition of Federal R&D from military to civilian concerns help remedy the underinvestment in R&D created by the limitations on private appropriability of its economic returns and focus Federal R&D funds on facilitating the commercialization and commercial diffusion of technology. Together these technology initiatives are essential to promote U.S. economic competitiveness meaning not only the ability of American firms to sell high-quality goods and services in the international marketplace but more importantly the ability to do so while maintaining high and rising wages and living standards for the American people CHAPTER The United States in the World Economy SOON AFTER TAKING OFFICE the President described the basic principles and goals of his Administration 's international economic policy in a February speech at American University He committed the United States to active global engagement to promote world trade and growth to aid the development of less prosperous nations to address the emerging problems of global environmental degradation and to encourage market reform in Russia and other parts of the former Soviet empire. The President affirmed that the United States would continue to champion open markets and expanded trade : In the President 's words " We must compete not retreat. " Acting upon these words the Administration successfully concluded two of the most important trade agreements in the Nation 's history : the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and the Uruguay Round Agreement under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) Like previous Administrations Democratic and Republican alike this Administration recognizes that international trade the voluntary exchange of goods and services across national borders is a means of increasing standards of living and economic well-being both at home and abroad. During the last half-century world trade has grown enormously largely as a result of American leadership in liberalizing global markets. Trade has been a major engine of growth for the world economy since World War II in marked contrast to the 1930s when protectionism worsened and helped spread global economic depression. As economists have long predicted freer trade has been a win-win strategy for both the United States and its trading partners allowing all to reap the benefits of enhanced specialization lower costs greater choice and an improved international climate for investment and innovation. American industries both their workers and their owners have benefited from increased export markets and from cheaper imported inputs American consumers have been able to purchase a wider variety of products at lower prices than they could have without the expansion of trade Recent changes in the global economy pose new challenges and new opportunities for the United States as we maintain our com- mitment to an open international trading system. The new opportunities come from the explosion of global markets while the new challenges come from the development of new global competitors During much of the last years the United States was the only global economic superpower. But now there are three : the European Union ( EU the deeper integration of the European Community ) Japan and the United States ; and all increasingly interdependent as a result of trade and capital flows and increasingly competitive. All three superpowers face both intensifying competition from and expanding market opportunities in the rapidly industrializing countries of East Asia which continue to increase their export competitiveness even as they open their own markets to greater trade and investment. Meanwhile the global trading system is being transformed by the emergence of new democratic and market-oriented regimes in central and eastern Europe the former Soviet Union Latin America and Asia regimes that have made substantial progress in tearing down their protectionist barriers and are now actively encouraging exports accepting imports and seeking foreign capital for development This Administration is committed to a high-wage strategy to enable the United States to take advantage of the new opportunities and to meet the new challenges of the changing global marketplace. This strategy consists of two distinct but interrelated parts : trade policies that will promote trade and foster more-open markets both at home and abroad ; and domestic policies that will help American companies remain the world 's productivity and technological leaders and American workers remain the most skilled and productive in the world. This two-part strategy reflects the fundamental goal of the Administration 's other economic policy initiatives : higher living standards for all Americans. Realizing this goal requires that America compete not on the basis of lower wages but on the basis of superior productivity technology and quality. It also requires that our trade policy be complemented by domestic policies designed to increase labor force skills and facilitate the adjustment of American workers and communities to changing economic circumstances whatever their source. Other chapters in this Report have analyzed the domestic economy. This chapter addresses the international dimension TRENDS IN U.S. TRADE Trade has become increasingly important to the American economy. As shown in Chart the share of exports of goods and services in real gross domestic product ( GDP ) has gradually risen and now stands at a postwar high of percent. Between and U.S. merchandise exports increased from $ billion to $ billion in current dollars and by percent in real terms. By the United States had regained its status as the world 's largest exporter and one in six American manufacturing jobs was directly or indirectly related to exports Chart U.S. Trade as Share of Real Gross Domestic Product The importance of trade to the U.S. economy has risen more or less steadily for three decades Percent of real GDP Imports of Goods and Services r- f J | L Exports of Goods and Services Source : Department of Commerce Imports have also grown in significance. As Chart shows the share of imports of goods and services in GDP has increased steadily and is also at a postwar high of percent. Perhaps the most striking development has been the increasing role of multinational corporations in U.S. trade and indeed the growing importance of intrafirm trade cross-border trade between the separate operations of a single firm. By multinational firms accounted for over percent of total U.S. merchandise trade and around percent of U.S. merchandise trade was intrafirm. And whereas intrafirm trade initially involved mainly U.S.-based multinationals more recently it has been led by foreign-based firms especially Japanese firms The impact of international trade on the national economy is not restricted to exports and imports. International trade also affects the fortunes of producers who do not directly export or import but interact with producers who do. According to input-output analy- ses which take such intersectoral or interproducer relations into account when the indirect effects of trade are included exports accounted for nearly four-fifths of the increase in domestic production of manufactures between and Moreover exports have become more dependent on imports. Between and the most recent years for which data are available the import content of exports rose from percent to percent. Thus exports are becoming more important for the economy and imports are becoming more important for exports. Overall international trade is increasingly vital to American prosperity The growth of U.S. trade has been accompanied by significant changes in both its sectoral and its regional composition. As shown in Chart real exports of nonagricultural merchandise and services have grown rapidly during the past quarter-century ( Box ) while the contribution of agricultural exports has remained relatively small. At the same time the relative contributions of particular sectors within nonagricultural merchandise trade have been shifting ( Table ) Chart U.S. Exports of Goods and Services Exports of services and nonagricultural goods have grown rapidly since the late 1960s Billions of dollars Nonagricultural Merchandise ^ Services Agricultural Merchandise j | Source : Department of Commerce Box U.S. Exports : More Than Peanuts In American service firms exported to nonafflliates abroad : over two-thirds as much in passenger fares ( $ billion ) such as seats on U.S.-flagged air carriers as the United States exported civilian aircraft ( $ billion ) more educational services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported corn ( $ billion ) more financial services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported wheat ( $ billion ) more equipment installation and repair services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported agricultural machinery ( $ billion ) more information services including computer and data processing and database services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported aluminum ( $ billion ) more legal services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported vegetable oils ( $ billion ) more management consulting services ( $ billion ) than the United States exported milled rice ( $ billion ) or peanuts ( $ billion ) TABLE U.S. Merchandise Trade by Industry and [ Percent of total ] Industry Exports Agricultural and forest products Minerals Fuels Chemicals Textiles apparel leather products and footwear Paper Nonmetallic minerals products Iron and steel Machinery Transportation equipment Furniture and fixtures Instruments Miscellaneous manufactures Other industries Imports Exports Imports Note -The classifications are based on the SITC Revision coding system Import figures have been adjusted to net out reexports Detail may not add to percent due to rounding Source : United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Division An important sectoral development in recent years has been the growth of high-technology products and industries in both U.S. exports and imports. In the United States exported $ billion in advanced technology products up in nominal terms from $ billion in Imports of these products also increased from $ billion in to $ billion in Aerospace information and communications and electronics together contributed the predominant share of U.S. high-technology exports. These sectors along with a few high-technology product lines within other industrial sectors are considerably more export-intensive than U.S. manufacturing as a whole. Indeed aircraft and computers and office equipment have the highest ratios of export sales to value added among all manufacturing industries Heightened foreign competition and the globalization of production ( technology respects no border ) have made many high-technology industries relatively import-intensive as well. In fact the most export-intensive of America 's high-technology industries ( with the marked exceptions of plastics and aircraft ) are now also the most import-intensive. The electronics industries have been the arena of the most dramatic penetration of the U.S. high-technology market both because Japanese and East Asian electronics producers have become more formidable competitors and because American electronics multinationals have spread their own production around the world Just as the commodity composition of U.S. trade has been changing so has its geographical composition. As shown in Table the shares of U.S. exports going to and imports coming from developing countries have risen while the shares to and from industrial countries have fallen. These trends reflect the fact that the developing countries as a group have been growing more rapidly than the industrial countries TABLE U.S. Merchandise Trade by World Region and [ Percent of total ] Region Exports Exports Imports Developing countries Asia Middle East Western Hemisphere Other Membership as of Note-Detail may not add to totals due to rounding Source : International Monetary Fund Japan European Community1 Other Industrial countries Imports The fast-growing countries of Asia have provided a rapidly expanding market for U.S. exports ; their share of the total nearly doubled from percent in to percent in Indeed by our trans-Pacific trade was percent greater than our transAtlantic trade. The increasing importance of Asia in U.S. trade appears to contradict the common contention that the world is devolving into three trading blocs centered on Europe Asia and North America. Nor is such a conclusion supported by more-sophisticated evidence. When researchers have modeled the pattern of trade flows among different countries they have found no real evidence that intraregional trade flows in Asia are unusually large once economic fundamentals are taken into account. The observed increases in intraregional flows can be explained largely in terms of differences in economic growth rates and geographical proximity Likewise when researchers have looked at financial flows exchange-rate determination and the like there is little evidence that a " y en bloc " is developing in Asia In addition to leading the world in trade the United States leads the world in the stock of foreign direct investment both as investor and as recipient. In U.S. firms owned percent and the United States hosted percent of the world 's foreign direct investment stock. The largest hosts of outward U.S. foreign direct investment ( ranked in order of importance ) are the United Kingdom Canada Germany Switzerland and Japan which together account for nearly half the total ( Table ) Similarly five industrial countries ( again ranked in order of importance ) Japan the United Kingdom the Netherlands Canada and Germany account for more than three-quarters of existing foreign direct investment in the United States. The predominant role of high-wage industrial countries in both inward and outward foreign direct investment in the United States refutes the popular notion that such investment is motivated primarily by the search for lower wages. In fact many foreign investment decisions are motivated by other considerations most often the need to have an active presence in large or rapidly expanding markets or the need to overcome trade and other barriers that impede access It is sometimes argued that outward foreign direct investment " exports " jobs. However the parallel expansion of two-way foreign direct investment and intrafirm trade suggests that such investment is more likely to complement rather than substitute for trade creating high-wage jobs domestically rather than destroying them Several recent studies have concluded that foreign direct investment is more likely to create trade than reduce it. Another recent study found that inward foreign direct investment brings with it competition new technologies and new management techniques TABLE Stock of U.S. Outward and Inward Foreign Direct Investment Country Billions of dollars NVESTMENT BY U.S. FIRMS ABROAD ( OUTWARD ) : United Kingdom Canada Germany Switzerland Jdpdn All countries INVESTMENT BY FOREIGN FIRMS IN THE UNITED STATES ( INWARD ) : Japan United Kingdom Netherlands Canada Germany All countries Note. All figures are on a historical cost basis Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis each of which has contributed to the resurgence in U.S. productivity further enhancing national competitiveness TRADE JOBS AND WAGE INEQUALITY In the short run both the level of output and the level of employment in the American economy depend on the level of aggregate demand. One component of aggregate demand is net exports the difference between exports and imports. Thus as long as there is slack in the economy an increase in net exports will stimulate production and create jobs. For example most scholars estimate that NAFTA will create additional American jobs over the next several years because it will boost U.S. net exports to Mexico. Once the American economy nears full employment however additional net exports could create upward pressure on prices as well. Even when the economy is at full employment however and even if trade liberalization increases both imports and exports equally leaving net exports unchanged the American economy still reaps the benefits of freer trade in the form of greater productive efficiency lower prices and higher living standards Despite the possible benefits of trade liberalization for the level of employment in the short run and the certain benefits of trade liberalization for living standards in the long run some observers worry that expanding trade with developing countries will depress the wages of low-skilled American workers. As explained in Chapter wage inequality has in fact increased over the past two decades as the share of trade in the U.S. economy has grown. Not surprisingly concerns have been voiced that greater international trade may be responsible for greater inequality in the wage distribution Such concerns are plausible and are consistent with economic theory. Skilled labor is relatively abundant in the U.S. economy According to theory when the United States trades with economies in which unskilled labor is relatively abundant we will tend to export products requiring skilled labor and import products using unskilled labor. The relative prices of skill-intensive goods will therefore rise in the United States and U.S. production will expand in export industries and contract in industries that compete with imports. Demand for skilled labor will rise while demand for unskilled labor falls. These changes in labor demand will raise the wages of skilled workers relative to those of unskilled workers Thus on a priori grounds one might expect an expansion of trade with developing countries to lead to greater wage inequality in the United States Despite the plausibility of the theoretical argument however several studies find that it is difficult to discern any substantial impact of trade on wage inequality. Economists have posited a systematic relationship between the relative prices of goods and the relative returns to factors of production. If increased trade with developing countries were the cause of growing wage inequality the relative prices of goods that use highly skilled labor would be rising relative to those of goods that use unskilled labor. However one study has found no evidence that the relative price of skill-intensive goods has risen in the United States. Indeed it is difficult to find any evidence of the changes in relative prices that would be required for changes in trade patterns to have altered the relative returns to different types of labor Similarly if increased trade were responsible for increased wage inequality the growth in wage differentials would lead firms in all sectors to substitute unskilled labor for skilled labor. Instead studies find that virtually all manufacturing industries have increased their relative use of skilled labor despite growing wage differentials. Rising wage differentials along with greater use of skilled labor suggests that demand for skilled labor has been rising broadly in the economy. As expected these wage differentials have led to an upgrading of skills in the work force allowing firms to meet their rising demand for skilled labor Taken together this evidence ( little change in relative prices and economy-wide increases in the demand for skilled labor ) suggests that growing demand for skilled labor has resulted from widespread changes within industries rather than from changes in the structure of production engendered by greater trade. The preponderance of evidence indicates that the primary sources of growing wage inequality are domestic rather than foreign. As discussed in Chapter the sources of wage inequality are difficult to pinpoint but to the extent that growing inequality can be explained technical change has been offered as the leading candidate. Increased trade with developing countries may have reinforced some of the changes in wages caused by technological change but careful studies have failed to discern a sizable impact of trade on wage inequality Two explanations of this finding have been offered. First although trade with developing countries has been growing most U.S. trade about percent still involves other industrialized countries whose skill levels and wages are similar to those in the United States. Second while trade is a growing part of the U.S economy it remains a relatively small part. Only extremely large changes in the composition of trade could have a discernable impact on wages and wage disparity in the U.S. economy Nonetheless the expansion of trade will inevitably disadvantage some workers in the short run. One goal of Administration policy as described in Chapter is to facilitate the adjustment of the labor force to changing economic circumstances whatever the putative source of change. It is by recognizing both the opportunities and the challenges presented by the changing global economy that the Administration seeks to achieve a productive and stable basis for U.S. engagement in the world economy THE ADMINISTRATION 'S TRADE INITIATIVES The Clinton Administration supports the goal of freer trade on a reciprocal basis. In pursuit of that goal the Administration is dedicated to working with the private sector and its trading partners to open foreign markets through bilateral regional and multilateral trade agreements. At the same time the Administration believes that trade policy should complement not substitute for domestic policies to enhance the global competitiveness of American companies and their workers and to make the United States an attractive production location for both domestic and foreign firms DOMESTIC INITIATIVES : THE NATIONAL EXPORT STRATEGY The Administration 's trade policy begins at home with an activist commitment to promote American exports both by reducing domestic barriers to them and by improving the efficiency of our export promotion programs. Working within the interagency Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee created by the Congress to reduce the fragmentation of our export promotion programs the Administration unveiled a new National Export Strategy in September This strategy reflected six underlying themes : streamlining and combining functions across agencies allocating resources stra- tegically involving the private sector and State and local governments effectively advocating the interests of U.S. exporters abroad measuring performance and reducing export controls ( restrictions on exports to meet national security antiproliferation or foreign policy objectives ) Among the actions to be undertaken immediately are : Revising outmoded export controls on high-technology products. The specific technical revisions are expected to reduce regulation significantly on an estimated $ billion worth of high-technology exports. For example export restrictions that previously affected sales of even some personal computers to many foreign markets have been relaxed Consolidating all Federal export promotion services in one location to facilitate " one-stop shopping. " Initially four centers will be created ; more will be added until a national network has been created Providing high-level government advocacy on behalf of U.S firms pursuing major foreign government procurement opportunities through an interagency " Advocacy Network " and an " Advocacy Center " located in the Department of Commerce Improving our export finance programs by combating the " tied aid " practices of other nations increasing the limits on insurance guarantees by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation broadening assistance to U.S. companies seeking to participate in activities funded by the multilateral development banks ( such as the World Bank ) and combining into one agency the infrastructure feasibility funds that are the seed money for U.S. firms ' participation in major infrastructure projects abroad Taken together the actions outlined in the National Export Strategy are expected to increase both the responsiveness and the efficiency of export promotion efforts BILATERAL NEGOTIATIONS Along with these unilateral actions the Administration has engaged numerous foreign countries in bilateral trade talks. The most prominent of these efforts has been with Japan The U.S.-Japan Framework Talks Japan presents a special case for the United States. Japan is the world 's second-largest economy after the United States and our second-largest trading partner after Canada. And it is with Japan that the United States maintains its largest bilateral merchandise trade imbalance : a deficit of $ billion in ( Table ) ( In the same year we enjoyed a $ billion surplus with Japan in services trade. ) Japan 's large surplus with the United States is an important part of its large global current account surplus ( the cur- rent account is a broader measure of trade that includes both goods and services ) which stood at $ billion in TABLE U.S. Merchandise Trade Balances with Selected Countries [ Billions of dollars ] " Greater China " European Community Year Japan Total People 's Republic of China Hong Kong Rest of world Taiwan Note. Exports are f a s and imports are customs value China Hong Kong and Taiwan have been grouped together as " Greater China " for analytical convenience Detail may not add to totals due to rounding Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Moreover certain of Japan 's trade patterns appear to differ from those of other major industrial countries. Japan has an unusually low share of manufactured imports in domestic consumption an unusually low share of intraindustry trade an unusually small stock of inward foreign direct investment an unusually small share of domestic sales accounted for by foreign-owned firms and an unusually high share of intrafirm trade which is predominantly controlled moreover by Japanese rather than foreign-based firms Manufactured imports play a relatively small role in the Japanese economy with the share of manufactured imports in consumption less than half that of the other major industrialized countries ( Table ) And while this measure has risen considerably in the other countries it has remained relatively unchanged in Japan for years TABLE Selected Trade Indicators for Six Industrialized Countries Indicator Import share of domestic manufactures ( percent ) Japan consumption United States Germany United Kingdom France Italy of Intraindustry trade index Foreign firms ' share of domestic sales ( percent ) Data for Not available Note. Intra-European Community trade has been excluded from the intraindustry trade and import share calculations Sources : Institute for International Economics ; United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Division ; World Bank ; and Department of Commerce Another interesting aspect of Japan 's trade pattern is its relatively low level of intraindustry trade trade in differentiated manufactures within a given industry. ( One common example is trade in different makes and models of automobiles. ) As economies develop and the demands of firms and consumers become more complex individual firms become less able to produce the vastly broader range of products required to satisfy all demands Intraindustry trade then increases as firms penetrate each others ' domestic markets to supply those particular products in which they specialize. Intraindustry trade it is sometimes argued is of particular importance because the adjustment costs associated with an expansion of intraindustry trade are thought to be lower than for a comparable expansion of interindustry trade import-competing firms can retool and specialize rather than disappear. If this is so expansion of intraindustry trade should be more compatible with trade liberalization Japan also exhibits an unusually high share of intrafirm trade Intrafirm trade is important both as a major channel of trade and because intracorporate transactions may be less responsive to normal price and cost determinants than are arm 's-length transactions This issue is of considerable interest with regard to Japan because of Japan 's unusual pattern of intrafirm trade. For most countries intrafirm trade is dominated by shipments from parent firms to their foreign affiliates. That is to say intrafirm trade is exportoriented. Japan is unusual in that Japanese parents dominate trade in both exports and imports. Some researchers have attributed this dominance to the prominent role of giant trading companies and keiretsu relationships in Japanese trade and argue that this pattern of trade is consistent with imperfectly competitive Japanese domestic markets. ( Keiretsu are large groups of Japanese firms that share financial production personnel and other linkages. ) Table reports data on U.S. bilateral trade with Europe and Japan. Intrafirm trade is a more important part of U.S.-Japan trade than of U.S.-Europe trade. Three-quarters of all U.S. imports from Japan are intrafirm ( compared with less than percent for trade with Western Europe ) and percent of U.S. exports to Japan are intrafirm ( compared with percent for Western Europe ) Japanese markets are not completely closed. Indeed some U.S firms excel in Japan. On the whole however the role of foreign firms and foreign goods is strikingly small ( Table ) Explanations of Japan 's apparent distinctiveness fall into two broad groups one emphasizing direct trade and industrial policy interventions and the other emphasizing structural characteristics TABLE Intrafirm Trade as Share of Total U.S. Exports to and Imports from Europe and Japan [ Percent of total ] Region U.S. imports from region to Europe Japan World total Note. Intrafirm trade is defined as merchandise trade between " related parties " ( that is between affiliates of the same firm ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census of the economy. Domestic industrial support policies in Japan have included subsidies to producers and to research and development consortia preferential tax treatment preferential access to credit government procurement preferences establishment of producer cartels and lax antitrust enforcement. External policies have included trade protection restrictions on inward foreign direct investment and control over high-technology trade. These policies have been applied to both infant and senescent industries With a few notable exceptions including agriculture Japanese tariffs and import quotas are not significant trade barriers. Yet Japan 's market is regarded by many as effectively closed to imports of many foreign manufactures especially those that directly compete with Japanese goods. Structural barriers alleged to deter imports include reliance on bureaucratic control to ensure product safety ; domestic cartels discriminatory pr-ctices by the keiretsu and weak enforcement of competition policies ; inadequate intellectual property protection ; government procurement procedures that favor domestic suppliers ; imperfect capital markets that inhibit inward foreign investment ; and impediments in the distribution channels for imported products to name a few Estimating the impact of the mostly overt barriers to trade in primary products is relatively straightforward. One recent study concluded that complete elimination of all agricultural trade barriers in Japan might increase the incomes of U.S. producers by percent of the value of bilateral agricultural exports. This would occur through a combination of higher export volumes to Japan and higher prices on exports to all markets. Comparable figures for potential gains in minerals and importantly services are not available What attracts the most attention however is the potential gain in manufactures. And here the story is far more controversial because the subtle nature of Japan 's trade barriers poses difficult problems for economists trying to assess their impact. In consequence researchers have eschewed direct measurement of these barriers and focused instead on inferring their impact indirectly by examining differences in predicted and actual trade volumes. These studies have been virtually unanimous in their conclusion that Japan 's low volume of manufactured imports can not be entirely explained by economic fundamentals In addition to examining quantities one can look at prices. If markets were really open traded goods should sell at " international prices " adjusted for transport costs. A number of studies have concluded that traded-goods prices are far higher in Japan than in other countries. Among these surveys were two involving exact brand and model comparisons conducted by the Department of Commerce and the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry as part of the Structural Impediments Initiative talks The survey found that two-thirds of the products covered were on average percent more expensive in Japan than in the United States ; the survey obtained quantitatively similar results. Additional evidence comes from Japanese researchers who used Japan 's input-output table to calculate the tariff-equivalents of Japanese nontariff barriers. In some sectors they discovered tariff-equivalents of percent and higher The question naturally arises as to why these price differences are not eliminated through arbitrage. Such large price differentials could perhaps be dismissed as the product of exchange-rate misalignment were they temporary but their persistence suggests that they are the product of market closure. Indeed one recent study concluded that Japanese manufactured imports might increase by more than percent if the price differentials were eliminated These studies which extrapolate well beyond the historical experience and are therefore unavoidably imprecise have reached a variety of conclusions as to the importance of economic policy in determining Japanese trade patterns. The preponderance of evidence however points to the closed nature of the Japanese market. According to one recent comprehensive study if Japan were to eliminate all formal and informal barriers to trade U.S. exports to Japan would initially increase by somewhere in the range of $ billion to $ billion per year It should be made clear however that even if these barriers were eliminated the bilateral balance would not change by this full amount : Japanese imports would increase initially but the resultant depreciation of the yen and reallocation of resources would boost Japanese exports and reduce Japanese imports at least partly offsetting the initial change in the balance. Moreover liberalization would occur over an extended period of time making it potentially difficult to disentangle changes in the balance due to liberalization from those due to macroeconomic developments even in retrospect but this in no way diminishes the desirability of obtaining greater access to the Japanese market though. With more-open markets not only will American firms sell more but because of the exchange-rate adjustments many American firms will receive more for what they sell. Moreover Japanese consumers will benefit for the same reasons that American consumers benefit from opening trade : Both will have access to a greater variety of goods at lower prices. Open markets are a win-win situation in which both sides gain The existence of such a large technologically dynamic and distinctive economy as Japan poses special trade problems for the United States. Current U.S. policy centers around the United States-Japan Framework for a New Economic Partnership announced in July The Framework is the successor to the Market Oriented Sector Selective ( MOSS ) talks and the SII talks already mentioned. The Framework document adopted at the time of the Tokyo economic summit calls for macroeconomic sectoral and structural reforms and cooperation on global issues of common interest such as the environment. In particular Japan committed itself to " actively pursue the medium-run objectives of promoting strong and sustainable domestic demandled growth...intended to achieve...a highly significant decrease in its current account surplus.... " Japan also committed to " promoting a significant increase in global imports of goods and services. " For its part the United States " will...actively pursue the medium-term objectives of substantially reducing the fiscal deficit promoting domestic saving and strengthening its international competitiveness. " The sectoral and structural parts of the talks are organized into five baskets : government procurement regulatory reform and competitiveness other major sectors ( in the first instance automobiles and auto parts ) economic harmonization and implementation of existing arrangements and measures. Topics under the government procurement basket include Japanese procurement practices in such sectors as computers supercomputers satellites medical technology and telecommunications as well as overall government procurement policies in both countries. Regulatory issues include policies and practices relating to financial services insurance competition policy retail and wholesale distribution and U.S. export competitiveness. Economic harmonization covers foreign direct investment intellectual property rights access to technology and long-term buyer-supplier relationships. The implementation basket is concerned with carrying out existing agreements between the two countries ( including SII ) The Framework agreement explicitly states that the United States and Japan are committed to the multilateral trading system and that " benefits under this Framework will be on a Most Favored Nation basis. " The Framework represents a departure from previous negotiations in two substantive ways. The first is the use of " objective criteria " to assess progress. The Framework agreement states that " assessment will be based upon sets of objective criteria either qualitative or quantitative or both as appropriate " on which the two governments will agree. In this sense the negotiation is results-oriented with both governments agreeing that " tangible progress must be achieved. " By establishing objective criteria progress can be independently verified allowing negotiators to agree on those areas where problems have successfully been resolved and to focus on those where progress is lacking The other innovation of the Framework talks is procedural : By explicitly incorporating biannual meetings between the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of Japan the Framework dramatically raises the political profile of the negotiations. The hope is that this will significantly increase the pressure on policymakers to make steady progress on resolving outstanding issues Trade with China China is also an important focus of U.S. trade policy because of its size its reforming economy and its large trade surplus with the United States which reached $ billion in It is misleading to focus exclusively on China 's bilateral balance with the United States. Table reports trade balances for China Taiwan and Hong Kong and aggregates them as " Greater China. " It becomes apparent that the increase in the U.S. deficit with China has been largely offset by declines in the U.S. deficits with Taiwan and Hong Kong. These developments are the result of large realignments in exchange rates since the late 1980s that have encouraged firms to relocate labor-intensive activities such as the production of shoes garments and toys from Hong Kong and Taiwan to China where wage rates are lower. In other words the growing U.S.-China trade imbalance represents in part a geographic reallocation of production not a fundamental change in U.S. trade relations With regard to China U.S. trade policy centers on prison labor and workers ' rights intellectual property rights market access textiles services and the issue of China 's most-favored-nation ( MFN ) status. In the area of intellectual property rights the United States and China signed a memorandum of understanding in January China agreed to provide product patent protection beginning January and to adhere to international conventions on the protection of copyrights. A process has been established to enforce the memorandum although there has been little actual progress on enforcement thus far In October the United States and China signed a market access agreement under which China committed itself to increase http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/- Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis the transparency of its trade regime to remove import restrictions such as licensing requirements and quotas from hundreds of products and to liberalize its import administration substantially. The United States agreed to liberalize restrictions that limit Chinese access to technology providing greater opportunities for U.S. producers. China is largely in compliance with the market access agreement although some issues remain unresolved with respect to transparency quotas and agricultural trade. The Administration is continuing to push for greater access in these areas as well as for better access to the Chinese market for U.S. providers of financial maritime and air transport services A memorandum of understanding on exports to the United States produced by prison labor was concluded in and provides for prison inspections. China has begun to allow U.S. officials access to prisons to investigate allegations and there has been a decline in such allegations since the memorandum was signed China continues to be denied coverage under investment guarantees of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation however Coverage was suspended in on the grounds that China was not taking steps to extend internationally recognized workers ' rights to its citizens In the case of textiles conflicts have arisen over China 's shortcomings in implementing the terms of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement which regulates trade in textiles and apparel. Chinese producers have at times resorted to fraudulent practices to evade restrictions on Chinese exports of textiles and apparel to the United States. The most common technique has been to ship goods produced in China to third countries and from there reexport them to the United States under the third countries ' quotas. In January the United States and China reached a new agreement on this issue. In the long run the transshipment problem can be solved through China 's entry into GATT and the tariffication of the U.S. import control system as envisioned in the Uruguay Round agreement ( discussed below ) In the meantime however the United States will continue its two-track policy of negotiations with the Chinese government combined with criminal prosecutions for customs fraud The last major remaining U.S.-China issue is the annual renewal of China 's MFN status. Under the terms of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the Trade Act of MFN status can be extended to nonmarket economies only if the President grants a waiver certifying that the country does not impede emigration. ( The law was originally designed to encourage the Soviet Union to permit the emigration of Soviet Jews. ) China first gained MFN status in the U.S. market in and renewal was routine until the Tiananmen Square incident in Since then renewal of China 's MFN sta- tus has become increasingly controversial with renewal in tied explicitly to human rights improvements In each trade area the Administration is carefully monitoring Chinese implementation of the bilateral agreements and will use all means at its disposal to ensure compliance. Successful implementation will lay the foundation for Chinese accession to GATT and a far closer economic relationship between the United States and China Trade and the Reform Process in the Former Socialist Bloc Another crucial focus of the Administration 's foreign economic policy is support of the reform process in the countries of central and eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union especially Russia Never before has a country of Russia 's size and influence ( with a population of million a large conventional military presence and nuclear weapons ) attempted such a rapid metamorphosis. Because of the immediate implications of Russian economic reform for world peace world economic growth and the U.S. economy the President has made support of the reforms one of his top foreign policy objectives. This involves both providing assistance to domestic reforms and facilitating the integration of Russia into the world trading system Most of the fundamental issues in economic reform including liberalization ( the freeing of prices ) privatization ( the transfer of ownership to private entities ) and stabilization ( the reduction of inflation and the budget deficit ) are essentially Russia 's domestic policy decisions. Nevertheless outside organizations including the International Monetary Fund the World Bank the Group of Seven ( G-7 ) and the U.S. Government have important roles to play. Indeed along with its G partners the United States has been actively assisting the cause of economic reform in Russia. In April the G-7 pledged $ billion of debt rescheduling and $ billion in other assistance. By the end of November over half of this total had been approved Economic assistance packages such as the one presented in Tokyo constitute a significant source of finance for reform policies But Russian exports to the West represent another perhaps even more important source of hard-currency revenues. Because the trade patterns of Russia and the other transitional economies were formerly based on arbitrary central planning decisions not market forces these countries have encountered difficulties in establishing normal commercial relations with other countries. The transition to a market economy has involved dramatic changes in both the product content and geographical composition of trading patterns. After most of these changes have been effected Russia may be a substantial participant in world trade. Russia 's share of U.S. trade is quite small ( percent of total U.S. trade ) but one study found that if the states of the former Soviet Union were like typical industrial economies their share of world exports would eventually rise to over percent from around percent in Through the first months of Russia 's two most important exports to the United States were aluminum ( $ million ) and crude oil ( $ million ) which together accounted for more than percent of the total Expanding trade with economies in transition from socialism raises special problems for the application of U.S. antidumping laws which divide the world into market and nonmarket economies ( NMEs ) with separate methodologies for assessing dumping specified for each. ( Russia for example is classified as an NME. ) For market economies dumping is determined to have occurred when a foreign producer charges lower prices in the U.S. than in its home market ( or alternatively prices below its costs in the home market ) In the case of NMEs since neither prices nor input costs are market determined they are not used in dumping investigations. Instead U.S. law instructs the Commerce Department to construct cost estimates based on costs in a " surrogate " country at a similar stage of development. In practice the surrogates are often at quite dissimilar stages of development thus potentially tilting the calculation toward finding large dumping margins. For example the Department of Commerce has used Swiss Canadian Dutch French German and Japanese producers as surrogates for Chinese firms in antidumping petitions. Perhaps the best known example however is that of Polish golf carts described in Box Box The Case of the Polish Golf Carts In the mid-1970s an antidumping petition was filed against Polish electric golf carts * Because Poland was an NME that had no golf courses and therefore little domestic demand for golf carts the U.S. authorities rightly concluded that it was impossible to compare the prices at which the carts were sold in the United States with prices in Poland. Instead the authorities employed a surrogate-country approach : they attempted to estimate what golf carts cost in a country similar to Poland. Canada was chosen. Unfortunately Canada did n't produce golf carts either so the final determination was based on an estimate of what golf carts would have cost in Canada if Canada had actually produced them Reclassification of NMEs such as Russia as market economies would not necessarily solve the problem however since they would then become subject to U.S. countervailing duty law at a time when their subsidies to state-owned producers remain sizable. As a result either the market or the nonmarket methodology may impede imports from economies in transition This situation is particularly problematic since allowing Russia and other economies in transition to export the goods in which they have comparative advantage benefits both these economies ( which obtain valuable hard-currency revenues as well as experience in world markets ) and Western nations ( which obtain goods produced relatively more efficiently than they can be produced in the West ) Open market access is therefore a positive-sum means of encouraging the reform process REGIONAL INITIATIVES Some issues can not be handled on a bilateral basis and the Administration has been deeply engaged in a number of regional efforts. The most prominent of these has been the North American Free Trade Agreement which will solidify the ongoing reforms in Mexico and help expand U.S.-Mexican trade The North American Free Trade Agreement In November the Congress ratified the North American Free Trade Agreement which went into effect on January NAFTA creates a free-trade area of million consumers and over $ trillion of annual output linking the United States to Canada and Mexico our largest and third-largest trading partners. Building on the earlier United States-Canada Free-Trade Agreement NAFTA will contribute to productive efficiency enhance the ability of North American producers to compete globally and raise the standard of living of all three countries. By improving the investment climate in North America and by providing innovative companies with a larger market NAFTA will also increase economic growth NAFTA will help reinforce the market reforms already under way in Mexico ( Box ) Mexico 's reforms have raised its rate of economic growth making it an increasingly important export market for the United States. A stable and prosperous Mexico is important to the United States for both economic and geopolitical reasons. The United States shares a border roughly miles long with Mexico ; and as economic opportunities in Mexico improve Mexican workers will have fewer incentives to migrate to the United States. NAFTA will help forge a lasting relationship between the two countries based on open trade and cooperation In addition to dismantling trade barriers in industrial goods NAFTA includes agreements on services investment intellectual property rights agriculture and strengthening of trade rules There are also side agreements on labor adjustment provisions protection of the environment and import surges Box Mexican Economic Reforms Mexico is one of the outstanding economic success stories of the last decade. After the debt crisis of the Mexican government began a broad program of economic reform which has continued through the early 1990s. Fiscal policy changes which moved the primary budget ( that is excluding interest payments ) from a deficit of about percent of GDP in to a sustained surplus were the first step. More-fundamental reform began in December when the Mexican government implemented a concerted program that combined macroeconomic stabilization with microeconomic liberalization Stabilization efforts in were pursued through a fiscal policy of tight spending controls and tax reform that broadened the tax base and lowered tax rates while maintaining a roughly stable level of revenue. Monetary and exchange-rate policies were combined to reduce inflation while preventing large exchange-rate movements. Finally incomes policies were used to reduce expectations of inflation and any inflationary inertia The microeconomic reforms were sweeping. More than percent of the public sector enterprises in existence in have already been privatized or liquidated. Privatization has enhanced microeconomic efficiency and reduced the fiscal demands imposed by badly run state-owned enterprises. In addition Mexico joined GATT in Tariffs were cut sharply and many nontariff barriers to trade such as quotas and import licenses were removed. Finally a renegotiation and restructuring of Mexico 's external debt eased its debt burden and greatly reduced the uncertainty associated with debt service The results of these reforms have been impressive. Inflation fell from approximately percent in to percent in At the same time real GDP growth rose from percent in to percent in before slowing somewhat to percent in The recent passage of NAFTA should strengthen the reform effort in Mexico and make a positive contribution to its economic performance in the future NAFTA and Industrial Trade. As a result of NAFTA existing duties on most goods from member countries either were eliminated on January or will be phased out in or years ( for certain sensitive items up to years ) Among those industrial goods for which trade is now tariff-free are computers medical equipment agricultural equipment internal combustion engines and telephone switches all of which previously faced tariffs of per- cent or more in the Mexican market. Approximately percent of U.S. industrial and agricultural exports to Mexico will be eligible for duty-free treatment within years. NAFTA will also eliminate quotas and import licenses that are not essential for such purposes as protecting human health NAFTA and Services Trade. NAFTA will allow U.S. service firms to provide their services directly from the United States on a nondiscriminatory basis with any exceptions clearly spelled out. For investors NAFTA assures nondiscriminatory treatment : Americans will generally be able to establish acquire and operate firms on the same basis as Mexicans in Mexico and Canadians in Canada NAFTA also protects U.S. investors against restrictions on their repatriation of capital profits and royalties and against expropriations without full compensation. Investors can seek monetary relief from an international arbitral panel for violation of their rights Virtually all types of inventions including Pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals are protected under NAFTA provisions that require patents to be granted for both products and processes developed by firms in member countries. The agreement also protects copyrights for computer programs and databases and rental rights for computer programs and sound recordings. Service marks and trade secrets are also covered along with integrated circuit masks both directly and as components of other products NAFTA and Agricultural Trade. NAFTA will virtually eliminate barriers to trade in agricultural commodities between the United States and Mexico over a 15-year period. All restrictions on products representing about percent of U.S.-Mexico agricultural trade were lifted as soon as the agreement took effect. Products such as frozen beef strawberries and cut flowers all of which previously were subject to tariffs of percent or more in the Mexican market now trade tariff-free. For the remaining products the phaseout will take between and years. The phaseout for most tariffs imposed by the United States will simply involve an annual reduction in the tariff rate In cases where the existing trade barrier is a nontariff barrier such as an import license or quota the phaseout process is more complicated. First the license or quota will be replaced by a " tariffrate quota " allowing a limited quantity of the good to be imported at a low ( or zero ) tariff rate but charging a tariff for quantities above the limit. Second the tariff-rate quota will be phased out gradually over a to 15-year period by increasing the quantity limit and/or reducing the tariff rate applied to imports above the limit With respect to the other bilateral flows U.S.-Canada trade liberalization will continue as specified under the earlier free-trade agreement with tariffs on all agricultural goods eliminated by while nontariff barriers on a few products ( poultry eggs dairy products and sugar ) are maintained. In a separate agreement under NAFTA Mexico and Canada will eliminate tariffs on their bilateral trade ( except for the four products listed above ) All three countries agreed to work for the elimination of agricultural exports subsidies As a consequence of these changes under NAFTA U.S.-Mexico agricultural trade is expected to grow significantly. U.S. corn growers for example can expect to export more corn to Mexico while Mexican farmers can expect to export more fresh vegetables to the Untied States NAFTA-Plus : The Side Agreements. The Clinton Administration accepted NAFTA as negotiated by its predecessor but argued that more was needed. The result was the negotiation of three innovative side agreements The North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation represents the first attempt to manage the terms of the potential change in labor markets brought about by an accord between the United States and a trading partner. The agreement involves such issues as restrictions on child labor health and safety standards and minimum wages. The supplemental labor agreement was developed around three fundamental principles : ( ) enhanced collaboration cooperation and information exchange among the three countries ; ( ) increased efforts to make each country 's labor laws and their implementation explicit and highly visible ; and ( ) increased use of effective mechanisms to encourage the enforcement of national labor laws. The agreement establishes procedural mechanisms for enforcement including channels of public communication exchanges of information discussion of issues and various levels of consultations. If a solution can not be reached the agreement provides for binding arbitration and assessment of penalties. In addition to signing the labor side agreement the Mexican government has pledged to link increases in the Mexican minimum wage to productivity increases. Moreover the United States has retained its right to use its domestic trade laws such as Section of the trade act with respect to labor issues not covered under NAFTA The North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation explicitly ensures our right to safeguard the environment. NAFTA maintains all existing U.S. health safety and environmental standards. It allows States and cities to enact even tougher standards while providing mechanisms to encourage all parties to harmonize their standards upward. The environmental side agreement creates a new North American Commission on Environmental Cooperation with a Council made up of the three countries ' top environmental officials. The Commission will have a Secretariat with a permanent staff. There is a " layered " enforcement mechanism to ensure that countries obey their own environmental laws. The mechanism starts with " sunshine " provisions that guarantee public participation in monitoring the enforcement of environmental laws Trade sanctions are then provided for if other avenues are not sufficient to resolve disputes. Besides the Commission two new institutions will be established to fund and implement environmental infrastructure projects along the U.S.-Mexican border The side agreement on import surges creates an early warning mechanism to identify those sectors where explosive trade growth may do significant harm to domestic industry. The side agreement also establishes that in the future a working group can provide for revisions in the treaty text based on the experience with the existing safeguard mechanisms During the transition period safeguard relief is available in the form of a temporary snapback to pre-NAFTA duties if an import surge threatens serious injury to a domestic industry. And unless a NAFTA member 's exports account for a substantial share of total imports and contribute significantly to the injury or its threat these exports must be excluded from safeguard actions taken by other members against imports from all countries Other NAFTA Issues. NAFTA preserves the right of each member to retain its own contingent protection laws ( such as antidumping and countervailing duty laws ) but in reviewing determination under these laws binational panels will replace domestic judicial review ( as in the case of the United States-Canada Free-Trade Agreement ) The panel will apply to domestic law of the importing country and its decision is final. Either the importing or the exporting country may request a review of a panel 's determination In other areas such as intellectual property rights dispute resolution is layered. First a country may request consultations and should these fail to resolve the dispute it may call a meeting of the Trade Commission which will include Ministers from each country If the Commission is unable to resolve the dispute it is submitted to an arbitral panel which issues a report. If the panel upholds the complaint but the disputants are still unable to reach a resolution the complaining country is authorized to suspend benefits as appropriate The North American Development Bank ( NADBank ) was created to address concerns about the environment and about worker dislocation. It will serve as a major lending institution to finance coordinate and implement environmental infrastructure and community development projects both along the border and elsewhere related to continuing North American integration. NADBank will be organized to invest specifically in the environmental physical and social infrastructure that will be needed to bring about an up ward convergence in environmental and social standards and practices between Mexico and the United States. In this way it will facilitate the adjustment of workers adversely impacted by NAFTArelated trade liberalization. The bank will be capitalized to provide $ billion to $ billion in loans and guarantees and will be able to leverage additional private and public funds to generate an estimated total of $ billion in project finance The Economic Impact of NAFTA. NAFTA may be the most thoroughly studied trade agreement in history. A review of the major studies of NAFTA 's economic impact indicates a broad consensus on key points in the NAFTA debate : ( ) All three NAFTA countries gain from the agreement. ( ) In the United States labor will gain from increased employment increased wages or both. ( ) Increased investment in Mexico will not come at the expense of investment in the United States. The few studies reaching contrary conclusions have been strongly criticized by academic and other professional economists In a letter to the President academic economists including Nobel Prize winners expressed their support for NAFTA stating " While we may not agree on the precise employment impact of NAFTA we do concur that the agreement will be a net positive for the United States both in terms of employment creation and overall economic growth. " Nineteen out of twenty studies surveyed found that NAFTA would benefit the United States ; the lone negative assessment was based on the unrealistic assumption that factories literally would be dismantled in the United States and moved to Mexico It has been estimated that the agreement will increase export employment in the United States by jobs ; on average Mexican export-related jobs pay wages percent higher than the national average. Moreover studies of NAFTA have found that gains would occur even among groups sometimes alleged to be adversely affected. For example it was found that union workers will benefit from NAFTA because the growing sectors of U.S. exports to Mexico are disproportionately unionized. Likewise African-American workers are more heavily concentrated in industries that export to Mexico than in Mexican import-competing sectors. As a result AfricanAmericans too may benefit disproportionately from the agreement Finally by contributing to the creation of more and better jobs in Mexico NAFTA will discourage illegal immigration from Mexico to the United States In summary NAFTA is an epochal agreement and its passage was a triumph of facts over fear. It is the world 's first free-trade agreement between industrial and developing countries. Its side agreements embody innovative ideas to deal with environmental and labor issues. The best available evidence shows that NAFTA will create good high-paying jobs for American workers. It will strengthen the ability of U.S. firms to compete in the global marketplace. It will help the Mexican and Canadian economies as well providing a disincentive for illegal transborder migration and other illegal activities. The Administration 's trade policy can be described as " export activism " the United States will work actively to open foreign markets and in return we will keep our market open NAFTA is a key component of this activist strategy Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) was begun in to encourage economic cooperation among countries of the Pacific region. In the past quarter-century the United States ' APEC partners Australia Brunei Canada China Hong Kong Indonesia Japan Malaysia Mexico New Zealand Papua New Guinea the Philippines the Republic of Korea Singapore Chinese Taipei ( Taiwan ) and Thailand have increased their combined share of world income and trade by more than half ( Box ) These economies now account for more than half of all U.S. trade or more than triple U.S. trade with the European Union. Even if Canada and Mexico are excluded from the calculation U.S. trade with other APEC countries is percent greater than our trade with the EU countries One consequence of this rapid growth is striking : as long as the Asian countries grow faster than the United States they will become more important in our trade while we will become less important in theirs. Therefore past trade strategies based on threats of market closure are liable to become less and less effective This analysis suggests that to achieve its trade policy goals in the region the United States will increasingly have to act in concert with other countries rather than unilaterally. Thus it may be desirable to begin establishing the appropriate institutional infrastructure for cooperation now and APEC is the leading candidate The United States held the rotating chairmanship of APEC in and hosted the annual Ministerial meeting in Seattle in November which was attended by economic policymakers from each of its members. The President elevated the importance of APEC by hosting the first-ever meeting of APEC leaders in Seattle At the APEC Ministerial meeting a group of private individuals previously commissioned by the APEC Ministers to serve as an Eminent Persons Group presented its report. The report described the threats to trade and investment in the region and recommended ways to promote regional trade liberalization and cooperation. The Ministers indicated that those recommendations closely linked to ongoing work in APEC should be implemented promptly. These include recommendations to achieve a common set of investment principles harmonize standards and create a mecha- Box The Asian " Miracle " Per capita gross national product ( GNP ) in East Asia grew on average by over percent per year between and During the same period per capita GNP in the industrialized countries that make up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) grew by less than percent per year. What explains this relatively rapid growth in East Asia ? A recent World Bank book argues that a major part of the explanation is that the average OECD member was much more technologically advanced than the average East Asian country in By adopting and adapting techniques from the industrial countries the East Asian countries were able to increase both productivity levels and per capita GNP at a rapid pace This is undoubtedly true. But other countries that were poor in did not grow as fast as the successful East Asian nations. Why did East Asia experience faster growth ? One key factor is almost certainly the macroeconomic environment : inflation and budget deficits were kept relatively low and national currencies were kept from becoming overvalued. Macroeconomic policies encouraged or at least did not discourage high saving and investment rates as well as strong export growth. Governments also emphasized education. The focus was primarily on the quality of basic education rather than on higher education. As a result of these policies East Asian countries accumulated substantial physical and human capital which spurred relatively rapid growth in GNP per capita The impact of other more interventionist policies on growth in several East Asian countries remains a source of controversy. Some government interventions in the market may have improved economic performance particularly when they were not excessively distortionary were administered competently were aimed at particular market imperfections and were adapted to meet changing circumstances * The Asian countries are expected to account for increasing shares of world income and trade. By it is likely that Asia will have surpassed North America and Europe as the world 's largest economic zone. As its share of world income rises so will its share of world trade the Asian share of U.S. trade is projected to rise to percent by the end of the decade nism for resolving trade and investment disputes. Other recommendations relating to deepening and broadening the Uruguay Round of GATT were singled out for additional study. The APEC leaders instructed the Eminent Persons Group to elaborate on their recommendations relating to longer term trade liberalization in a report to be presented to the leaders in in Indonesia MULTILATERAL INITIATIVES : THE URUGUAY ROUND The most far-reaching of the Administration 's market-opening efforts has been on a global scale : the Uruguay Round negotiations of GATT whose participating countries account for approximately percent of world trade. GATT was created after World War II to reduce tariffs and remove nontariff barriers to international trade. In seven rounds of GATT-sponsored multilateral trade negotiations ( the Uruguay Round is the eighth ) the member countries have lowered tariffs and agreed on codes of conduct for nontariff barriers In the Uruguay Round negotiations effectively completed on December the United States and other GATT members agreed not only to lower tariffs on merchandise trade but also to integrate into GATT certain areas of trade and investment that had not been subject to effective GATT discipline including agriculture textiles trade in services investment and intellectual property rights. The Uruguay Round also made progress in reforming multilateral dispute settlement procedures and other multilateral trade rules including those dealing with nontariff measures The Congress is expected to ratify this agreement this year The stakes in the Uruguay Round negotiations were enormous In the short run failure to complete the Round would have significantly undermined business confidence around the globe and might have contributed to the erosion of the open trading system. In the long run the successful completion of the Round will mean a major boost to the world economy. Preliminary studies suggest that the likely gains to the U.S. economy alone are more than $ billion but less than $ billion annually by ( Box ) These efficiency gains will manifest themselves in the form of more and better jobs for American workers The Round achieved major reductions in trade barriers facing industrial products. Key provisions of the market access agreement include the following : Tariffs imposed by major industrial countries are to be eliminated and those of many developing countries either eliminated or sharply reduced in the following areas : construction equipment agricultural equipment medical equipment steel beer distilled spirits Pharmaceuticals paper toys and furniture Box The Economic Impact of the Uruguay Round Even before the Uruguay Round was completed researchers were attempting to quantify its likely effects on the American economy. Studies based on existing formal economic models unanimously conclude that these effects will be beneficial. It is quite likely that new studies incorporating some of the Round 's final accomplishments in such areas as intellectual property protection will yield even larger estimates of benefits The Uruguay Round will increase American output because the specialization encouraged by more-open markets will raise productivity. As foreign markets open we will produce more of the goods that make use of the highly skilled highly productive U.S. work force. Economic models offer a range of estimates of the output gain from greater specialization. A recent OECD study estimates those gains to be percent of GDP for the United States. But this is almost certainly a gross under * estimate of the impact of the Round because it ignored a host of important factors including gains from specialization within the manufacturing sector. Another study by World Bank and OECD economists estimates even smaller gains but focuses on agriculture. Studies that more adequately capture gains from specialization suggest that the benefit to the U.S * economy is likely to be approximately percent of GDP after the Uruguay Round tariff cuts are fully phased in Other important sources of benefit are not captured by the existing models which do not quantify the impact of trade liberalization in services or enhanced protection of intellectual property rights. In addition higher productivity will result in increased investment and innovation providing an important additional benefit. These additional gains are difficult to quantify but they are almost certainly sizable and may even exceed the more easily quantified gains. The total gain years after implementation of the agreement begins is then likely to be more than $ billion but less than $ billion annually Major U.S. trading partners agreed to deep tariff cuts ranging from to percent on important electronics items including semiconductors computer parts and semiconductor manufacturing equipment Tariffs of industrial and major developing countries on chemical products are to be harmonized at very low rates ( zero or percent according to product ) The agreement significantly increased access to markets representing approximately percent of world trade by reducing tariffs on certain specific items of key interest to U.S. export ers. Progress in textiles and apparel was particularly significant. For decades international trade in textiles and apparel products has effectively been exempted from GATT rules. Instead the Multi-Fiber Arrangement establishes a procedure for limiting textile and apparel exports from developing to industrial countries. Under the final Uruguay Round agreement products covered by the Multi-Fiber Arrangement will be free of quotas after years and textiles will be integrated into general GATT rules. Tariffs will be reduced as well Throughout the Uruguay Round negotiations one of the most contentious issues was agricultural trade liberalization. The final agreement on agriculture strengthens the long-term rules for agricultural trade and sharply limits national policies that distort that trade. U.S. agricultural exports will benefit significantly from reductions in foreign export subsidies and from market opening by our trading partners The United States was successful in its effort to obtain meaningful rules and explicit commitments to reduce export subsidies cut domestic subsidies and increase market access. Agricultural export subsidies and trade-distorting domestic farm subsidies are not only to be reduced but for the first time will be subject to explicit multilateral disciplines. The United States also prevailed in establishing the principle of comprehensive tariffication which will lead to the eventual removal of all import quotas and other nontariff import barriers. Nontariff barriers will first be replaced by tariffs ensuring minimum or current access and then these tariffs will gradually be reduced Progress in creating a more hospitable trading system for hightechnology products was achieved on two fronts. First the United States was able to win greater protection for intellectual property rights such as patents copyrights and trademarks. This is very important for a diverse set of U.S. industries including the electronics industry ( where semiconductor masks will be protected ) the pharmaceutical industry ( patents ) and the communications industry ( protection of copyrights ) Second the Uruguay Round agreement sets forth multilateral rules governing subsidies. Because of the beneficial social spillovers associated with research and development activities government support can not and should not be ruled out altogether. The challenge for the multilateral trading system is to find rules that permit governments to support innovations that benefit all nations while precluding rent-shifting subsidies designed to benefit one nation at the expense of others. The Uruguay Round agreement makes progress in this respect by establishing clearer rules and stronger disciplines in the subsidies area. It also makes nonactionable certain subsidies relating to basic research regional development and environmental cleanup provided they are subject to conditions designed to limit their distorting effects Negotiators were able to agree on comprehensive GATT rules governing trade and investment in services ( the so-called General Agreement on Trade in Services or GATS ) such as telecommunications professional and financial services. The agreement contains a strong national-treatment provision : Member countries must accord to service suppliers of other countries treatment no less favorable than that accorded their own suppliers. GATS also includes a market access provision that incorporates disciplines on discriminatory measures that governments frequently impose to limit competition. These measures include restrictions on the number of firms allowed into the market " economic need " tests and mandatory local incorporation rules. Because of the breadth and complexity of these issues not as much progress was made as was desirable. To realize additional progress GATS establishes a procedural framework for further negotiation The Uruguay Round negotiations also yielded systematic prohibitions on trade-related investment measures. For example the agreement prohibits so-called local content requirements which force foreign firms to use a set amount of locally produced inputs as a condition for investment. It also prohibits " trade balancing " requirements under which a foreign affiliate must export as much of its production as it imports for use as inputs. These requirements have bedeviled U.S. firms operating abroad in the past Lastly the Uruguay Round agreement prohibits so-called voluntary export restraints and other similar measures that are often used as safeguards outside GATT rules. It also provides specific time limits for the formation and operation of dispute settlement panels and requires the automatic adoption of panel reports ( except in the case of unanimous veto ) Previously any country including the country against which the complaint was lodged could effectively block the implementation of a panel 's decision. The new procedures will greatly expedite the resolution of international trade disputes. The members of GATT agreed to establish a new multilateral organization to be called the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) to enforce these new agreements In summary the U.S. negotiators in the Uruguay Round were successful in negotiating broad-ranging multilateral trade liberalization. This was accomplished by reducing existing barriers and bringing areas of trade that had been largely outside the GATT system such as agriculture textiles intellectual property and services under the GATT rubric. At the same time GATT procedures have been strengthened to ensure that signatories meet their obligations without compromising our ability to implement our national trade or other laws ( Box ) The liberalization of global trade resulting from these substantive and procedural achievements will raise real incomes in the United States by billions of dollars annually in the coming years Box -The Uruguay Round and U.S. Trade Laws The Uruguay Round final agreement contains a number of provisions that will enhance dispute resolution and facilitate better enforcement of U.S. rights. The agreement both moves GATT procedures closer to U.S. laws and complements U.S laws for dealing with unfair foreign trade practices Section of the Trade Act of provides the basis for actions to enforce U.S rights under trade agreements and to respond to foreign practices that impede or restrict U.S. exports. When disputes arise in areas covered by GATT * Section requires the United States to use GATT dispute resolution procedures before undertaking unilateral action. The Uruguay Round brings agriculture textiles and services under GATT rules for the first time and enhances the speed and effectiveness of GATT dispute resolution procedures. As a result the United States can now use GATT to accomplish objectives that formerly required unilateral action. When disputes arise in areas outside the GATT framework the United States can still use Section to combat unfair foreign trade practices The Uruguay Round brings GATT closer to U.S. practices in other areas. For example in dealing with food safety measures the Uruguay Round agreement allows countries to choose their own levels of safety but requires that each country 's standards have a scientific basis and not be used as disguised trade barriers. Because U.S. laws already have a scientific basis it is unlikely that they will be susceptible to challenge. Other countries however have used food safety regulations in an arbitrary manner to block imports. The agreement adopts similar provisions for dealing with technical barriers to trade such as so-called conformity assessment procedures ( registration inspection and laboratory accreditation procedures among others ) used to evaluate conformance with technical regulations Antidumping is another area in which the post-Uruguay Round GATT will become more like U.S. trade laws. The United States has a transparent process for implementing its antidumping laws. The Uruguay Round agreement will make foreign antidumping actions more transparent which should help U.S. exporters by improving the fairness of other countries ' antidumping procedures THE TRADE POLICY AGENDA By lowering tariffs and providing a framework for cooperation in international trade GATT has contributed significantly to a more harmonious world trading regime. But new issues in trade policy are coming to the fore as the world economy evolves. Among the important new issues confronting GATT and the new WTO will be issues relating to trade and the environment competition policies and regionalism TRADE AND THE ENVIRONMENT Trade and environmental issues have become intertwined in recent years. Some accuse GATT of being hostile to the environment while others argue that some countries ' environmental policies are thinly veiled protectionism. In reality protectionism often contributes to environmental degradation by encouraging inappropriate patterns of production. An obvious example is agricultural protection which stimulates agricultural production in poorly suited locations. Farmers in these areas overuse chemicals or exhaust scarce water resources to compensate for their natural disadvantages thereby contributing to environmental degradation. Freer trade would encourage more-appropriate patterns of production and improve the environment even as it increased living standards Standard economic analysis suggests offsetting government action when prices fail to reflect environmental costs ( Chapter ) But trade restraints are rarely the best solution to environmental problems. If the environmental problem is limited to one country domestic policies not trade protection should be employed. If pollution or other environmental problems spill across borders international rules and cooperation will be necessary. But here again trade protection will seldom be the most effective remedy Sometimes trade sanctions are used ( or threatened ) as a way to enforce environmental agreements. For example the Montreal Protocol which seeks to reverse the depletion of the upper-atmosphere ozone layer caused by the release of chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals requires trade actions against countries that do not abide by the environmental standards in the agreement. A second example is the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) which aims to protect endangered species of wildlife by restricting and monitoring their trade During the possibility of using trade sanctions for environmental purposes was raised pursuant to a recommendation of CITES in the case of trade by China and Taiwan in rhinoceros and tiger parts and in regard to Norwegian whaling practices under the Pelly Amendment to enforce the International Whaling Con vention moratorium on whaling. In both cases however sanctions were deferred The founders of GATT could not have foreseen the present importance of environmental problems. Some headway in harmonizing trade and environmental concerns has already been made in the environmental side agreement to NAFTA. And the preamble to the agreement establishing the WTO recognizes the importance of environmental concerns. The WTO negotiators have also agreed to develop a work program on trade and the environment to ensure the responsiveness of the multilateral trading system to environmental objectives INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND COMPETITION POLICY As tariff and nontariff barriers to trade fall and as national economies become more integrated into the world trading system differences in national business practices and laws become more important determinants of trade outcomes. Currently there are no multilateral rules to redress possibly restrictive practices in the way companies compete such as price fixing price discrimination and the preferential supplier and distributor relationships characteristic of Japan 's keiretsu. Many nations including the United States rely on antitrust laws to prevent anticompetitive business practices by domestic firms in their domestic market National antidumping laws are the most commonly used remedy in such circumstances. But unlike domestic antitrust laws which generally increase competition and lower prices national antidumping laws sometimes reduce competition and raise prices. Both in the United States and elsewhere antidumping laws go beyond preventing anticompetitive practices which should be their rationale and often have the effect of protecting domestic industries from foreign competition. For example a recent study found that during the Reagan Administration nontariff barriers including antidumping actions probably reduced U.S. manufactured imports by around a fifth largely by discouraging foreign producers from entering the U.S. market or by discouraging those that do export here from lowering their prices If sound competition policies were present and effectively enforced in more nations and if such laws were more easily enforceable against foreign misconduct they could serve as the first line of defense against restrictive business practices by both domestic and foreign firms. The United States is currently pursuing this goal through such bilateral mechanisms as antitrust cooperation agreements Here NAFTA is a step in the right direction. The agreement commits its signatories to cooperate in the area of competition law enforcement and imposes discipline on certain government-des ignated monopolies. It also establishes a trilateral committee to consider the relationship between trade and competition policy in the NAFTA countries. Some other free-trade areas have gone further. For example in the European Union and the Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area antidumping laws do not apply to trade among member countries since this is considered internal trade subject to organization-wide competition policies Until there is greater convergence and international cooperation in the enforcement of antitrust laws against cross-border conduct international disputes over unfair pricing between corporations of different national origins will often continue to play out in one of two ways : through the application of national competition laws with the continuing difficulties associated with their international enforcement or through the application of overly restrictive national trade laws. As part of the Uruguay Round the WTO Council for Trade in Goods will consider provisions on investment policy and competition policy in the future. The OECD is also pursuing a work program in this area REGIONALISM Although there may be significant benefits to trade liberalization on a regional basis some nonmember countries could be hurt through trade and investment diversion as trade and investment are preferentially shifted from them to the member countries. One way to mitigate these concerns is for members of a free-trade area to move toward a customs union whose common external tariff would match the lowest tariff within the region prior to the formation of the customs union. Another possibility would be to open regional arrangements to new members. It has also been suggested that GATT rules be amended to allow compensation for nonmembers hurt by regional liberalization agreements. These and other proposals to deal with regional free-trade associations may need to be discussed in GATT in order to preserve the benefits of regional trade liberalization while addressing the concerns of outsiders FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET DEVELOPMENTS The international value of the dollar as measured by its tradeweighted average exchange rate rose by an astonishing percent between the end of and early By mid-1988 however the dollar had returned to its level and since then it has continued on a slight downward trend with much narrower fluctuations than earlier in the 1980s. The large appreciation and subsequent depreciation of the dollar had a marked impact on the com petitive position of U.S. firms. Had they been offset by differences between the inflation rates of the United States and its trading partners these large swings in the value of the dollar would have had no impact on our competitiveness. Inflation differentials however were much smaller than the exchange-rate swings. As a result the dollar appreciated and then depreciated in both real and nominal terms by roughly equal amounts Chart shows indexes of the value of the dollar relative to the currencies of our major trading partners. In addition to the nominal effective exchange rate which does not adjust for inflation differences the chart shows two measures of the real effective exchange rate : one in which relative consumer prices are used for the inflation adjustment and one in which relative unit labor costs are used. The chart clearly demonstrates the high correlation between nominal and real exchange-rate movements since In addition the chart shows that relative unit labor costs in manufacturing have declined sharply since their peak. Partly as a result U.S. manufacturing firms have become extremely competitive in world markets Chart Nominal and Real Effective Dollar Exchange Rates The value of the dollar has been more stable in the 1990s than during the 1980s Index = ~ Real effective exchange rate Relative unit labor costs ( manufacturing ) Nominal effective exchange rate Note : Indexes are based on units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar. A decline in any of the indexes indicates falling relative costs and increasing competitiveness Source : International Monetary Fund The dollar ended roughly where it began. After rising sharply in the second half of it varied in a narrow range in ( Chart ) The relatively small movements in the dollar 's effective exchange rate masked considerable changes in the value of the dollar relative to individual currencies however. The U.S dollar rose relative to the Canadian dollar and most continental European currencies but declined sharply relative to the yen Chart Exchange Rates of the Dollar Against Selected Currencies The dollar strengthened against the Canadian and German currencies after mid-1992 but weakened against the yen Index January = Canadian $ -y ^ ^ ^ ^ K f ~ ^ T / ^ ^ ..r. ^ .y /iv ^ Effective N / x N ^ j \ N / D M \ / \ / \ / \ / \ _ J Yen I Note : Indexes are based on units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar Source : International Monetary Fund The appreciation of the dollar relative to the European currencies occurred despite low short-term and falling ( until November ) longterm interest rates in the United States. Since low and falling interest rates are frequently associated with currency depreciations this may at first appear puzzling. The decline in European interest rates during explains the apparent puzzle The stability of the dollar and the cyclical behavior of the Japanese and European economies are important in understanding the likely impact of the President 's deficit reduction package on the U.S. current account. As Chapter points out deficit reduction is generally associated with an increase in net exports. This expansion in net exports provides a stimulus that partially offsets the impact of spending cuts and tax increases on domestic demand The weakness in the economies of our major trading partners has on the other hand reduced demand for U.S. exports. Some of the boost to export demand that can be expected to result from the deficit reduction package may therefore be delayed until economic activity picks up in Europe and Japan. But by export demand should begin to rise THE EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM The European Monetary System ( EMS ) was created in March to limit exchange-rate variability among the European currencies ( Box ) A majority of countries in the EMS agreed to participate in the system 's Exchange Rate Mechanism ( ERM ) under which most member countries were required to maintain their exchange rates within percent of " central rates " between their currency and each of the other members ' currencies. When an exchange rate between two members ' currencies moves to the limits of the band both central banks are required to intervene to prevent the exchange rate from moving outside the band. In the event of irresistible pressure on a member country 's exchange rate realignments of the country 's central rate are permitted Inflation in most European economies declined by the mid-1980s moving toward the rates of Germany and the Netherlands. Countries concentrated on maintaining their parities with respect to the deutsche mark since Germany had for historical reasons established an unwavering commitment to price stability. Increasingly then the deutsche mark became the monetary anchor for the EMS By linking their monetary policies to German policy other ERM members brought their inflation rates down. French inflation for example declined from over percent at the start of the 1980s to under percent in To some observers the disinflation achieved within the EMS highlights an important rationale for pegging exchange rates. An alternative view holds that disinflation was not simply a product of the EMS but was worldwide in scope. During the 1980s for example inflation also declined in the United Kingdom which did not join the ERM until and in the United States and Canada So perhaps the relative stability of EMS parities in recent years was as much the result as the cause of a convergence in inflation rates Realignments took place relatively frequently in the first years of the EMS but not thereafter. Between and there were realignments ; these tended to be small as well as frequent and thereby occurred without major crises. After January essentially no realignments took place until September Box Exchange-Rate Volatility and International Trade Proponents of the ERM argue that stabilizing exchange rates is important for expanding trade. Exchange-rate volatility they argue is a source of uncertainty to firms engaging in trade because it adds volatility to the domestic currency value of future foreign currency transactions. Firms therefore face greater uncertainty in revenues and profits from foreign sales when exchange rates are more volatile. This added uncertainty it is claimed discourages firms from engaging in trade and from making the investments that support trade Such claims seem plausible but they enjoy little empirical support. The volume of U.S. trade did grow slightly faster between and when the dollar was fixed than between and when the dollar floated. Relative to GDP however trade volumes grew more quickly in the second period. In addition studies that have examined the extent to which greater exchange-rate volatility inhibits trade flows have generally failed to find a robust relationship. One possible explanation is that financial markets provide firms with risk management tools that can be used to hedge exchange-rate movements. For example a firm can buy currencies forward to fix the domestic currency value of future payments. Whatever the explanation it is difficult to find empirical support for an adverse impact of exchange-rate volatility on trade volumes THE EUROPEAN CURRENCIES IN TURMOIL The EMS has experienced a series of crises since the summer of Germany adopted tight monetary policies in response to inflationary pressures that arose following German reunification in As a result German short-term interest rates which had been rising since continued to rise reaching nearly percent by the summer of German policy in turn created a dilemma for other ERM participants. Maintaining fixed parities with the deutsche mark required them to tighten monetary policy despite stagnating or declining output rising unemployment and low rates of inflation When investors are free to choose among assets denominated in different currencies the rates of return they expect to receive for comparable degrees of risk can not vary too far from one currency to another. Expected exchange-rate changes are important in determining expected rates of return on assets denominated in different currencies. If for example investors expect the French franc to depreciate relative to the deutsche mark they will move funds from French franc deposits into deutsche mark deposits unless they are compensated by a higher franc interest rate. Thus interest rates on franc-denominated assets would have to rise above the interest rate on deutsche mark assets to prevent sustained flows of capital out of franc assets and into deutsche mark assets Speculative pressures motivated by the possibility of a change in parities precipitated a crisis in September In the United Kingdom where output had declined by more than percent from its previous peak and the unemployment rate had topped percent pressure increased to realign or to drop out of the EMS so that interest rates could be lowered. Finland and Sweden although not formal participants in the ERM had been unilaterally maintaining pegged exchange rates and so faced similar dilemmas as their economies went through deep and prolonged recessions. In September Finland the United Kingdom and Italy decided to allow their currencies to float with the last two effectively leaving the ERM. Sweden followed in November. Spain Portugal and Ireland all devalued within the ERM between September and January A second crisis erupted in mid-July following additional signs of growing slack in the European economies. Massive speculative capital flows occurred. Belgium Denmark France and Portugal all raised interest rates and intervened heavily to defend their currencies. Nonetheless the Belgian franc the French franc and the Danish krone dropped through their ERM floors. Selling pressures on these currencies continued and on August the countries participating in the ERM decided to widen the bands around the ( unchanged ) central parities to percent ( Chart ) ( A separate agreement maintains bands of percent for the deutsche mark and the Dutch guilder. ) Since all currencies were well within the wider bands central banks were not obliged to intervene and the speculative crisis stopped The wider bands allow the participating countries much greater latitude to change interest rates independently. For the most part however the authorities have not used this ability to push interest rates down. Instead they have sought to maintain relatively stable exchange rates with the deutsche mark and have cut interest rates only in parallel with Germany. By the end of the Belgian Danish French Portuguese and Spanish currencies were within or near the old ERM limits relative to the deutsche mark. The United Kingdom aggressively cut interest rates after leaving the ERM in September THE MAASTRICHT TREATY ON ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION In the Maastricht Treaty of the members of the European Community agreed to replace the EMS with an Economic and Mon- Chart French Franc-Deutsche Mark Exchange Rates Last summer 's exchange-rate crisis precipitated a widening of the Exchange Rate Mechanism 's intervention bands Francs per DM Upper intervention limit September : Pound and lira leave ERM December : Franc returns to narrow bands August : Bands widened \ Lower intervention limit Note : The Exchange Rate Mechanism prescribes intervention bands for participating members of the European Monetary System Sources : Council of Economic Advisers and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System etary Union ( EMU ) a common currency and a European Central Bank overseeing a single monetary policy. Under the treaty progress toward EMU would take place in stages with the final stage under which exchange rates are fixed irrevocably coming no later than The treaty establishes conditions for implementing a common currency and monetary policy ( Box ) As of late no country in the European Union met these conditions. With reunification swelling its public sector deficit even Germany failed to meet the criteria The process of ratifying the Maastricht Treaty was completed in although the timing of full implementation will depend in part on the achievement of the agreed conditions. In May Danish voters reversed the outcome of the previous year 's referendum and accepted the treaty. The British House of Commons then approved the treaty in July. The final steps in the ratification process were completed when court challenges to the treaty failed in July in the United Kingdom and in October in Germany. The Maastricht Treaty entered into force on November creating the European Union Box Criteria for Joining the Economic and Monetary Union Countries acceding to EMU must meet several strict criteria : The entering country 's inflation rate must not exceed the average of the lowest three members ' rates by more than percentage points Its interest rate on long-term government bonds can not exceed those of the three lowest-inflation members by more than percentage points The country 's general-government budget deficit must not exceed percent of GDP and outstanding government debt must not exceed percent of GDP For at least years the country 's currency must have remained within its narrow ERM band without realignment Shortly after completing the ratification process the EU countries selected Frankfurt as the home of the new European Monetary Institute the forerunner of the European Central Bank. Despite their failure to complete the first stage ( bringing all countries within narrow ERM bands ) the EU countries are proceeding with the timetable set out in the Maastricht Treaty CONCLUSIONS The year proved to be the most important year for American trade policy in half a century thanks to developments that vastly increased the prospects for free and open trade During the past year the Administration completed two landmark negotiations. The first created a North American Free Trade Area encompassing the United States Canada and Mexico. In many respects this agreement is historically unprecedented : It is the first free-trade agreement between industrialized and developing countries ; it is the first trade agreement to incorporate environmental provisions explicitly ; and it contains technical innovations in areas such as dispute settlement that may become models for the global trade regime The Administration did not stop there however. It also led a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of GATT the most farreaching global trade agreement in history. This agreement will reduce trade barriers protect the legitimate interests of U.S. producers in areas such as intellectual property rights where none existed before and bring areas of trade such as agriculture and textiles into the multilateral system for the first time Besides bringing these endeavors to fruition the Administration launched several new trade initiatives and breathed new life into some old ones. The Administration made major progress in establishing APEC as a prominent forum for advancing our interests in the critical Asia-Pacific region. In addition the United States reached a new bilateral agreement with Japan. Complementing the new international initiatives the Administration also launched a new National Export Strategy to promote American exports This Administration understands that expanding trade relations are not only inevitable but critical to the future health of the U.S economy. It is determined to ensure that the growing interdependence with our trading partners brings benefits to the United States To this end the United States Government is committed to act unilaterally bilaterally regionally plurilaterally and globally to open markets to maintain the ability of U.S. firms to compete around the world. Through increasing integration into the global economy we can achieve ever-rising living standards for all of our people Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington B.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Laura D'Andrea Tyson Chair Alan S. Blinder Member Joseph E. Stiglitz Member Council Members and their Dates of Service Name idwin G Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blcugh Robert C. Turner \ rthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Soiomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D'Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Position Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member August August November May August May June September8 March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August February June October November November February July July Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January May September January August June January January Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Statutory Mission of the Council The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues The Chair of the Council The inauguration of President Clinton brought changes to the membership of the Council of Economic Advisers. In February Laura D'Andrea Tyson was appointed Chair of the Council and a Member of the President 's Cabinet. Dr. Tyson is on leave from the University of California Berkeley where she is Professor of Economics and Business Administration and Research Director of the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy. As Chair of the Council Dr. Tyson is responsible for communicating the Council 's views on economic developments to the President through personal discussions and written reports. She is the Council 's chief public spokesperson Dr. Tyson represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and various other high-level meetings including those of the National Security Council focusing on economic issues daily White House senior staff meetings budget team meetings with the President and many other formal and informal meetings with the President senior White House staff and other senior government officials Dr. Tyson is one of six members of the Principals Committee of the newly established National Economic Council and is a member of the Domestic Policy Council. She guides the work of the Council of Economic Advisers and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the professional staff. Dr. Tyson succeeded Michael J Boskin who returned to Stanford University where he is the Friedman Professor of Economics ; he is also a Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution on War Revolution and Peace O The Members of the Council Alan S. Blinder and Joseph E. Stiglitz are the other new Members of the Council of Economic Advisers. They succeeded Paul Wonnacott who is now a Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics and David F. Bradford who returned to Princeton University. Dr. Blinder is on leave from Princeton University where he is the Gordon S. Rentschler Memorial Professor of Economics. Dr. Stiglitz is on leave from Stanford University where he is the Joan Kenney Professor of Economics. Members of the Council are involved in the full range of issues within the Council 's purview and are responsible for the daily supervision of the work of the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume mgyor responsibility for selecting issues for the Council 's attention The small size of the Council permits the Chair and Members to work as a team on most policy issues. The Chair works on the whole range of economic issues under the Council 's purview. There continues to be however an informal division of subject matter among the Members. Dr. Stiglitz is primarily responsible for microeconomic and sectoral analysis and regulatory issues. Dr. Blinder is primarily responsible for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis and economic projections. All three Members under Dr. Tyson 's lead are heavily involved in international trade issues and participate in the deliberations of the National Economic Council MACROECONOMIC POLICIES The Council advised the President on all major macroeconomic issues in The Council prepared for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff a comprehensive series of memoranda on the statistical releases that help monitor U.S economic activity. It also prepared special analyses of economic policy issues and briefing papers on significant economic events such as the floods in the Midwest ( and the earthquake in southern California early in ) The Council participated in discussions of macroeconomic policy issues with officials from the Department of the Treasury the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) and other members of the President 's economic policy team. It was a leading participant in the formulation of the Administration 's economic policies through various Cabinet and sub-Cabinet working groups. The Council also played an important role in setting priorities within the fiscal and budgets The Council analyzed the macroeconomic effects of all major Administration policy proposals including the President 's deficit re- duction budget package the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) In addition the Council carefully monitored the response of the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy to the sharp reduction in long-term interest rates that followed the proposal and enactment of the President 's deficit reduction plan The Council the Department of the Treasury and the OMB the economic " Troika " produced the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration 's budget projections. Dr. Blinder in collaboration with Dr. Tyson and Council senior economists led this forecasting effort. Two official forecasts are released each year. The first is published early in the year and is relied upon for the President 's budget calculations. An update is then published in the summer as part of the Administration 's mid-session budget review. In preparing its forecasts the Troika took particular care to present economic assumptions that were not unduly optimistic so as to maintain the credibility of the Administration 's budget projections and its economic plan. Leading private sector forecasters visited the Council before the forecasting rounds to share their views on the economic outlook The Council worked to improve the public 's understanding of economic issues and the quality of economic information through regular briefings with the White House financial and general press corps periodic discussions with distinguished outside economists and meetings with leading business executives. The Chair and the other Members made numerous presentations to outside organizations to explain the Administration 's economic strategy and policies. Dr. Tyson Dr. Blinder and Dr. Stiglitz regularly exchanged information and met with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to discuss the economic outlook and monetary policy Finally the Council worked to improve the quality of government economic statistics. The Council urged increased funding for economic and demographic statistics in interagency discussions and in deliberations over Federal budget priorities INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES International economic issues were a high priority for the Council in All three Members continued the Council 's active role in the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Dr. Tyson attended the OECD 's Economic Policy Committee meeting in Paris in May and served as its Acting Chair in November. Dr. Blinder led the U.S. delegation to the OECD to assess U.S. economic policy and was a member of the U.S. delegation to OECD Working Party on macroeconomic policy coordination Dr. Stiglitz headed the U.S. delegation to OECD Working Party meetings on microeconomic and structural issues. Senior staff members represented the Council at the semiannual Short-Term Economic Projections meetings at the OECD in Paris and at the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Experts Meeting in Sydney. The goal of these meetings was to support the coordination of macroeconomic policies to promote economic growth. The Chair and the other Members helped formulate Administration policies that brought to completion two major trade agreements the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay Round of GATT and provided economic analyses of the implications of those agreements for the U.S. economy. The Council also participated in formulating other Administration policies in the international arena including such important initiatives as the National Export Strategy and the ongoing evaluation of the economic relationship between the United States and the People 's Republic of China Dr. Tyson and Dr. Blinder were deeply involved in the negotiations of the United States-Japan Framework for a New Economic Partnership with Dr. Blinder making two trips to Japan as part of the negotiations. The Council also engaged in discussions with Japan 's Economic Planning Agency on the current account imbalances and other macroeconomic issues. The Council was involved throughout the year in Administration policies for advancing economic reform in the former Soviet Union. Dr. Stiglitz traveled to Russia and Ukraine and established an official relationship with the Russian Government 's Working Center for Economic Reform The Council provided the President with regular briefings on international developments and was particularly active in the preparations for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) Ministerial meeting and the first-ever APEC leaders ' meeting hosted by the President in Seattle MICROECONOMIC POLICIES The Council was an active participant in a broad range of Administration microeconomic initiatives in Dr. Tyson and the Secretary of Transportation jointly led the Administration 's Working Group on Aviation which developed the Administration 's Civil Aviation Initiative. At the request of the President Dr. Tyson also served on the National Commission for a Strong Competitive Airline Industry. The Council also assisted in the development of the Administration 's Domestic Natural Gas and Oil Initiative issued by the Department of Energy Dr. Stiglitz played an important role in the development of two Executive Orders one on regulatory planning and review and another on the Nation 's infrastructure. Each order directs executive branch agencies to rely upon cost-benefit analysis when identifying appropriate regulatory approaches and when determining which infrastructure projects should be undertaken. Dr. Stiglitz also serves as co-chair of a committee of the Administration 's Regulatory Working Group studying cost-benefit analysis methodology and he participated in a number of working groups on financial markets and economic development. Dr. Tyson and Dr. Stiglitz are also working closely with the Vice President and other Administration officials in developing legislative proposals for telecommunications regulation. In addition Dr. Tyson and the other Members are involved in analyzing various proposals for bank regulatory agency consolidation Dr. Tyson was a member of the Health Care Task Force headed by the First Lady and the Council was deeply involved with the health care reform effort over the past year especially in analyzing the economic effects of reform options. The Council also helped develop the tax empowerment zone and enterprise communities provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act ( OBRA ) Dr Tyson is a member of the President 's Community Enterprise Board. In addition the Council participated in the development of the Administration 's work force security and welfare reform initiatives and in the design of the Administration 's defense reinvestment initiative. Dr. Tyson was appointed a member of the President 's National Science and Technology Council and was appointed the Administration 's representative on the Competitiveness Policy Council. Dr. Tyson and Dr. Stiglitz both served on the Administration 's Welfare Reform Task Force Dr. Stiglitz was particularly active in the Administration 's environmental policymaking efforts. He chaired the Subcommittee on Economics Research on Natural Resources and Environment created to identify key research areas in economics common to many environmental quality and natural resource management issues He has also been actively involved in developing the Administration 's proposals for Superfund reauthorization Clean Water Act reauthorization and the President 's Climate Change Action Plan WEEKLY ECONOMIC BRIEFINGS Dr. Tyson conducts a weekly economic briefing for the President the Vice President and the President 's other senior economic and policy advisers. Dr. Blinder and Dr. Stiglitz also attend. The Council in cooperation with the Office of the Vice President prepares a written Weekly Economic Briefing of the President which serves as the basis for the oral briefing. The briefing includes analysis of current economic developments more extended treatments of a wide range of economic issues and problems and summaries of news on different regions and sectors of the economy The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The professional staff of the Council consists of the Chief of Staff the Senior Statistician fourteen senior economists six staff econo- mists and two research assistants. The professional staff and their areas of concentration at the end of were : Chief of Staff Thomas P. O'Donnell Senior Economists Jonathan B. Baker David M. Cutler Robert E. Cumby William T. Dickens Constance R. Dunham Warren E. Farb Sally M. Kane Alan J. Krupnick Erik R. Lichtenberg Mark J. Mazur Marcus Noland Matthew D. Shapiro Jay S. Stowsky Robert F. Wescott Regulation Industrial Organization and Law Health International Economics Labor Welfare and Education Financial Markets and Foreign Assistance Business and Regional Analysis Climate Change and Natural Resources Environment and Natural Resources Agriculture International Trade and Natural Resources Public Finance International Economics Macroeconomics and the Weekly Economic Briefing of the President Technology Defense Conversion and Regional Economic Development Macroeconomics and Forecasting Senior Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Staff Economists Kevin C. Murdock Kimberly J. O'Neill Peter R. Orszag Jeremy B. Rudd Elizabeth A. Schneirov Darryl S. Wills Technology and Finance Health and Public Finance International Economics Macroeconomics and Forecasting Regulation Industrial Organization and Environment Labor Welfare and Agriculture Research Assistants D. W. Clark Dees James C. Hritz Statistical Office Mrs. Furlong manages the Statistical Office. The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council 's statistical information prepares the Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report and verifies statistics in Presidential and Council memoranda testimony and speeches Susan P. Clements Linda A. Reilly Brian A. Amorosi Margaret L. Snyder Statistician Statistical Assistant Research Assistant Secretary The Administrative Office Elizabeth A. Kaminski Catherine Fibich Administrative Officer Administrative Assistant Office of the Chair Alice H. Williams Sandra F. Daigle Lisa D. Branch Francine P. Obermiller Executive Assistant to the Chair Executive Assistant to the Chair and Assistant to the Chief of Staff Executive Assistant to Dr. Blinder Executive Assistant to Dr. Stiglitz Staff Secretaries Mary E. Jones Rosalind V. Rasin Mary A. Thomas Mrs. Thomas also served as Executive Assistant for the Weekly Economic Briefing of the President Michael Treadway provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report Sherman Robinson University of California Berkeley served during the summer and early fall of as a senior economist specializing in the North American Free Trade Agreement. Omri S Dahan Michelle R. Dorman Mark H. Fithian Ian B. Goldberg and Jennifer Howard served as student assistants during the year Suzanne M. Tudor returned to serve as Dr. Blinder 's Executive Assistant during Lisa Branch 's leave of absence. Volunteers during the year were Diana Billik William P. Cowin Matthew T Henshon John D. Levin and Megan R. Sweeney DEPARTURES James D. Foster who served as Special Assistant to the Chairman resigned in January to accept a position with the Tax Foundation. Shelley A. Slomowitz Staff Assistant to the Chairman also resigned in January The Council 's senior economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Most of the senior economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are Kwok-Chiu Fung ( University of California Santa Cruz ) Sherry Glied ( Columbia University ) Andrew S Joskow ( Department of Justice ) Steven B. Kamin ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Michael M. Knetter ( Dartmouth College ) Howard D. Leathers ( University of Maryland ) Deborah J. Lucas ( Northwestern University ) Andrew B. Lyon ( University of Maryland ) and Raymond L. Squitieri ( Department of the Treasury ) John H. Kitchen went on to a new position at the Department of the Treasury. Jonathan B. Wiener accepted a position on the faculty of the Duke University Law School Kevin Berner staff economist accepted a position with McKinsey and Company Inc. Cleveland Ohio. Junior staff economists ( now designated staff economists ) are generally graduate students who spend year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are : Christopher J. Acito ( University of Chicago ) Lucy P. Allen ( Yale University ) Sherif Lotfi ( Columbia University ) and Natalie J. Tawil ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Joshua B. Michael accepted a position with The Eiger Development Corporation Seattle Washington. Bret M. Dickey research assistant began graduate studies at Stanford University. Janet J. Twyman staff secretary resigned in Public Information The Council 's Annual Report is the principal medium through which the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. Annual distribution of the Report in recent years has averaged about copies. The Council also has primary responsibility for compiling the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress and has a distribution of approximately Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : Page B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-12 B-13 B-14 B-15 B-16 B-l7 B-18 B-19 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 B-30 B-31 Gross domestic product Gross domestic product in dollars Implicit price deflators for gross domestic product Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross domestic product weights Changes in gross domestic product and personal consumption expenditures and related implicit price deflators and fixedweighted price indexes Selected per capita product and income series in current and dollars Gross domestic product by major type of product Gross domestic product by major type of product in dollars Gross domestic product by sector Gross domestic product by sector in dollars Gross domestic product by industry Gross domestic product by industry in dollars fixed weights Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Personal consumption expenditures in dollars Gross and net private domestic investment Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars Inventories and final sales of domestic business Inventories and final sales of domestic business in dollars Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Exports and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments of factor income in dollars Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Gross saving and investment Personal saving flow of funds accounts Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : Page B-32 B-33 B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 Population by age group Population and the labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristics Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-49 B-50 B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : B-59 B-60 B-61 B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 B-67 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-68 B-69 B-70 B-71 B-72 B-73 B-74 B-75 B-76 Money stock liquid assets and debt measures Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Commercial bank loans and securities Bond yields and interest rates Total funds raised in credit markets by nonflnancial sectors Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding Page GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-77 B-78 B-79 B-80 B-81 B-82 B-83 B-84 B-85 B-86 B-87 Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Federal budget receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percentages of gross domestic product Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts State and local.government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-88 B-89 B-90 B-91 B-92 B-93 B-94 B-95 Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : Page B-96 B-97 B-98 B-99 B-100 B-101 Farm income Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities Farm business balance sheet INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-102. International investment position of the United States at yearend B-103. U.S. international transactions B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category B-105. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-106. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance B-107. International reserves selected years B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-109. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-110. Foreign exchange rates B-lll. Growth rates in real gross domestic product NATIONAL WEALTH : B-112. National wealth B-113. National wealth in dollars SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE : B-114. Selected historical series on gross domestic product and related series General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies from January through early February NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross domestic product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories " : : : : : : : : I V : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. : II See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-l. Gross domestic product. Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government purchases Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases ' Addendum : Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross domestic product Gross domestic purchases ' IV.... IV.... IV.... IV.... IV.... IV.... IV... IV... p : : : : : : : : : I II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV.. : II.... III... IV... : II.... III... IV Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services GDP plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross domestic product in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories p : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II IV : I II See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-2. Gross domestic product in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government purchases Federal Net Exports Imports exports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases Addendum : Gross national product2 Percent change from preceding period Gross domestic product Gross domestic purchases * I960. " : : : : : : : : IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. : I II III.. IV.. : I II III. IV. : I II : I II IV " Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services GDP plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment : Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential P 1982.1V : IV : IV... : IV : IV : IV... : IV : IV : I I III... IV... : I I Il l IV : I I III... IV... : I I III... IV. See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Government purchases of goods and services Exports and imports of goods and services Federal Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases ' Percent change from precedperiod GDP implicit price deflator " : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : I II.. : : I : I IV II Ill IV P... Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Quarterly changes are at annual rates Note. Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross domestic product weights [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment : Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential " IV. : II Ill IV : : : : : : : : IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. IV. : I... I V : IV.. : See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-4. Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross domestic product weights Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Government purchases of goods and services Exports and imports of goods and services Federal Year or quarter Exports " : IV IV IV IV : IV IV : IV IV : Ill IV II Ill I V II Ill I V II III Imports Total Total National Nondedefense fense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases J Percent change from preceding period GDP fixedweighted price index2 Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services * Quarterly changes are at annual rates Note. Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Changes in gross domestic product and personal consumption expenditures and related implicit price deflators and fixed-weighted price indexes [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross domestic product Year or quarter Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) Current dollars Constant ( ) dollars Implicit price deflator Fixedweighted price index ( weights ) " _ I I IV. _.l : II Ill I V : II Ill I V : II III I V : II I V : II III IV : II III. IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-6. Selected per capita product and income series in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Constant ( ) dollars Current dollars Year or quarter Gross Disposdomes- Person- able tic al personprod- income al uct income Personal consumption expenditures Total Gross Disposdomes- able tic personDura- Nonal ble durable Serv- prod- income uct goods goods Personal consumption expenditures Total Dura- Non- Servble durable goods goods Population ( thousands ) ' " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV 1988.1V : IV : I I : I I Il l IV : I I Il l IV : I I Il l IV " Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas- includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source-. Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B-7. Cross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in sales of Gross busidomesdomestic ness tic product product inventories Durable goods Total Total Final sales Change in business inventories Final sales Change in business inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in business inventories Services Structures Auto output " : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Exports and imports of certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Cross domestic product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods l Year or quarter Change Final in sales of Gross busidomestic domesness tic product product inventories Total Total Final sales Durable goods Change in business inventories Final sales Change in business inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in business inventories " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Auto output Structures Services Exports and imports of certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-9. Gross domestic product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business1 Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonfarm1 Total Farm Statistical discrepancy Households and institutions General government2 Total Federal State and local " : IV : IV : IV 1985-.IV : IV : IV 1988-.IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Gross domestic product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business ' Year or quarter Gross domestic product Totall Nonfarm ' Farm Statistical discrepancy Households and institutions General government2 Total Federal State and local " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II III... IV... : : IV II Ill IV : f... IV. Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises Compensation of government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B l l G r o s s domestic product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Agri- Year Gross culdomes- ture fortic prod- estry and uct fisheries Manufacturing Mining Construction Total Transportation WholeNonRetail and Durasale durapublic trade trade ble ble utiligoods goods ties Finance insurance and real estate Services Government Statistical discrepancy l Based on SIC : Based on SIC : Equals gross domestic product ( GDP ) measured as the sum of expenditures less gross domestic income that is GDP measured as the costs incurred and profits earned in domestic production Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. Gross domestic product by industry in dollars fixed weights [ Billions of dollars ] Year Based on SIC : Based on SIC : AgriculGross ture domes- forestry tic product and fisheries Manufacturing Mining ConstrucDura- Nontion Total ble durable goods goods FiTransStanance portatistion Whole- Retail insur- Serv- Govern- tical Residand sale trade ance ices dis- ual ment and public trade crepreal utiliancy x estate ties Equals the current-dollar statistical discrepancy deflated by the implicit price deflator for gross domestic business product Equals cross domestic product ( GDP ) in constant dollars measured as the sum of expenditures less the statistical discrepancy in constant dollars and GDP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross product originating by industry Note. Constant-dollar values are equal to fixed-weighted quantity indexes with weights divided by and multiplied by the value of current-dollar GDP Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-13. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net domestic product Year or quarter " : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : I II ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV P Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ! 3,048.b Domestic income Consumption of fixed capital Total Indirect business taxes * Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Compensation of employees l ! l ! Profits Total Profits Profits before tax tax liability Total Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Inventory valuation UndisDivi- tributed adjustdends profits ment Profits after tax Capital Net interconsump- est tion adjustment T A B L E B-14. Output costs and profits oj nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit Consumption of fixed capital Indirect business taxes Compensation of smploy- Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits tax liability Net interest Profits after tax Output per hour of all employees ( dollars ) Compensation per hour of all employees ( dollars ) Current dollars : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV. : IV.. : IV. : IV. : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II dollars Total Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) TABLE B-15. Personal consumption expenditures. [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures Motor vehicles and parts Nondurable goods Furniture and house- Total hold equipment ! Food Clothing and shoes Gasoline and oil Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Totall HousTotal Trans- MediEjec- porta- cal tricity tion care and gas " : IV : IV : 1V : IV : IV : IV : 1V : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Personal consumption expenditures in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Nondurable goods Personal FurniconMotor ture sumption vehi- and expendi- Total cles house- TotalJ tures and hold parts equipment Food Cloth- Gasoing line and and shoes oil Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing2 ' : : : : : : : : ElecTotal tricity and gas J Transportation Medical care : I I Il l IV ^ : I I Il l IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV... IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-17. Gross and net private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Equals : Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Less : Consumption of fixed capital Nonresidential Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment dential Change in business inventories " : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : I I Ill IV : : II Ill IV : IV... Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-18. Gross and net private domestic investment in dollars [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Equals.- Net private domestic investment Net fixed investment Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Less : Consumption o f fixed capital Nonresidential Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories " : : : : : : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV IV IV IV IV II Ill IV Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Inventories and final sales of domestic business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventoriesl Nonfarm Quarter Total Farm Total Fourth quarter : Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Final sales of domestic business Ratio of inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm P : II Ill IV : II Ill IV i | : Ill IV II Ill IV Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in business inventories ( CBI ) component of GOP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at their respective end-ofquarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas CBI is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-20. Inventories and final sales of domestic business in dollars [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories l Nonfarm Quarter Total Farm Total Fourth quarter : Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Final sales of domestic business Ratio of inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the constantdollar change in business inventories component of GDP is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-21. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts from rest of the world Year or quarter Total Total " : IV... : IV... : IV... : IV... : IV... : IV... : IV... : IV... Payments to rest of the world Merchandise Receipts of factor Serv- income3 ices2 Payments of Serv- factor inices come4 Transfer payments ( net ) Imports of goods and services Exports of goods and services Total Total : I II III... IV : II Ill IV.. : I II Ill IV.. chandise2 Total From From From persons govern- business ment ( net ) ( net ) Net foreign investment : I II Ill IV Includes capital grants received by the United States ( net ) not shown separately. See Table B-29 for data Exports and imports of certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services Consists largely of receipts by U.S. residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of foreign affiliates of U.S corporations Consists largely of payments to foreign residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of U.S. affiliates of foreign corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-22. Experts and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments oj factor income in dollars. [ Billions of 19S7 dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Do Merchandise Year or quarter Total Total Durable goods i Services Nondurable goods eceipts of factor income Merchandise Total Total Durable goods i Nondura ble goods Services Payments of factor income '431.3 " : IV 1983.1V : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV P Exports and imports of certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services Consists largely of receipts by U.S. residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of foreign affiliates of U.S corporations Consists largely of payments to foreign residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of U.S. affiliates of foreign corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-23. Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and nationaI income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter Gross domestic product PIUS : Less : Receipts Payments of factor of factor income income to from rest rest of the of the world2 world ' Equals : Gross national product Less : Consumption of fixed capital Equals : Net national product Indirect business tax and nontax liability Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy PIUS : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Equals : National income p : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV. Consists largely of receipts by U.S. residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of foreign affiliates of U.S corporations Consists largely of payments to foreign residents of interest and dividends and reinvested earnings of U.S. affiliates of foreign corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-24. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] National income Year or quarter Net interest Equals : >IUS : Less : Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Wage Contribu- accruals tions for less social disburseinsurance ments Personal interest income Personal dividend income Government transfer payments to persons Business transfer payments to persons Personal income " IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV ! II III I V II III I V II III I V II III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-25. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter National income Total Wages and Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Supplements to wages and salaries Farm Total Total Proprietors ' income * ' : : : : : : : : : : I IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV II Ill IV : I. II Ill IV : Nonfarm Capital consumption adjustment Total Proprietors ' income valuation adjustment Capital consumption adjustment " tor ? " -L0 : National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross domestic product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-23 See next page for continuation of table T A B L E B-25. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Capital Rental conincome sumption of adjustpersons ment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Total Profits after tax Total Profits before tax Profits tax liability Total UndisDivitributed dends profits Inventory valuation adjustment Capital Net coninterest sumption adjustment _ " : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : : I II. I V : II Ill IV : II Consists mainly of employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds With inventory valuation adjustment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-26. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Govern- Other labor income J Proprietor ' ' income with invcmuiy valuation and cap tal consunlption adjustr lents ment Farm Nonfarm " I V I V I V I V I V I V I V I V 3P647.8 II III IV II III IV II III IV II III IV The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-25 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements TABLE B-26. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : L II Ill IV " Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Transfer payments to persons Personal Personal dividend interest income income Total Old-age Governsurvivors ment disability unemand Veterans ployment health benefits insurinsurance ance benefits benefits Government employees retirement benefits Aid to families with dependent children ( AFDC ) Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance Nonfarm personal income2 Personal income exclusive of the farm component of wages and salaries other labor income proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments and net interest Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-27. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable personal income l Less : Personal outlays Less : Year or quarter Personal income Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total Personal transfer Personal payconInterest sumption paid by ments expendi- persons to rest of the tures world ( net ) Personal outlays Equals : Personal saving Total Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving ' : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Percents based on data in millions of dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-28. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II... III. IV.. : II Ill IV : : II.. IV " dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) l Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-29. Gross sating and investment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Year or quarter Total Total Personal saving Gross business saving1 Gross investment Government surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Total Federal State and local Capital grants received by the United States ( net ) Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Statistical discrepancy " : : : : : : : : : : : II... III.. IV.. : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV Ill IV Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments corporate and noncorporate consumption of fixed capital and private wage accruals less disbursements Consists mainly of allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) Net exports of goods and services plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world less net transfers plus net capital grants received by the United States. See also Table B-21 Consists of a U.S. payment to India under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This payment is included in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-30. Personal saving flow of funds accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Personal saving Net investment in tangible assets Less-. Net increase in debt Non- MortSecurities CheckInsurcor- gage Other Time able Owner- Conance and Money Governfinan- occu- sumer porate debt Con- Other deposand Corpoon sumer busiTotal its and savings market cial Other pied dura- ness non- credit d e b t fund ment rate pension ascurren- depos- shares securi- equi- securihomes bles re6 farm asits cy ties ties serves sets ties sets homes _ ^ _ : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. IV.. : II... III.. _ Saving by households nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Consists of U.S. savings bonds other U.S. Treasury securities U.S. Government agency securities and government sponsored enterprise securities federally-related mortgage pool securities and State and local obligations Includes mutual fund shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Consists of security credit mortgages accident and health insurance reserves nonlife insurance claims and investment in bank personal trusts for households ; and of consumer credit equity in government-sponsored enterprises and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business Purchases of physical assets less depreciation Includes data for corporate farms Other debt consists of security credit U.S. Government and policy loans and noncorporate business debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-31. Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Families1 Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Year Number ( millions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) Female householder Total Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent Median money income ( in dollars ) of persons years old and over with income Males Number ( millions ) Percent Females All persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround full-time workers ALL RACES 198C $ $ $ $ $ WHITE BLACK ! The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Current dollar median money income deflated by CPI-U-X1 Prior to data are for persons years and over Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. Poverty rates ( percent of persons below poverty level ) for all races for years not shown above are : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI-U ) For details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 Nos. and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES A N D PRODUCTIVITY T A B L E B-32. Population by age group ( Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning All estimates are consistent with decennial census enumerations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-33. Population and the labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Labor force including Resident Armedl Forces resident Armed Forces Employment including resident Armed Forces Unemployment rate Employment Total Total cultural Nonagricultural Unemployment All workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Civilian workers CivilCivilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticiulapation tion rate ratio 50J14 Thousands of persons years of age and over I960 Not seasonally adjusted Unemployed as percent of labor force including resident Armed Forces Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-33. Population and the labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Unemployment rate Civilian labor force Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Resident Armed Forcesl Labor force including Armed Forces Employment including resident Armed Forces Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment All workers Thousands of persons years of age and over \ July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. % July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : Percent : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June Dec Civilian workers Civilian employment/ populapation tion rate4 ratio Civilian labor force Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagricultural employment Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population and labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-33 through B-42 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age. [ Thousands ot persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Unemployment Civilian employment Males Females Year or month Total Total Jan. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb.. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec years and over Total years years Note. See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Males Females years and over Total years Total years Total years and years and over over T A B L E B-35. Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black Black and other Total Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr.. May. JuneJuly.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Note. See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Total Males Black Black and other Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-37. Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment/population ratio Labor force participation rate Year or month : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec civilian work- Males Females Both sexes years White Black and other Black All civilian workers Males Females Both sexes years Civilian labor force or civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics White Black and other Black TABLE B-38. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black Males Total Total years Males Females years and over Total years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black Jay ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-39. Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Black and other or black Males years Females years Total and over years Females Males years Total Total and years years Total and years over over years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Aug ^ ! ( ^ * 8L5 35I5 ^ ^ ^ * ^ ^ Black June July Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-40. Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Males Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May ! " '. ! " ! ! ' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All civilian workers Total Females years and Total years over ! ! years R3 years and over ! l Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for and are for April ; for March Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Both sexes years ! n ! i ! White Black and other Black Experienced wage and salary workers Married men spouse present Women who maintain families TABLE B-41. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; l monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black Males Total Total years Females years and over Total years Females Males years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over Black and other Black : : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar fe June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note.-See Note Table B-40 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B-42. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Reason for unemployment Duration of unemployment Year or month : Jan.. Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration ( weeks ) Median duration ( weeks ) Job losers Job leavers Total On layoff Other Reentrants New entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Data for by reason for unemployment are not strictly comparable with those for later years and the total by reason is not equal to total unemployment Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-33 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-43. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) ^ Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept. Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov... Dec " Insured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) Total ( millions Weekly average ; thousands Thousands " ? * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemembers ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) Federal Supplemental Compensation and Emergency Unemployment Compensation programs except as noted in footnote Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Including Emergency Unemployment Compensation and Federal Supplemental Compensation total benefits paid for and would be ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for p34,484.8 Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B-44. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Soods-producing industries Year or month Manufacturing Total Total " Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p My a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p My a June July Ag u Sept Oct Nov p Dec " ^ ] Mining Construction ^ Total ^ Durable goods 8,'358 Nondurable goods Note. Data in Tables B-44 and B-45 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-33 through B-42 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-44. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Year or month P : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct Nov. Dec. : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services Total Federal State and local Note ( cont 'd ) which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source-. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-45. Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average weekly hours Manufacturing Year or month " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov " Dec " Total private Tntal 1OI3I Overtime Average hourly earnings Average weekly earnings total private Total private Current dollars 1QOO IDOL ftf.1 QOI- lars $ $ Percent change Level Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ frnm ycai irom earlier Current dollars $ dollars2 $ Current dollars 1QQO L ) ioc dollars For production or nonsupervisory workers ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B-44 Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Percent changes are based on data that are not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table B-44 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-46. Employment cost index private industry Total private Year and month Total compensation Wages and salaries Goods-producing Benefits1 Total compensation Wages and sala- Service-producing Total compensation Benefits1 Wages and salaries Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing fits " " Total compensation Wages and salaries Benefits1 Total compensation Wages and sala- fits1 Index June = ; not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June sept Dec : : : : : Index June = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of labor free from the influence of employment shifts among occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Through December percent changes are based on unrounded data ; thereafter changes are based on indexes as published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-47. Productivity and related data business sector [ = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year nr Tear Of Output per hour of all persons Output1 Hours of all persons2 Compensation pert our3 Real compensation per hour4 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill quarter Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-48. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Output1 Tear or quarter Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Compensation per hour3 Hours of all persons2 Voar nr Nonfarm business sector Business sector Real compensation per hour4 Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Nonfarm business sector Business sector Ncnfarm business sector Business sector v _ : II Ill IV : II ill IV : II Ill Implicit price deflator5 Nonfarm business sector Nonfarm business sector Unit labor costs _ _ _ i Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in dollars Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product Note. Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-47 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-49. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month " : Jan Feb Mar Ar p May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Fb e Mar Apr June July Aug Sept Oct " Nov Dec p j Manufacturing Mining Total Durable i Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Utilities Nondurable TABLE B-50. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Materials Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods Total Total " : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct " Nov Dec " Automotive products Equipment Other Nonduradurable Total ble goods goods Defense and space Total Durable : Intermediate products Nondurable Ener- Two components oil and gas well drilling and manufactured homes are included in total equipment but not in detail shown Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-51. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Primary metals Year or month Total " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct " Nov " Dec " Iron and steel Transportation equipment Industrial and Fabricated metal products commercial machinery and computer equipment Electricai machinery Total Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Motor vehicles and parts Lumber Apparel and prodproducts ucts Textile Printing mill and prod- publishucts ing Chemicals and products Foods TABLE B-52. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar. MPay " June July Aug Septp Oct Nov P Dec " Total industry Total Durable goods Primary processing Advanced processing Utilities Mining Output as percent of capacity Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Nondurable goods T A B L E B-53. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction Residential buildings Total Total Public construction New housing units Total Commercial Total Federal State and local5 Industrial Other4 ^ * New series New series See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-53. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Public construction Private construction Year or month Total new construction Total Total : Jan Feb Mar Nonresidential buildings and other construction Residential buildings New housing units Total Commercial Total Industrial Federal State and local Other = = June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Includes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities ( telecommunications gas ejectnc railroad and petroleum pipelines ) and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-54. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ] New private housing units authorized New housing units started Private and public * Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) ( ) Type of structure Type of structure Nonfarm Total unit ( ) to units Total unit units or more 2to4 units units or more Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : Jan Feb. Mar. May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May ( ) ( ) June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec " ( ) ( ) Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior to Not available separately beginning January Series discontinued December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-55. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Industries surveyed quarterly ' Manufacturing Year or quarter : I I Il l IV : I I Ill5 IV : I5 I s I All industries Total Durable goods Addenda Nonmanufacturing Nondurable Total goods Mining ComTrans- Public mercial porta- utiliand ties tion other Total nonfarm busi-3 ness Nonmanufacturing Manufacturing Total Surveyed quarterly Surveyed annually4 These industries accounted for percent of total nonfarm spending in Excludes forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate which effective with the April-May survey are no longer surveyed quarterly. See last column ( " nonmanufacturing surveyed annually " ) for data for these industries " All industries " plus the part of nonmanufacturing that is surveyed annually Consists of forestry fisheries and agricultural services ; professional services ; social services and membership organizations ; and real estate Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in October and November corrected for biases Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-56. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Retail trade Merchant wholesalers Year or month Sales * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Inventories Ratio i.52 Sales J Inventories Ratio Sales * Inventories Ratio Sales Inventories Ratio3 Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are- beginning averages of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year ; and for earlier years weighted averages. Monthly data are ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-57. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Year or month Total " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p " Dec x Inventories2 Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Materials and supplies Total Total Work in process Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for prior periods Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Work in Finished proc- goods ess TABLE B-58. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New ordersl Unfilled orders2 Unfilled orders shipments IdllU " Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total " Jan Fb e Mr a Ar p My a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nv o Dc e Jan Fb e Mr a My a June July Ag u Sept Ot c Nov " Dec " NonCapital durable goods goods indus- industries tries nondefense Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries ^ 58'637 Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-59. Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = ] Food and Housing UcvcFdgcS Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec All items ( CPI-U ) Totall Food2 Umioo Total Shelter2 HouseOther Transhold Apparel por- Medical Entergoods and Fuel and furnish2 and taupkeep tion care tainment services other ings utilities2 and operation Energy Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately See table B-60 for components Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through See table B-60 for the components Note. Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-60. Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Food Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Ot c Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Ar p May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Fuel and other utilities Shelter Food and beverages Renters costs Fuels Fuel oil Gas Other and ( piped ) utilities Home- Mainteother and and Total Away Total Rent owners ' nance Total At elecTotal home from public Total resi- costs and Total houserepairs hold tricity services home dential fuel ( energy comservmodities ices ) " 'iifto " " : Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately December = See next page for continuation of table " '21.4 ' A6 TABLE B-60. Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Continued [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Medical care Transportation Private transportation Year or month Total Total New cars Used cars : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Motor fuel Automobile maintenance and repair Other Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services Includes other new vehicles not shown separately. Includes direct pricing of new trucks and motorcycles beginning September Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning September Not available Note. See Note Table B-59 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-61. Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Commodities Year or month All items ( CPI-U ) : Jan Feb Mar ffljZZZZ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May'.'. " .'.'.'. ! " '. ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All commodities Food ! Special indexes Services Medical care services Commodities All less services food Services less medical care services All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy All items CPI-U-X1 less ( all items ) medi- ( Dec. cal = ) J care CPI-U-X1 is a rental equivalence approach to homeowners ' costs for the consumer price index for years prior to the first year for which the official index ( CPI-U ) incorporates such a measure. CPI-U-X1 is rebased to the December value of the CPI-U ( = ) ; thus it is identical with CPI-U data for December and all subsequent periods. Data prior to estimated by moving the series at the same rate as the CPI-U for each year Note. See Note Table B-59 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-62. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year or month Dec Year to Dec to Dec All items less food Year to to Dec year Year Dec to to to Dec. year to Dec1 Year Dec to year All items less medical care All items less food and energy Year to Dec Dec year All items less energy year Percent change from preceding period Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted 1992-Jan Feb Mar Aor May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May J June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unadjusted _.l Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. See Note Table B-59 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted TABLE B-63. Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year Total Dec to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec. Food Year to year Dec to Dec Total Year to year Medical care Year to year Dec to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec1 Year to year Dec to Dec Year to year Dec to Dec Energy Medical care Services Commodities _ _ g ^ Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Commodities and services Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. See Note Table B-59 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-64. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer foods Year or month 1992-Jan Fb e Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1993-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Tntal Total finished goods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed I Total Total Durable Nondurable Capital equipment finished consumer goods i Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication See next page for continuation of table T A B L E B-64. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Crude materials for further processing Intermediate materials supplies and components Materials and Year or month Total Foods and feeds Processed fuels and lubricants components Other For manufacturing For construction Ton containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feed- Other Total Fuel Other stuffs " " : Jan Feb Mar May " " '. " " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug1 Sept Oct Nov Dec fc = Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Finished goods Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods excluding foods and energy Total Foods and feeds1 Energy Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other ! ! : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June........ 7L3 ! : July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May ' ! '. ! ! ! ! ! '. ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ? Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B-66. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power1 Chemicals and allied products * : Jan... Feb... Mar... Apr... May.. June. July... Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. May " June July.. Aug2 Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication TABLE B-66. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Year or month Rubber Lumber and and plastic wood products products : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June July.. Aug.. Sept Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June July.. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Pulp Metals Machinery Furniture Nonpaper and metallic and and and metal household mineral allied products equipment durables products products Source-. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Transportation equipment Motor vehicles Total and equipment Miscellaneous products T A B L E B-67. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Total finished goods Finished consumer foods Year or month Consumer goods Total Dec to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec year Dec1 year ^ ^ _ Finished energy goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Capital equipment Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec1 year Dec1 year year Dec1 o3 o3 o o3 Dec Year Dec1 year _ Finished goods excluding foods and energy Dec to Year to year Dec. Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec SeasonUnadally ad- justed justed _ _ i SeasonUnadally ad- justed justed _ i _ _ SeasonUnadally ad- justed justed _ SeasonUnadally ad- justed justed SeaSeasonUnadally ally ad- justed justed justed Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE T A B L E B-68. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml Year year and month December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec M Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Ml plus overnight RPs and Eurodollars MMMF balances ( general purpose and broker/ dealer ) MMDAs and savings and small time deposits M3 M2 plus large time deposits term RPs term Eurodollars and L MO n | c ( VIo piUS other liquid assets institutiononly MMMF balances ^ 4J72.2 Debt1 Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average ) Percent change from year or months earlier2 Ml M2 M3 Debt Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors ; data derived from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate Note. See Table B-69 for components Data do not reflect revisions of February Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-69. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Currency Travelers checks Demand deposits Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Overnight repurchase agreements ( RPs ) net plus overnight Eurodollars Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances General purpose and broker/ dealer Institution only Savings deposits including money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) NSA December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes continuing contract RPs Data prior to are not seasonally adjusted Data prior to are savings deposits only ; MMDA data begin December See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-69. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Small denomination time deposits4 Year and month Large denomination time deposits4 Term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) NSA December : 1992-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Term Eurodollars Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances Commercial paper NSA Savings bonds Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ and more than $ respectively Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted See also Table Data do not reflect revisions of February Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/1 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE B-70. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures l ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Reserves of depository institutions Year and month Total Nonborrowed Nonborrowed plus extended credit Required Monetary base Total Seasonal Extended credit December : Jan Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct : Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov : Nov Dec Data are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Monetary base data do not reflect revisions released on February Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-71. Commercial bank loans and securities [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ' ] Loans and leases Year and month December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June... July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total loans and securities2 U.S Govern- Other Total securities Commercial Real and estate industrial Individual NonState ForLease bank and Foreign financAgriSecu- finanpolitiOther culeign official ing rity cial cal tural banks insti- receivinstisubditutions ables tutions visions " " Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and for foreign-related institutions beginning July Prior to July data for foreign-related institutions are averages of current and previous month-end data Excludes loans to commercial banks in the United States Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source.- Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-72. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3month Constant maturities Corporate bonds ( Nloody 's ) x 6month 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade Newmunicihome pal mortbonds gage ( Standyields3 ard & Poor 's ) Commercial paper months4 Prime rate charged by banks Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal funds rate Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-72. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] J.S. Treasury securities Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) HighComgrade Newmermunici- home cial pal mortpaper bonds gage ( Stand- yields months ard & Poor 's ) 3month : Jan Feb Mar Jay ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug & : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec 6month Constant maturities2 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Prime rate charged by banks Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York5 High-low Year and month Bills ( new issues ) l High-low Federal funds rate6 ! SI Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-73. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors U.S. Government Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages. Private domestic nonfinancial sectorsDebt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations.. Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential. Commercial Farm Other debt instrumentsConsumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper.. Other State and local governments Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate. Corporate By borrowing sector- Foreign net borrowing in United States. Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S. Government and other loans. Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectorsDeposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instrumentsForeign funds At banks Credit market instruments U.S. Government and related loans net. U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves. Other sources TABLE B-73. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item Net credit market borrowing by nonfinancial sectors Total net borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors U.S. Government.. Treasury issues Agency issues and mortgages Private domestic nonfinancial sectors.. Debt capital instruments Tax-exempt obligations Corporate bonds Mortgages Home mortgages Multi-family residential. Commercial Farm Other debt instruments Consumer credit Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper Other By borrowing sector : State and local governments. Households Nonfinancial business Farm Nonfarm noncorporate.. Corporate Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Open-market paper U.S. Government and other loans... Foreign net borrowing in United States. Total domestic plus foreign Direct and indirect supply of funds to credit markets Total funds supplied to domestic nonfinancial sectors Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Deposits and currency Checkable deposits and currency Time and savings deposits Money market fund shares Security repurchase agreements Foreign deposits Credit market instruments Foreign funds At banks Credit market instruments. U.S. Government and related loans net U.S. Government cash balances Private insurance and pension reserves Other sources Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-74. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten End of year or quarter : I.. II Ill IV : I. IV. : I... II.. III. All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multifamily properties Commercial properties to 4-family houses Total J Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-75. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Other holders Major financial institutions End of year or quarter : II III IV II Ill IV II Ill Total Total Commercial banks Federal and related agencies Individuals and others Savings institutions * Life insurance companies Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLNIC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-76. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month December- : Jan Feb Mar May ! " ! ! ! '. ! '.'. ! '.'. ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov " Total consumer credit Installment c r e d i t l Total Automobile Revolving Other3 Noninstallment credit4 Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes and scheduled to be repaid ( or with the option of repayment ) in two or more installments. Credit secured by real estate is excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Excludes 30day charge credit held by travel and entertainment companies. Prior to included in " other " except gasoline companies included in noninstallment credit prior to Beginning includes open-end credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Includes mobile home loans and all other installment loans not included in autombile or revolving credit such as loans for education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum including single-payment loans charge accounts and service credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends Data newly available in January result in breaks in many series between December and subsequent months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-77. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Off-budge t On-budge Gross Federal debt Adden- /pn/j nf narinfi \ Fiscal year or period Transition quarter.. Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit Gross domestic product " Held by the public Total " ^ 93J " _ Not strictly comparable with later data Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October l-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year February for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and TABLE B-78. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions... OUTLAYS : ON-PUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other On-budget... Off-budget.. Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings Reserve System All other by Federal On-budget Off-budget... Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and servicesAdministration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget and Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-78. Federal receipts outlays and debt fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimates Actual Description RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Off-budget receipts. Off-budget outlays... Held by Government accounts. Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS. ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET. Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance taxes and contributions. On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET. National defense International affairs General science space and technology. Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget and social See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year February for additional information Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-79. Federal budget receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percentages oj gross domestic product [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year Receipts Surplus or deficit ( ) National defense Total Gross Federal debt ( end of period ) Held by public Total ^ Transition quarter l Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year February for additional information Sources-. Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-80. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accou nts [ Biiiions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Receipts Expenditures State and local government Federal Government Surplus or deficit ( ) national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures ( ) national income and product accounts " : IV.. : IV.. : IV.. : IV.. : IV.. : IV.. : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II IV : : Il l IV P Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-81. Federal and State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter >> : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Total Surplus Subsior Hioc Hofirit OcllCIl oies Less : ( ) > locc less DiviLess : nacurInter- dends tional rent reest reincome surceived ceived and plus of by by govern- prodgovern- govern- ment uct ac2 ment ment enter- counts prises Net interest paid Indirect perbusi- Contrisonal Corpo- ness butions rate tax for tax profits and social and nontax tax ac- non- insurcruals reance tax ceipts accruals Par Total Purchases Transfer payments Total Interest paid Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Prior to dividends received is included in interest received Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis b'i * Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments * TABLE B-82. Federal Government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Purchases Year or quarter Fiscal : Calendar : P : IV : IV 1984.1V : IV 1986.1V : IV : IV : IV : I II III IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Total Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate for Natax and profits tax and Total nontax tax nontax social Total tional dereceipts accruals accruals insurance fense Transfer payments To To rest per- of the sons world ( net ) Subsi- Surplus or Grantsdies deficit in-aid less to ( ) Net State inter- current national surplus income and est of local paid and govern- product govment accounts ernenterments prises ^ Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter. Data are not seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-83. State and local government receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Indirect CorpoContriburate business Federal tions for tax and profits grants-insocial tax nontax aid insurance accruals accruals Total Surplus Subsior dies Net Transdeficit less interest fer ( ) current paid paysurplus national Purless ments income of chases divito and governdends perproduct ment sons received accounts enterprises p : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II : I. II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-84. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General expenditures by function General revenues by source2 Fiscal year l Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes Corporation net income taxes Revenue from Federal Government All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other4 Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-85. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] Nonmarketable Marketable End of year or month Fiscal year : Total interestbearing public debt securities Total > Treasury bills Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total U.S savings bonds Foreign government and public2 series Government account series Other = : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar.. June. July.. Aug... Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. AlfayZ Includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately in the amount of million dollars Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-86. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Average length Within lyear Ito5 years to years to years years and over Months Years Millions of dollars Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr... May. June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-87. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; l billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month Total Commercial banks2 Individuals3 Total Total Savings bonds4 Other securities Insurance companies Money market funds Corporations State and local governments Foreign and international7 Other investors : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Mar June Sept U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered and foreign banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes State and local government series ( SLGs ) as well as State and local pension funds Consists of the investments of foreign and international accounts ( both official and private ) in U.S. public debt issues. Reflects benchmark through December and benchmark to date Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored enterprises Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-88. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability lends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments " : : : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Year or quarter IV. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Total TABLE B-89. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Financial1 Nonfinancial Total Total Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Rest of the world Other " : : : : : : IV IV IV IV IV IV IV IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Consists of the following industries : Depository institutions ; nondepository credit institutions ; security and commodity brokers- insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-90 for industry detail NOte. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-90. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products Nondurable goods ElecIndustronic Motor trial and vehicles machinother and ery and electric equipequipequipment ment ment Other Total Food and Kindred products Chemicals Petroleum and and allied products coal products Other ^ : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown. In the SIC the categories shown here as " industrial machinery and equipment and " electronic and other electric equipment " were identified as " machinery except electrical " and " electric and electronic equipment " respectively Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-91. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Sales ( nat \ Profits Before After income income taxes * taxes MOCK- holders ' equity2 Sales ( net ) : IV Qtnrk After Before income income taxes taxes l New series : : IV Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits MOCK- holders ' equity2 Profits Sales ( net ) After Before income income taxes taxes MOCK- holders ' equity2 : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill Addendum : Impact of Accounting Change3 First quarter : I In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted In new series no income taxes have been deducted the Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Data for the first quarter of were revised significantly as a result of the early adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ( Employer 's Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits Other Than Pensions ) by a large number of companies during the fourth quarter of Corporations must show the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle in the first quarter of the year in which the change is adopted Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting principles industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations, ' Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-92. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percentx Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV All manufacturing corporations New series : : IV : I | | III Ill IV : II Ill IV II Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only See footnote Table B-91 Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-91 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-93. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Sources Uses Internal Year or Total tpr lei I960... : II III... IV... External Inventory valuation Capital Foreign and conearricapital sumption ngs re- Total Total tributed conallow- tained profits sumption ances abroad ' adjustments Credit market funds II <s U.o unrlic undis- Total : II III... IV... : II III... Securities and mortgages Loans and Other2 shortterm paper Discrepancy Capital ncrease sources i Total expendiless inanciai tures uses ) assets _4 ^ 1L6 Foreign branch profits dividends and subsidiaries ' earnings retained abroad Consists of tax liabilities trade debt and direct foreign investment in the United States Plant and equipment residential structures inventory investment and mineral rights from U.S. Government Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-94. Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Common stock prices * New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Year or month Composite : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Dow Jones industrial average2 Standard & Poor 's composite index Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio ( Tl8 " " " " Averages of daily closing prices except NYSE data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( more than ) ; for Dow-Jones industrial average stocks ; and for S&P composite index stocks Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. All indexes shown here reflect the doubling Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter. Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation ( S&P ) TABLE B-95. Business formation and business failures B siness failures ' i business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate Year or month Index nt not OT net business ( = n ) Nw e Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Liability size class Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar May ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec : Jan Feb. Mar May ' ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! June July Aug Sept Oct Nv o Dec Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data beginning are based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data. Data for and are subject to revision due to amended court filings Failure rate per listed enterprises Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation AGRICULTURE TABLE B-96. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from arming Gross farm income Year or quarter Total II Ill I V : II.. Ill IV | | III " Net farm Cash marketing receipts Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 Production expenses Current dollars income dollars3 'Cash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Income in current dollars divided by the GDP implicit price deflator ( Department of Commerce ) Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture except as noted TABLE B-97. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators5 Crops Year Total Livestock and products Total4 Feed crops Food grains Oil crops Farm output per unit of total factor input Farm output per unit of farm labor Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households Gross production Horses and mules excluded Includes items not included in groups shown See Table B-98 for farm inputs Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-98. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April x Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population2 Farm employment ( thousands ) Total Family workers Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Hired workers Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Total Farm labor Agricultural chemicals Feed seed Other and purlivechased stock inputs purchases DuraFarm ble real equipestate ment Energy j ! J Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Series discontinued in Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-33 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed seed and livestock purchases Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources-. Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-99. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by jarmers [ = ] Prices received by farmers Year or month * : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. fc June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All farm products Crops Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest taxes and wage rates Production items Total Tractors and selfpropelled machinery Fertilizer Fuels and energy Wage rates Addendum- Average farm real estate value per acre3 " " Includes items used for family living not shown separately Includes other production items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are for March of each year through February for April for February for and January for Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-100- U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Imports Exports Year Total Food grains Feed grains Oilseeds and products Cot- Animals and products To- Total Crops fruits and vegetables Animals and products Coffee Cocoa beans and products Agricultural trade balance _ j ! ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown separately Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Hess than $ million Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-101. Farm business balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Physical assets End of year Nonreal estate Total assets estate ' Financial assets Livestock and poultry InvestMachinPur- ments in ery and Crops : chased cooper- Other * motor atives invehicles puts Total claims Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt Proprietors ' equity Excludes commercial broilers ; excludes horses and mules beginning ; excludes turkeys beginning Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC Includes fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Sum of currency demand deposits time deposits and U.S. savings bonds Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data exclude operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-102. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. ASSETS ABROAD : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. Government assets other than official reserves U.S. credits and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. shortterm assets U.S. private assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment abroad : At current cost At market value Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere FOREIGN ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Foreign official assets in the United States U.S. Government securities U.S. Treasury securities Other Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment in the United States : At current cost At market value U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Valued at market price Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business June June and June Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-103. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars- quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Merchandise Services Investment income Exports Imports Net travel Other Net military and services transac- ranspor- net tions3 tation receipts Payments on foreign assets in U.S Year or quarter : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill p Nt e Excludes military Adjusted from Census data for differences in Quarterly data are not seasonally adjusted Receipts on U.S assets abroad valuation coverage and timing Includes transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs See next page for continuation of table Nt e Balance on goods Unilateral Balance on services transfers current and net account income TABLE B-103. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill >> U.S official reserve assets Other U.S Government assets Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow ( ) ] U.S private assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Statistical discrepancy AllocaOf tions of Total which : special drawing ( sum of Seasonal the adjustrights items ment ( SDRs ) with sign discrepreversed ) ancy U39 " * Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Year or quarter Imports Nonagricultural products AgriculturIndus- Capital al trial Total goods prod- Total supplies except Auto- Other and ucts automo- motive matetive rials Total Petroleum and products Nonpetroleum products Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Auto- Other Total and automo- motive matetive rials : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I... II.. III. End-use categories beginning are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for merchandise exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign merchandise ) are assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic merchandise Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysts TABLE B-105. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Billions of dollars ] Item first quarters at annual rate Canada Japan Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa OPEC3 Other4 ; International organizations and unallocated Other countries except Eastern Europe Australia Eastern Europe Industrial countries Exports Industrial countries Canada Japan... Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa OPEC3 Other4 Other countries except Eastern Europe Australia Eastern Europe Imports International organizations and unallocated Balance ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC3 Other4 Eastern Europe2 International organizations and unallocated Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted The former German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) included in Western Europe beginning fourth quarter and in Eastern Europe prior to that time Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Ecuador ( through ) Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin America other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-106. U.S. merchandise exports imports and trade balance [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Genera merchandise imports ( customs value ) I Merchandise exports ( f.a.s. /alue ) ' Principal end-use commodity category Year or month Total Principal end-use commodity category Pen ExConConeral InAuto- summerExInCap ( f.a.s. ) ports Cap- Auto- sumer chandusmoer Foods dusital moless ( f.a.s. ) Foods trial ital tive goods trial goods tive goods dise imfeeds supvehi- ( nonTotal feeds sup- goods vehi- ( nonimless imcles cles bev- plies cept parts food ) Other bev- plies cept parts food ) Other ports ( cusand and autoex ( ci.f toms ports ererauto- and ex4 mama ( ci.f. ) and cept value ) cept valages teri- moages teri- moen- auto ip \ tive en- autogines moals als ii ve gines motive tive F.a.s. value Trade balance Customs value F.a.s. value : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Customs value ? -12.S Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning Includes undocumented exports to Canada through Beginning undocumented exports to Canada are included in the appropriate end-use category Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Ci.f. ( cost insurance and freight ) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for are estimates F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Trade in gold is included beginning Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for the U.S.- Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments Data beginning include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-107. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country Oct Nov All countries Industrial countries * 30i225 United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data for Luxembourg Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Cuba ( after ) U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; ; October ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics TABLE B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries United States Year or quarter Canada European Community1 Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( = LOO ) ^ " : II Il l IV : | | I I I IV Consumer prices ( = ) | | Il l IV II Ill IV Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark France Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands United Kingdom Germany Portugal and Spain. Industrial production prior to July excludes data for Greece which joined the EC in Data for Portugal and Spain which became members on January are excluded prior to Former West Germany All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : National sources as reported by Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Economic Analysis Trade and Industry Statistics Division ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-109. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France Germany * Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( percent ) : II.. III. IV. : II.. IV. " " " " " " " " " " Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( = ) Former West Germany Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France Germany and United Kingdom should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data. Many Italians reported as unemployed did not actively seek work in the past days and they have been excluded for comparability with U.S. concepts. Inclusion of such persons would about double the unemployment rate for Italy through and increase it to percent for and percent in There are breaks in the series for Germany ( ) and Italy ( and ) Based on the prior series the rate for Germany was percent in and the rate for Italy was percent in and in The break in raised Italy 's rate by 4approximately percentage points Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States and Canada and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries. For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source.- Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-110. Foreign exchange rates [ Currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ] Period Belgium ( franc ) Canada ( dollar ) France ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) March : I I Il l IV : I I Il l IV Netherlands ( guilder ) Sweden ( krona ) Switzerland ( franc ) United Kingdom ( pound ) Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real2 March : II Ill IV : II Ill IV Value is U.S. dollars per pound Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Growth rates in real gross domestic product [ Percent change ] Area and country World * United States Canada Japan European Community France Germany2 Italy United Kingdom3 Industrial countries- Developing countries Africa Asia Middle East and Europe Western Hemisphere Countries in transition4 Central Europe Former Soviet Union5 All figures are forecasts except data for United States Through for West Germany only Average of expenditure income and output estimates of GDP at market prices For most countries included in the group total output is measured by real net material product ( NMP ) or by NMP-based estimates of GDP Data beginning are weighted averages of separate estimates for the states of the former U.S.S.R Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and International Monetary Fund NATIONAL WEALTH TABLE B-l National wealth [ Billions of dollars ] Private net worth End of year Total net worth Tangible wealth l Total Total * Owneroccupied real estate Government net financial assets Financial wealth Consumer durables Total5 Corporate equity Noncorporate equity Total Federal State and local Sum of private net worth and government net financial assets Referred to as household net worth in the Balance Sheets Held by households and nonprofit organizations Also includes nonprofit organizations real estate Also includes credit market instruments life insurance and pension reserves security credit and miscellaneous assets and is net of liabilities Includes households and nonprofit organizations ' direct ( or through mutual funds ) holdings of corporate equity. Equity held through pension and life insurance reserves is not included Also includes sponsored credit agencies and the Federal Reserve. Some tangible wealth is included for these agencies Note. Data are from Balance Sheets for the U.S. Economy September with updates for recent years from Flow of Funds Accounts Flows and Outstanding December Data are measured at market value where available. For example corporate equity and land are measured at market value but bonds are measured at par value Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-113. National wealth in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Private net worth End of year Total net worth Tangible wealth s Total Total Owneroccupied real estate Government net financial assets Financial wealth Consumer durables Corporate equity Total Noncorporate equity Total Federal State and local Sum of private net worth and government net financial assets Referred to as household net worth in the Balance Sheets Held by households and nonprofit organizations Also includes nonprofit organizations real estate Also includes credit market instruments life insurance and pension reserves security credit and miscellaneous assets and is net of liabilities Includes households and nonprofit organizations ' direct ( or through mutual funds ) holdings of corporate equity. Equity held through pension and life insurance reserves is not included Also includes sponsored credit agencies and the Federal Reserve Some tangible wealth is included for these agencies Note. See Note Table B-112 Deflated by the GDP implicit price deflator. ( The deflator was averaged for fourth quarter of year shown and first quarter of following year. ) Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis SUPPLEMENTARY TABLE TABLE B-114. Selected historical series on gross domestic product and related series [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Constant ( ) dollars Gross domestic product Year Current dollars Percent change from preceding period Implicit price Im1987 deflator dollars ( = Current plicit price ) dollars dollars deflator Personal Gross Goverprivate conNet sumption domestic exports ment purexpendi- investchases ment tures Saving as percent Populaof tion dispos ( thouable Per person- sands ) capita al ( dolinlars ) come Disposable personal income Total Percents based on data in millions of dollars Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; does not include data for Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis O ISBN 78C