Transmitted to the Congress February Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office Superintendent of Documents Mail Stop : SSOP Washington DC ISBN C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER PROMOTING PROSPERITY IN A HIGH-EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY CHAPTER MACROECONOMIC POLICY AND PERFORMANCE CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF CHILDREN CHAPTER ECONOMIC INEQUALITY AMONG RACIAL AND ETHNIC GROUPS CHAPTER IMPROVING ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY : ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH ISSUES CHAPTER RECENT INITIATIVES IN ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT CHAPTER THE BENEFITS OF MARKET OPENING APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report seepage ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : For the last years this Administration has worked to strengthen our Nation for the 21st century expanding opportunity for all Americans demanding responsibility from all Americans and bringing us together as a community of all Americans. Building a strong economy is the cornerstone of our efforts to meet these challenges When I first took office in the Federal budget deficit was out of control unemployment was unacceptably high and wages were stagnant. To reverse this course we took a new approach putting in place a bold economic strategy designed to bring down the deficit and give America 's workers the tools and training they need to help them thrive in our changing economy Our strategy has succeeded : the economy has created more than million new jobs unemployment is at its lowest level in years and core inflation is at its lowest level in years. Economic growth in was the strongest in almost a decade and the benefits of that growth are being shared by all Americans : poverty is dropping and median family income has gone up nearly $ since We also saw the biggest drop in welfare rolls in history. Many challenges remain but Americans are enjoying the fruits of an economy that is steady and strong THE ADMINISTRATION 'S ECONOMIC STRATEGY From the beginning this Administration 's economic strategy has had three crucial elements : reducing the deficit investing in people and opening markets abroad Deficit reduction. In this Administration 's deficit reduction plan set the Nation on a course of fiscal responsibility while making critical investments in the skills and well-being of our people. When I took office the deficit was $ billion and projected to go much higher. This year the deficit will fall to just $ billion and possibly lower still. That is a reduction of more than percent leaving the deficit today smaller in relation to the size of the economy than it has been since And this year I have proposed a budget that will eliminate the deficit entirely achieving the first balanced budget in years Beyond that it is projected that the budget will show a sizable surplus in the years to come. I propose that we reserve percent of the surplus until we have taken the necessary measures to strengthen the Social Security system for the 21st century. I am committed to address- ing Social Security first to ensure that all Americans are confident that it will be there when they need it Investing in our people. In the new economy the most precious resource this Nation has is the skills and ingenuity of working Americans. Investing in the education and health of our people will help all Americans reap the rewards of a growing changing economy. Those who are better educated with the flexibility and the skills they need to move from one job to another and seize new opportunities will succeed in the new economy ; those who do not will fall behind That is why the historic balanced budget agreement I signed into law in included the largest increase in aid to education in years and the biggest increase to help people go to college since the G.I. Bill was passed years ago. The agreement provided funds to ensure that we stay on track to help million disadvantaged children prepare for success in school. It provided funding for the America Reads Challenge with the goal of mobilizing a million volunteers to promote literacy and it made new investments in our schools themselves to help connect every classroom and library in this country to the Internet by the year The balanced budget agreement created the HOPE scholarship program to make completion of the 13th and 14th years of formal education as widespread as a high school diploma is today. It offered other tuition tax credits for college and skills training. It created a new Individual Retirement Account that allows tax-free withdrawals to pay for education. It provided the biggest increase in Pell grants in two decades. Finally it provided more funds so that aid to dislocated workers is more than double what it was in to help these workers get the skills they need to remain productive in a changing economy But we must do more to guarantee all Americans the quality education they need to succeed. That is why I have proposed a new initiative to improve the quality of education in our public schools through high national standards and national tests more charter schools to stimulate competition greater accountability higher quality teaching smaller class sizes and more classrooms To strengthen our Nation we must also strengthen our families. The Family and Medical Leave Act which I signed into law in ensures that millions of people no longer have to choose between being good parents and being good workers. The Health Care Portability and Accountability Act enacted in ensures that workers can keep their health insurance if they change jobs or suffer a family emergency. We have also increased the minimum wage expanded the earned income tax credit and provided for a new $ 500-per-child tax credit for working families. To continue making progress toward strengthening families the balanced budget agreement allocated $ billion to provide health insurance to up to million uninsured chil- dren the largest Federal investment in children 's health care since Medicaid was created in Opening markets and expanding exports. To create more good jobs and increase wages we must open markets abroad and expand U.S exports. Trade has been key to the strength of this economic expansion about a third of our economic growth in recent years has come from selling American goods and services overseas. The Information Technology Agreement signed in lowers tariff and other barriers to percent of world trade in information technology services To continue opening new markets creating new jobs and increasing our prosperity it is critically important to renew fast-track negotiating authority. This authority which every President of either party has had for the last years enables the President to negotiate trade agreements and submit them to the Congress for an up-or-down vote without modification. Renewing this traditional trade authority is essential to America 's ability to shape the global economy of the 21st century SEIZING THE BENEFITS OF A GROWING CHANGING ECONOMY As we approach the 21st century the American economy is sound and strong but challenges remain. We know that information and technology and global commerce are rapidly transforming the economy offering new opportunities but also posing new challenges. Our goal must be to ensure that all Americans are equipped with the skills to succeed in this growing changing economy Our economic strategy balancing the budget investing in our people opening markets has set this Nation on the right course to meet this goal. This strategy will support and contribute to America 's strength in the new economic era removing barriers to our economy 's potential and providing our people with the skills the flexibility and the security to succeed. We must continue to maintain the fiscal discipline that is balancing the budget to invest in our people and their skills and to lead the world to greater prosperity in the 21st century THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely <r Janet L. Yellen Chair Jeffrey A. Frankel Member Rebecca M. Blank Member-Nominee C O N T E N T S Page CHAPTER PROMOTING PROSPERITY IN A HIGH-EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY The Administration 's Economic Strategy A Credible Plan for Deficit Reduction Investing in People and Technology Opening Markets at Home and Abroad A Record of Accomplishment Benefits of a High-Employment Economy Deficit Reduction : Completing the Task Policies to Raise Growth Reduce Inequality and Increase Opportunity Strengthening Cities and Communities Strengthening the Performance of Domestic Markets. Opening Foreign Markets Promoting an Economically Sound Environmental Agenda Facing the Challenges Ahead Conclusion CHAPTER MACROECONOMIC POLICY AND PERFORMANCE Overview of : A Burst of Growth Aggregate Spending in Monetary Policy and Financial Markets Inflation and the Labor Market Productivity Explaining Recent Inflation Performance Recent Inflation Performance and the NAIRU Alternative Measures of Utilization and Capacity A New Era for the Economy ? The Economic Condition of Households The Confident Consumer The Condition of Household Balance Sheets The Personal Saving Rate The Long-Term Uptrend in the Bankruptcy Rate Long-Term Growth : Budget Deficits and National Saving Saving in a Closed Economy Saving in an Open Economy Implications Page Forecast and Outlook The Administration Forecast Components of Long-Term Growth Productivity Inflation Considerations The Demand for Housing The Near-Term Outlook CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF CHILDREN Trends in the Economic Well-Being of Children The Link Between Income and Children 's Well-Being. Measuring Trends in Child Poverty Rates Explaining Recent Changes in Child Poverty Policy Initiatives to Support Family Incomes Other Measures of Children 's Material Weil-Being Availability of Food Adequacy of Housing New Housing Policy Initiatives Health Status and Health Insurance Health Outcomes Health Insurance Recent Initiatives to Expand Children 's Access to Health Insurance Child Care and Education Child Care Early Childhood Education Elementary and Secondary Education Conclusion Ill CHAPTER ECONOMIC INEQUALITY AMONG RACIAL AND ETHNIC GROUPS Population Composition Economic Status Family Income Household Wealth The Role of Family Structure in Income and Poverty Education Differences and Trends in Educational Attainment Explaining Educational Attainment Gaps Affirmative Action in Higher Education Admissions Labor Markets Trends in Labor Market Outcomes Explaining Earnings Gaps Discrimination Page CHAPTER IMPROVING ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY : ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH ISSUES Cost-Effective Environmental Protection Tradable Emissions Permits Air Quality Standards Climate Change Non-Point Source Water Pollution Improving Health Care and Health Insurance Markets Improving Access and Portability Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry Food and Drug Administration Reform Reducing Teenage Smoking CHAPTER RECENT INITIATIVES IN ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT Origins and Principles of Antitrust Mergers Market Definition Competitive Effects Entry Efficiencies Electronic Commerce High-Technology Industries Innovation and Intellectual Property Innovation and Intellectual Property Network Externalities Fast-Paced Technological Change The Global Marketplace and International Antitrust Efforts CHAPTER THE BENEFITS OF MARKET OPENING Trends in U.S. International Trade The Sectoral Composition of U.S. Trade The Geographic Composition of U.S. Trade U.S. Trade by Domestic Region Initiatives in Market Opening Trade-Negotiating Authority Multilateral Initiatives Regional Initiatives Bilateral Initiatives The Effects of Market Opening The Benefits of Trade Liberalization Measuring the Gains from Trade Trade and the American Worker Trade and Average Wages Page Trade and Relative Wages Trade and Aggregate Employment Trade and Job Displacement The U.S. Trade Balance Foreign Direct Investment Current Trends in FDI The Benefits of FDI Current U.S. Initiatives in Investment Policy Conclusion APPENDIXES A B Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production LIST OF TABLES Components of GDP and Growth in GDP Household Debt Service Burden Household Credit Card Balances as a Percent of Income Expected Effects on Changes in the CPI and Real GDP of CPI Methodological Changes Accounting for Growth in Real GDP Contribution of Selected Determinants of Demand and Supply for New Homes Administration Forecast Children with Family Incomes Below Different Income Cutoffs Changes in Child Poverty Rate and Selected Macroeconomic Indicators Accounting for Changes in Child Poverty Children in Households Reporting That There Was Sometimes or Often Not Enough to Eat During the Last Months Housing Problems Among Households with Children... Children with Health Insurance by Age of Child and Type of Coverage Average Number of Physician Contacts in Last Year for Children Under by Family Income Uninsured Children by Family Income Racial and Ethnic Composition of the U.S. Population. Ratios of Black and Hispanic to White Median Weekly Earnings Page Tariff Rates of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Members Industry Compensation Premiums Inward and Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Industry Selected Years Countries with Which the United States Has Bilateral Investment Treaties LIST OF CHARTS Investment and Government Spending in Overall GDP Growth Real Household Income Growth by Quintile Federal Budget Deficit as a Percent of GDP Net Interest as a Share of Federal Outlays Returns to Education Inflation and Trend Unit Labor Costs Computer Prices and Total Inflation Wage Growth and the Unemployment Rate Consumer Sentiment Ratio of Household Net Worth to Disposable Personal Income Household Debt by Type Household Debt Delinquency Rates Household Debt Service Payments Alternative Measures of Productivity Productivity Growth and the End-of-Expansion Effect. Poverty Rates of Children Children Living with Their Mother Only by Marital Status of Mother Monthly AFDC and Food Stamp Benefits for a Family of Four Infant Mortality Rates and Incidence of Low Birthweight Child and Youth Mortality Rates Children Without Physician Visit Within Past Year NAEP Long-Term Trend Assessment : Science and Mathematics Scores NAEP Long-Term Trend Assessment : Reading Scores.. Median Family Income Distribution of White Persons by Household Income Distribution of Black Persons by Household Income Gini Index for Family Income Poverty Rates for Persons Family Structure High School Completion Rates for to 29-Year-Olds Page Women Aged with 4-Year College Degree or Higher Men Aged with 4-Year College Degree or Higher Unemployment Rates Ratios of Median Weekly Earnings of Male Full-Time Workers Ratios of Median Weekly Earnings of Female Full-Time Workers Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Permit Prices Volume of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Permit Trades Sources of Nitrogen Oxides Emissions in U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Actual and Projected Cumulative World Emissions of Carbon Dioxide Projected World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Without Kyoto Agreement Energy Prices and Private Energy Research Clinical Trial and Drug Application Approval Times for New Drugs Mergers Filed with the Antitrust Agencies Exports and Imports as a Percent of GDP U.S. Exports and Imports by Category in and U.S. Goods Exports and Imports by World Region in and Exports of Goods by U.S. Region U.S.-Initiated WTO Dispute Settlement Cases by Target Country Real Wages and Labor Compensation and Productivity Saving Investment and the Current Account Balance Real Value of the Dollar and the Trade Deficit Growth in Real Imports and GDP Foreign Direct Investment Flows LIST OF BOXES Poverty Alleviation the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Minimum Wage Accounting for the Deficit Surprise During Fiscal Turmoil in Asian Economies Circuit Breakers Recent Revisions to Capacity and Utilization The National Bankruptcy Review Commission Methodological Changes in the Consumer Price Index. How Does Our Poverty Measure Affect Our Conception of Poverty ? Page Racial and Ethnic Identity and Classification The President 's Initiative on Race The Clean Water Initiative Quality Data Collection for Medicare Managed Care History of Food and Drug Administration Regulation of Drugs The Prescription Drug Users Fee Act of Consolidation in the Defense Industry The WTO Dispute Settlement Process and U.S. Trade Policy Regional Trade Agreements : Building Blocks or Stumbling Blocks for the Multilateral Process ? APEC Tariff Reductions and Other Initiatives Industry-Related Differences in Wages Fears and Facts about Foreign Direct Investment Bilateral Investment Treaties CHAPTER Promoting Prosperity in a HighEmployment Economy THE PAST YEAR SAW THE NATION 'S ECONOMY turn in its best performance in a generation. Over the course of output growth and job creation remained vigorous while inflation declined Real ( inflation-adjusted ) gross domestic product ( GDP ) grew percent and employment rose by million for an average rate of jobs per month. The unemployment rate dropped below percent for the first time in years yet core inflation ( as measured by the consumer price index excluding its volatile food and energy components ) averaged only percent its lowest rate in over years. This exceptional economic performance occurred during a period of historic deficit reduction : the Federal budget deficit which reached $ billion in the fiscal year declined to only $ billion in fiscal And the Administration has submitted a budget for fiscal that projects a balanced budget for the first time since As begins the prospects for continued growth with high employment and low inflation remain excellent. The economy is remarkably free of the symptoms that often presage an economic downturn such as an increase in inflation an accumulation of inventories or evidence of financial imbalance. Inflation fell in and developments in East Asia by reducing U.S. import prices are likely to exert additional downward pressure on U.S. inflation in Economic turmoil in East Asia could affect the global economy but if international efforts to restore stability there succeed the main effect on the U.S. economy could simply be to allow continued growth and job creation with a more moderate outlook for interest rates. Another sign that an expansion is nearing its end would be a sudden accumulation of inventories as businesses find their sales falling short of production. Yet sales were strong in and inventory-sales ratios are near historical lows. Financial imbalances can also threaten to disrupt an expansion. But today banks and other financial institutions do not appear overextended as they did in the late 1980s and early 1990s and the stock market shrugged off a oneday plunge in October ( although its continuing high valuation relative to earnings is a source of concern to some ) Although the business cycle may not have been vanquished the economy is in fun- damentally sound shape and well-equipped to handle any unexpected bouts of rougher weather A principal force behind the current expansion has been private fixed investment. Almost none of the growth in GDP over this expansion has come from increased government spending whereas close to one-third has come from greater private fixed investment ( Chart ) Because of the Administration 's deficit reduction efforts the contribution of government spending to overall growth has been much lower than in most previous postwar expansions ( real Federal Government spending has actually declined ) while that of private fixed investment has been substantially higher. One benefit of this burst of investment has been a rapid expansion of industrial capacity : over the past years average annual capacity growth has exceeded every previous growth rate since Policies such as deficit reduction have contributed to an investment-led recovery and a climate conducive to sustained economic Chart Investment and Government Spending in Overall GDP Growth Real GDP growth during this expansion has been driven by private spending particularly on fixed investment Share of real GDP change ( percent ) Private fixed investment F Government spending l 1991-present Note : Change in component expressed as fraction of overall change in real GDP Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and National Bureau of Economic Research growth. But the lion 's share of the credit for the economy 's performance goes to American workers and firms who have risen to the challenges of a competitive global economy and rapidly changing technology. The role of government in such an economy is not to prop up economic growth with government spending but more subtly to provide individuals and businesses with the tools they need to flourish through their own efforts. The range of appropriate government policies in such an economy includes promoting private investment through sound macroeconomic policies encouraging the formation of skills through training and education securing opportunity for the marginalized members of our society and where necessary providing assistance to the most vulnerable. Using government to complement not replace the market and the private sector has been a fundamental guiding principle of this Administration 's economic strategy from the very beginning. And it is this strategy that has borne fruit over the last years Despite the economy 's recent exemplary performance a number of challenges remain. The first is to preserve and nurture the successes achieved so far. And although progress has been made in addressing the longer term problems that have affected the economy since the productivity slowdown of the early 1970s problems like slow growth in wages and incomes and widening income inequality more needs to be done. This chapter describes the principles and policies of this Administration for achieving its two basic overarching goals : securing high and rising living standards now and in the future and ensuring that the benefits of a higher standard of living are extended to all Americans THE ADMINISTRATION 'S ECONOMIC STRATEGY The Employment Act of ( which created the Council of Economic Advisers ) together with its later amendments gave the Federal Government responsibility for stabilizing short-run economic fluctuations promoting balanced and noninflationary economic growth and fostering low unemployment. This Administration 's strategy in pursuing this mandate has focused on getting the fundamentals right : reducing the budget deficit investing in technology and the American people and opening markets at home and abroad These were the right policies for encouraging the job creation needed to move the economy to full employment and they are the right policies for attacking the longer term problems of sluggish productivity growth and widening income inequality that began to afflict the economy in the early 1970s But there is more to the Administration 's policy agenda than can be measured by aggregate economic statistics alone. Getting the fundamentals right means removing the barriers that block people from realizing their potential ; it means promoting their sense of individual responsibility and giving them the tools to succeed. Getting the fundamentals right also means fostering a personal commitment by all Americans to help others a sense of shared responsibility for our Nation 's children and a sense of community in an increasingly multiethnic society A CREDIBLE PLAN FOR DEFICIT REDUCTION The policy course set in has contributed to the Nation 's recent economic health and strength. In the economy was still recovering from the recession and it labored under the burden of a Federal budget deficit that had ballooned to $ billion an all-time record. The linchpin of the Administration 's economic strategy was a credible budget plan that could achieve substantial deficit reduction over the longer term yet be balanced and gradual enough to allow the economy to gather strength and move toward full employment in the short term. The success of this program rested on achieving an interest rate environment conducive to investment which would allow the economy to grow in the face of a contractionary fiscal policy. This in turn required that financial markets correctly anticipate an appropriately accommodative monetary policy. In large measure that is exactly what happened. Long-term interest rates fell to 25-year lows in spurring a pickup in economic growth A key feature of the Administration 's deficit reduction plan was its credibility. A credible and realistic program for deficit reduction one that observers and financial markets judged likely to be fully implemented was a precondition for the reduction in interest rates that spurred investment-led growth. Fundamental to the plan 's credibility was the adoption of a set of economic projections that represented conservative mainstream forecasts of future growth and inflation These projections eschewed the " rosy scenarios " of previous budgets which invariably fell short of reality ; they were not meant to indicate the best that the economy could do but rather how the economy was most likely to perform given past experience. In fact the economy 's performance has been stronger than the Administration projected In the 1980s expansive fiscal policy required relatively tight monetary policy in the form of high interest rates to prevent the economy from overheating. This policy mix is particularly unfavorable from the standpoint of fostering longer term growth : high interest rates impede capital formation while burgeoning government deficits depress national saving and contribute to more borrowing from abroad. The net result of deficit reduction in the 1990s has been to promote a more balanced mix of fiscal and monetary policy. Deficit reduction has also had an important collateral benefit namely a restoration of Americans ' confidence in the ability of their government to manage its own affairs INVESTING IN PEOPLE AND TECHNOLOGY The primary purpose of deficit reduction however is to encourage investment. Hence this Administration recognized from the outset that a plan that balanced the budget at the expense of the government 's own productive investments would ultimately be self-defeating. Far from curtailing public investment the Administration has given investment in people and technology a major place in its economic agenda Government invests in people by promoting public health and safety encouraging opportunity and individual responsibility and assisting in the formation of human capital through education and training. This last function is especially vital in today 's high-technology economy where a skilled work force is an essential condition for future growth. Education is critical if Americans are to capitalize on the opportunities created by new technologies and more open global markets. And education and training programs are of particular importance in the present economic environment as a means of preventing poverty and ensuring opportunity for all. The return to education has risen dramatically since the late 1970s ; today highly skilled workers command a large premium in the labor market over their less skilled counterparts. This rising skill premium is an important reason why earnings inequality is greater today than it was in the late 1970s. Governments have an important role to play in ensuring that all Americans have the opportunity to accumulate the skills necessary for economic success. This requires initiatives to improve public education at the primary and secondary levels as well as programs to make higher education more accessible. It also requires recognizing that learning must be a lifelong activity in an economy where technological change is ongoing Investing in basic research and the development of new technologies is another important function of government. The private sector spends billions of dollars every year on research and development But economists have long recognized that private sector spending alone in these areas will be less than the optimum. Since the fruits of a new scientific discovery for example are enjoyed not merely by the discoverer but by society as a whole the private incentive for pursuing scientific research falls short of the total social benefit. Moreover new theories of economic growth place a special emphasis on advances in knowledge through research and development as the motive force behind long-run increases in living standards. This analysis implies that the return to government investment in basic research and technology is likely to be especially high OPENING MARKETS AT HOME AND ABROAD A third major component of the Administration 's economic agenda is the promotion of freer and more competitive markets at home and abroad. Domestically this has involved the pursuit of initiatives directed at enhancing competition particularly in such industries as telecommunications electric power financial services and health care and a vigorous approach to antitrust enforcement. It has also meant addressing market failures in such areas as health care and environmental protection. In some cases the effect of these initiatives is a one-time boost to the level of output through greater efficiency and lower costs. But these policies can also sometimes lead to a faster rate of economic growth. For example past experience provides evidence that sensible deregulation can not only help raise efficiency but also spur continued innovation through greater competition Moreover some benefits of these policies are not captured in the GDP statistics at all but rather take the form of improvements in our quality of life The Administration is also committed to reducing the burden of government regulation and ensuring that the benefits of new regulations justify their costs. Many government regulations apply to industries in which technological change is rapidly altering the nature of market competition. A key precept of this Administration 's approach to regulation therefore is that the regulatory process must be dynamic with regulatory policies under constant review so as to minimize their burden on consumers and businesses. Another important precept is to refrain from policies that regulate through government fiat in favor of policies that use market-based incentives to attain the desired outcome. Experience with such policies as permit trading for sulfur dioxide emissions suggests that this approach can help ensure that compliance with socially beneficial goals is achieved efficiently and cost-effectively This Administration has also worked hard to open markets abroad by encouraging fairer and freer international trade. From his earliest days in office the President has advocated an outward-looking internationalist trade policy. During the Administration 's first years the United States concluded over trade agreements with other countries. Some of these agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and the Uruguay Round agreement of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade were comprehensive in scope whereas others had much more limited aims but all are vital to our Nation 's competitive future Economists generally recognize that an open economy offers both static and dynamic advantages. First trade benefits an economy by allowing it to specialize in what it does best a point that economists have made since the early 1800s. Even if a country is more efficient than its neighbors at producing every good it consumes it can still benefit from trade by specializing in the production of goods in which it is relatively more efficient and then trading its surplus production for whatever else it wants to consume. In addition a new view of international trade argues that increased trade actually raises an economy 's rate of growth because increased competition and larger markets spur the acquisition of new skills and the development of new technologies. If so the case for trade liberalization becomes even more compelling since raising the economy 's growth rate even by a few tenths of a percentage point per year has vastly more significance for long-run living standards than even a relatively large one-time increase in the level of output A RECORD OF ACCOMPLISHMENT Focusing on the fundamentals in shaping economic policy has paid off by helping to produce an economy that is stronger than it has been in decades. This past year alone saw a drop in the unemployment rate to its lowest level in a generation and the forging of a budget agreement that promises to bring the Federal deficit under control for the first time in decades. Last year also saw significant advances in this Administration 's economic agenda along other fronts BENEFITS OF A HIGH-EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY Driven largely by strong growth in business fixed investment growth in real GDP and employment picked up in the second half of and persisted in This robust growth led to a series of monetary policy tightenings over the course of which resulted in more moderate growth in In retrospect may have been the pause that refreshes. Economic growth exceeded expectations in and strong growth continued through The result has been a high-employment economy with the potential to overcome some of the longer term problems of productivity growth and income distribution that built up in the 1970s and 1980s A high-employment economy brings enormous economic and social benefits. Essential to personal economic security is the knowledge that work is available to those who seek it at wages sufficient to keep them and their families out of poverty. A tight labor market increases the confidence of job losers that they will be able to return to work lures discouraged workers back into the labor force enhances the prospects of those already at work to get ahead enables those who want or need to switch jobs to do so without a long period of joblessness and lowers the duration of a typical unemployment spell Returning the economy to full employment yields a direct benefit by ensuring that the economy 's resources human and material are not squandered by needless cyclical unemployment. On average reducing the unemployment rate by a percentage point raises output by approximately percent ; in percent of GDP was $ billion or roughly $ for every American man woman and child Wasted resources from not producing at potential together with the human cost of unemployment are intolerable ; the elimination of this waste is the principal benefit of a sustained return to full employment But a high-employment economy in which jobs are plentiful and labor markets tight yields other benefits as well. Short-term economic conditions can affect long-term structural unemployment. A tight labor market encourages participation by those who might otherwise be forced to sit on the sidelines and makes it easier to absorb less skilled or younger and more inexperienced workers into the labor force. These new labor market entrants gain much-needed job experi ence building the skills they will need to hold down a job in the future. The importance of this can be seen from the experience of some European countries : prolonged stagnation or recession may have led to a permanent increase in unemployment there as the unemployed and the never-employed have seen their skills atrophy or become obsolete. Running a high-employment economy then may be one of the surest ways to ensure that an unacceptably large fraction of our citizens are not consigned to long-term joblessness and economic marginalization From the 1980s until the early 1990s the economy 's ability to reduce poverty through growth alone was hampered by a strong headwind : sustained declines in wages at the low end of the earnings distribution that offset the benefits of an expanding economy for the poorest Americans. As a result holding a job no longer ensured that a less skilled worker would be able to lift his or her family out of poverty. This adverse secular trend raises even further the stakes of maintaining a high-employment economy Keeping the unemployment rate low and job growth high is also necessary if we are to move current welfare recipients into the work force. Early indirect evidence here is encouraging : employment and labor force participation rates among single women who maintain families about two-thirds of whom have children under have increased in the past few years. This is probably in part the result of recent welfare reform : the greatest acceleration in employment rates has occurred among those single women most likely to be affected by welfare reform namely those with young children. Nevertheless it is obvious that fostering an economy in which job opportunities are plentiful plays a crucial part in aiding the transition from welfare to work We have begun to see heartening signs that the current expansion is yielding gains in living standards for all Americans especially those at the bottom of the income distribution. The poverty rate fell to percent in from percent in ; the poverty rate for black Americans is at a historical low and in unemployment among blacks fell to its lowest rate since Since household income has grown in each quintile of the income distribution with the largest percentage increase going to the poorest members of our society ( Chart ) Maintaining a full-employment economy is essential if this progress is to continue DEFICIT REDUCTION : COMPLETING THE TASK The most significant economic policy event of was the passage of a deficit reduction package that will finish the task of balancing the Federal budget by This will be the first balanced budget since and only the ninth since World War II ( Chart ) Some have claimed that the expanding economy not government policy deserves all the credit for vanquishing the deficit. It is cer tainly true that ups and downs in the business cycle have an important effect on both revenues and outlays leading to fluctuations in the deficit. But even when cyclical factors are thus accounted for it Chart Real Household Income Growth by Quintile From to households in the lowest quintile of the income distribution enjoyed the fastest growth in real incomes Average annual percent change Lowest Second Third Quintiles Fourth Highest Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Chart Federal Budget Deficit as a Percent of GDP The budget is projected to be in balance in fiscal for the first time since Percent of GDP Fiscal years Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget is evident that policy has played a major role in bringing the deficit under control. It is also worth noting that in January before the deficit reduction package was adopted the Federal deficit was projected to reach $ billion in fiscal and to rise to $ billion in fiscal even when the economy was projected to be at full employment. Finally it is difficult to imagine that the economy 's performance would have been anywhere near as strong as it has been without a credible and successful attempt to put the government 's fiscal house in order. Improvements in economic conditions have played a part in reducing the deficit but a balanced budget would not now be in sight had the Nation remained on the fiscal course in place in Although a balanced budget is often taken as the goal of fiscal policy from an economic standpoint the motivation for deficit reduction is to raise national saving thereby augmenting society 's future consumption possibilities. When the government 's budget is in surplus in the sense that revenues exceed outlays the government makes a positive contribution to national saving. As discussed in Chapter of this Report a case for higher national saving can be based on the high return on saving in the United States and the fact that private saving remains low. A higher rate of national saving now would lead to a larger economy when the baby-boom generation retires thus making it easier to provide for their retirement without imposing undue burdens on younger generations. Although a balanced budget does not add to the government 's outstanding debt to the public which past deficits have ballooned it does not subtract from it either. Leaving a large public debt in place implies that a sizable portion of existing government resources will continue to be absorbed by interest payments leaving less for all other spending. Indeed one legacy of the runup in the national debt that accompanied the deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s has been a sharp increase in the share of total outlays that must be used to make interest payments on the debt ( Chart ) POLICIES TO RAISE GROWTH REDUCE INEQUALITY AND INCREASE OPPORTUNITY A significant part of the Administration 's economic agenda also involves investment in people : in a broad sense this encompasses education and training measures to promote health and policies that extend opportunity to all Americans. A number of policies have been put in place to ensure that these investments are made Education The balanced budget agreement included the largest Federal investment in education in a generation in the form of initiatives to improve the quality and accessibility of primary secondary and higher education Chart Net Interest as a Share of Federal Outlays Net interest payments now represent twice as large a share of total outlays as they did in the 1970s Percent Fiscal years Source : Office of Management and Budget Higher education is a particular priority. The earnings of college graduates have risen sharply relative to those of workers with only a high school education ; in today 's economy a college degree has become as vital for success as a high school diploma was a generation ago. Even post-high school education that does not lead to a bachelor 's degree ( such as an associate 's degree program or vocational or technical training ) boosts earnings substantially over just completing high school ( Chart ) Moreover learning must be a lifelong process. A fundamental characteristic of our economy is constant technological change. Such progress holds the promise of higher living standards for all but it also requires workers to adapt to employers ' demands for a welltrained highly skilled work force. It is therefore critical to provide all individuals including those not traditionally thought of as " school age " with access to additional education or training The President 's higher education initiatives reflect these principles Specific measures include : The largest Pell grant increase in years. The balanced budget agreement raises the maximum Pell grant by over percent to $ Approximately million students receive Pell grants and close to a quarter of a million families will become eligible for the grant for the first time Chart Returns to Education Earning an associate 's degree raises earnings significantly Percent change in earnings relative to an individual with a high school diploma only 9th grade 11th grade Associate 's degree ( vocational ) Associate 's degree ( academic ) Bachelor 's degree Master 's degree Professional school Doctorate Note : data used in calculations Source : Calculations by Council of Economic Advisers based on the Current Population Survey HOPE scholarships for post-high school education. In his State of the Union address the President called for making the 13th and 14th years of education as universal as a high school education is today. The HOPE scholarship program accomplishes this by providing a tax credit for higher education expenses of as much as $ enough to cover tuition at a typical community college A tuition tax credit for Americans of all ages. A 20-percent tax credit for post-high school tuition expenses will be available for the first $ ( and after $ ) of qualified education expenses This tax credit is offered not just to school-age Americans but to those already working as well to permit workers to upgrade their skills at any time during their life Tax exemptions for employer-provided education benefits. The budget agreement extends Section of the tax code for years allowing workers to exclude up to $ of employer-provided education benefits from their taxable income A tax deduction for interest on student loans. Up to $ of interest payments on loans for higher education expenses will be tax-deductible in any given tax year starting in This deduction will rise by $ each year until Because public education in the United States is largely administered by local authorities the Federal Government 's ability to influence primary and secondary education is somewhat less direct Nevertheless this Administration recognizes that there is much that the Federal Government can do to improve our public schools and has worked to enact programs that will ensure that our children have access to the best possible primary and secondary education. These initiatives include : Establishing national standards. Research shows that students in countries that have standardized mandatory examinations do better than students in countries that do not. The Administration 's voluntary national testing program has received full funding ; this will allow for the development of national fourth-grade reading and eighth-grade mathematics examinations Expanding Head Start. The balanced budget agreement raised funding for Head Start by $ million to $ billion to reach the Administration 's goal of having million children in the Head Start program by Since funding for this program which has shown great success in preparing low-income preschoolers to enter school has increased by percent. The program will serve over children and their families in including infants and toddlers in the Early Head Start program Establishing a comprehensive literacy strategy. Every child should be able to read by the third grade. To meet this basic goal the President 's comprehensive literacy strategy will receive nearly $ million in new funding in for State teacher training family literacy and tutoring efforts ; $ million was provided in an advance appropriation to be available in contingent on authorization of a literacy initiative such as the America Reads Challenge Increasing funding for charter schools. The President set a goal of having locally designed public charter schools in operation by early in the next century. Funding for charter schools is increased by over percent in the balanced budget agreement to allow the Department of Education to support nearly charter schools by the end of Health This Administration has made promoting health increasing access to health insurance and improving the functioning of health insurance markets a major priority. The Balanced Budget Act of allocates $ billion over years to assist States in providing health insurance for up to million children through Medicaid or State programs. This represents the single largest investment in children 's health since Medicaid was begun in The Administration 's budget proposes to expand access to health insurance further by allowing uninsured Americans between and years old as well as to 61-year-olds who have been laid off or displaced from their jobs to buy into the Medicare program. These measures are fully offset so as not to increase the cost of Medicare to the government The Balanced Budget Act also takes important steps toward ensuring that Medicare itself remains viable. Structural reforms such as expanded choice among health care plans and the restructuring of payment systems will help save $ billion over years. Recently passed legislation also provides additional funding for preventive care such as mammograms which can help keep health care expenses down by catching and treating health problems before they become serious. These and other measures will keep the Medicare trust fund solvent for at least the next decade. The Balanced Budget Act also created a commission to examine long-term solutions to the problems that will face Medicare as a result of the demographic changes coming in the 21st century The Administration has also promoted policies to improve the functioning of health insurance markets increase consumer protection and improve access to new Pharmaceuticals. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of helps workers who change jobs by making it easier to carry their health insurance with them to the new job. In the President 's Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry established to advise the President on changes in the health care system responded to the President 's request to develop and recommend a " Consumer Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. " The President urged the Congress to pass appropriate and necessary legislation to ensure that a range of protections are extended to all Americans. And the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of which codifies a number of initiatives taken by this Administration as part of the reinventing government initiative will help ensure the timely availability of safe and effective new drugs. These policies and others are considered in greater detail in Chapter of this Report Finally teenage tobacco use is one of the most important public health concerns that the Nation faces and it has been rising in recent years. The increase in the tobacco tax passed last year not only will help fund the expansions in children 's health insurance coverage described above but also will help reduce teen smoking. The rise in the tax complements recent Food and Drug Administration rules to limit advertising targeted at youth. Finally the Administration has indicated its support for national legislation designed to achieve large reductions in teen smoking with strict financial penalties on the tobacco industry if specific targets in this effort are not met Welfare Reform and Poverty Alleviation Welfare reform presents an ongoing challenge : to ensure that our neediest citizens can maintain a decent standard of living without creating incentives that encourage a life of dependency. This Administration has committed itself to a policy that combines work incentives and community efforts to move people off of welfare and into employment. This has contributed to the largest reduction in welfare rolls in history The same long-term changes in the wage structure that give greater rewards to education and skill also imply that some workers will find it difficult to raise themselves and their families out of poverty even with a full-time job. To make work pay all those who work must be guaranteed a minimum level of earnings. The Administration has made an expansion of the earned income tax credit ( EITC ) which raises the take-home pay of eligible low-income workers a cornerstone of its strategy to promote work and reduce poverty ( Box ) This expansion has occurred alongside two increases in the minimum wage ( the second Box l ~ l+ ~ P0wrty Alla ^ iitttoii the Earned toeome Credit and the Minimum Wage A typical cash assistance program guarantees its maximum benefit to those who receive no income * then phases out this ben * eflt aa the recipient 's income from other sources ( usually labor ) rises The disincentive to work that such programs create has been a major concern perhaps the major concern of policymakers with regard to welfare policy. These disincentives will persist so long as we confine ourselves to considering policies with this structure * One way to avoid these work disincentive effects is to design programs that add to the wages of low-income workers. One such program ^ the earned income tax. credit was expanded substantially in Under the EITC eligible low-wage workers receive a credit against their income and payroll tax lability ; this credit is rebated in cash if the worker ^ income tax ttebility is zero The EITC differs from the typical cash assistance pro * gram in that no benefits are paid to those who do not work ? and benefits rise as earnings increase ( up to some threshold earnings level ) It therefore largely eliminates the typical program 's work disincentive effects Hie asdiiimum wage complements and enhances the ISITC * When used by itself to guarantee a subsistence level of income the minimum wage must be set very high. But an excessively Mgh minimum wage ( that is substantially above the current one ) eould discourage hiring. On the other hand using tfca EITC alone to guarantee an income floor would require payment of a large subsidy ^ which would then have to be phased out slowly to minimise the disincentive to earn additional income. This makes the program much more costly Henee ? the minimum wage and the EITC are best employed jointly in designing an optimal asttetaitea package of which in September raised the minimum wage from $ to $ an hour ) In August the President signed into law a comprehensive bipartisan welfare reform bill which established the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. This created a new system of block grants to States and dramatically altered the nature and provision of Federal welfare benefits in America. This legislation has changed the Nation 's welfare system into one that requires work in exchange for time-limited assistance and provides support for families moving from welfare to work Although these policies have helped shrink the welfare rolls significantly since much remains to be done. To that end two additional initiatives have been put in place to advance this Administration 's strategy for moving welfare recipients into employment. The first is a tax credit for employers who hire long-term welfare recipients ; the credit rebates to employers up to $ in wages paid in the first year and up to $ in the second. The second initiative is the Welfare to Work Job Challenge Fund which will assist States and communities in moving long-term welfare recipients into lasting unsubsidized employment. A hallmark of this fund for which $ billion has been earmarked is that it is targeted to those areas of the country most in need of poverty alleviation The Child Tax Credit The Administration proposed a tax cut to help working families with the expense of raising their children. The Taxpayer Relief Act of will reduce taxes for million families by providing a tax credit of $ per child. This credit will benefit over million children under age including over million children from working families with incomes below $ Because the credit is partly refundable large families who have paid significant out-of-pocket payroll taxes can benefit even if they have little or no income tax liability STRENGTHENING CITIES AND COMMUNITIES This Administration has worked to make Federal resources available for investment in our Nation 's cities and communities. First the Administration has sought to expand the number of Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities. The initial round of competition in led to the establishment of Enterprise Communities and Empowerment Zones ; both urban and rural areas were represented. The Taxpayer Relief Act of established additional Empowerment Zones. To compete for these designations communities submitted strategic plans for revitalization ; this requirement is intended to mobilize local communities and encourage them to harness their talents and resources in framing a plan for local economic development. Designated zones and communities receive tax benefits and flexible grants and are entitled to apply for waivers of certain Federal regulations ; the underlying principle of the program is that communities know best how to solve their own problems but may lack the necessary resources The Administration has also worked to promote fair access to loans and investment capital for residents of low- and moderateincome areas. Reform of the Community Reinvestment Act regulations required banks to focus on performance actual lending investments and services rather than paperwork. Since conventional home mortgage lending to black Americans has increased by percent lending to Hispanic borrowers is up nearly percent and lending activity in low- and moderate-income communities has risen by percent. The Administration also obtained $ million in funding for Community Development Financial Institutions which make investment capital and other financial products available to low- and moderate-income communities. The President 's budget requests an additional $ million for this program In addition the President signed into law the " brownfields " program which will provide tax incentives for the restoration of urban land contaminated by pollution. These incentives will leverage more than $ billion for nationwide private sector cleanups and the redevelopment of contaminated and abandoned sites in economically distressed urban areas Several basic principles inform these policies. First they seek to equip communities with the tools they need in order to flourish they are helping hands not handouts. Second they place the principal responsibility for community development with the communities themselves because they are closest to their problems. Third they emphasize private sector engagement rather than government mandates. And finally they stress results over process : the Enterprise Communities/Empowerment Zones program for example gives communities broad scope to determine for themselves the best path for development ; similarly the reformed regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act use criteria based on actual outcomes to judge compliance with its provisions STRENGTHENING THE PERFORMANCE OF DOMESTIC MARKETS As part of this Administration 's commitment to free and open markets the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice has worked together with the Federal Trade Commission to vigorously enforce the Nation 's antitrust laws. Recent cases and investigations reveal that the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have both pursued an aggressive but balanced approach in enforcing antitrust law ; in particular both agencies have sought to ensure the continued growth and competitiveness of high-technology industries Chapter of this Report describes how the antitrust agencies have worked to attain these goals in several recent cases OPENING FOREIGN MARKETS Progress was also made in toward opening foreign markets to U.S. goods as a number of important international trade initiatives were made final. Trade agreements affecting three important sectors were reached concluding some unfinished business from the Uruguay Round of multilateral negotiations. The first of these agreements the Information Technology Agreement ( ITA ) will eliminate tariffs on a large array of information technology products in which U.S. firms tend to be highly competitive. Also successfully concluded were an agreement covering financial services which will foster broad liberalization of banking securities and insurance markets and a key agreement to liberalize basic telecommunications services ( including telephone services ) Chapter of this Report considers the Administration 's trade policies in more detail These negotiations illustrate an important point about trade liberalization. Even though all three agreements involved sectors in which the United States is generally thought to have a competitive advantage other countries were willing nevertheless to agree to their liberalization. They did so because they recognized that the entry of efficiently produced foreign products in these markets would improve the competitiveness of their own economies : securing goods of the highest quality at the lowest possible price is good for any economy PROMOTING AN ECONOMICALLY SOUND ENVIRONMENTAL AGENDA The Administration took several important steps in to protect the environment. These included efforts to address global climate change and to improve air quality. In December representatives of the United States and some other countries meeting in Kyoto Japan agreed to establish binding limits on industrial countries ' greenhouse gas emissions. These limits are intended to stem the disruptive effects of climate change by stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. ( Because developing countries will emit an increasing share of global greenhouse gases the President has indicated that the Kyoto agreement will not be submitted for ratification without meaningful developing-country participation. ) The Administration has proposed several market-based approaches to meeting the Kyoto limits. Domestically tax incentives for energyefficient technologies and research and development will spur early efforts to reduce emissions. A national system of tradable permits for greenhouse gas emissions patterned after the successful permit trading program for sulfur dioxide emissions will be implemented later under the President 's proposal. In addition the Kyoto agreement allows for trading in greenhouse gas emissions permits on an international scale as well as opportunities for firms in the industrial countries to receive emissions credits for investing in climate-friendly technologies in developing countries. All of these efforts will help the United States attain its greenhouse gas emissions target in a costeffective way In July the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) issued a significantly more stringent standard for ground-level ozone and a new standard for fine particulate matter in the atmosphere. Although the Clean Air Act does not allow for the consideration of costs in setting these standards under the President 's policy the EPA must implement these health-based standards in a cost-effective manner. The Administration 's plan for achieving the new air quality standards departs from traditional command-and-control approaches by designing regional strategies that will complement local efforts and encouraging the development of trading programs for emissions of nitrogen oxides which are ozone precursors. The nitrogen oxide trading program like the acid rain program and the trading program envisioned for greenhouse gas emissions enlists market incentives in controlling pollution and should reduce pollution more cheaply than do traditional regulatory approaches. Chapter of this Report provides a detailed assessment of the Administration 's environmental policies FACING THE CHALLENGES AHEAD In many ways the U.S. economy today is very different from that in which our parents and grandparents lived and worked. Today percent of families are headed by a single parent compared with percent years ago. And three in five married mothers with children under are in the work force twice as large a share as in This makes affordable quality child care a pressing concern for most families. Meanwhile the nature of the labor market has changed significantly : few American workers expect to be working for the same employer or even to be in the same career when they retire Industry has also changed radically : in the 1950s the information technology industry barely existed ; today it employs a larger share of the labor force than the automobile industry did in the 1950s and 1960s. And the U.S. population is aging implying that in the next century there will be fewer workers for every retiree This Administration 's economic agenda is designed to deal with these changes and the challenges they pose. If the American economy is to maintain its preeminence as the strongest and most dynamic in the world both policymakers and citizens will have to meet and overcome a number of challenges in the 21st century Several such challenges already loom large for this Administration and Congress. Perhaps the most important is preparing for the aging of the population which requires reforming Medicare and Social Security and promoting retirement security more generally. As reported above some progress was made in addressing Medicare 's immediate problems but comprehensive reforms are still needed to ensure the program 's long-term viability. Likewise steps will have to be taken to strengthen the finances of the Social Security system For almost years Social Security has provided Americans with income security in retirement and protection against loss of family income due to disability or death. A large share of elderly Americans particularly those with low incomes rely on Social Security as their primary source of pension income in retirement. The system has enjoyed dramatic success in reducing poverty rates among older Americans. However many Americans now fear that Social Security will not be there for them when they are ready to retire. This concern reflects the widespread recognition that under current " intermediate " projections of the Social Security trustees the system faces a long-term funding gap : beginning in unless the system is reformed by then the government will be unable to pay current Social Security benefits in full out of current payroll taxes ; it will then have to draw down the system 's trust fund and by those funds will be exhausted. If still nothing has been done the government would then face several options which it could adopt singly or in combination : it could reduce benefits until they are in line with collections raise payroll taxes to cover an unchanged level of benefits or finance the shortfall from other parts of the budget by raising other taxes cutting expenditures on other programs or borrowing and allowing the budget deficit to increase. One or more of these measures will have to be taken so long as no changes are made to the present system Although the seriousness of the financial imbalance facing Social Security should not be downplayed its magnitude is not so large as to be insurmountable particularly if early action is taken. For- example even if nothing is done and the trust fund is exhausted payroll taxes will still be sufficient to permanently finance roughly percent of benefits. Put another way the difference between the anticipated income and the anticipated expenditures of the Old Age Survivors ' and Disability Insurance program over the next years amounts to around 21A percentage points of taxable payroll or approximately percent of GDP. ( The imbalance is somewhat larger when viewed over a longer horizon. ) These facts suggest that the problem of placing Social Security on a sound financial footing can admit of eventual resolution and the President has proposed a process to devise an appropriate solution over the next years. The President has also proposed that any budget surpluses should be reserved until Social Security reform is achieved Medicare reform presents a somewhat thornier problem in terms of both its complexity and its scale. Unlike Social Security Medicare promises not just the payment of a sum of money but the delivery of a service : health insurance. The government has little influence over the rate of increase in the cost of providing this service which has been rising faster than general inflation for decades largely driven by technological advances in medical care. Higher costs for medical care are projected to account for the bulk of the increase in Medicare expenditures for the next years or so after which the aging of the baby-boom generation will act to raise expenditures still further through increases in program enrollment. Hence any long-term reform will have to involve slowing both the rise in health care prices and the growth in volume and intensity of use of covered services Neither will be accomplished easily Before last year 's budget legislation was enacted the trust fund for the component of Medicare that covers hospital costs was projected to fall to zero in The reforms will delay the trust fund 's depletion until The legislation also calls for the establishment of a bipartisan commission to assess and recommend the structural changes that will be needed to ensure Medicare 's long-term viability A second major policy challenge involves continuing the drive for more open international markets. Preferential trade agreements are being negotiated among countries around the world at a rapid pace and the United States could easily be left behind through inaction Since countries in Latin America and Asia have negotiated preferential trade arrangements that exclude the United States. One of these is MERCOSUR a customs union among four South American countries. The European Union has begun a process intended to culminate in a free trade agreement with Brazil Argentina and the other MERCOSUR nations ; the President of one European nation has even gone so far as to declare that the economic interests of Latin America lie with Europe not the United States. Meanwhile the MERCOSUR nations are attempting to extend their preferential trade arrangement to the entire continent. It is clear that now more than ever continued engagement with the world trading system will require an active effort on the part of the United States In the Senate voted to move forward on extending the President 's so-called fast-track negotiating authority. This authority allows the President to negotiate trade agreements and submit them to the Congress for a yes-or-no vote without amendments. However in the House of Representatives the vote to renew fast-track was postponed. Some have voiced concern that free trade hurts American workers and contributes to the U.S. trade deficit. As discussed in Chapter however market-opening initiatives do not cause net job losses to the U.S. economy as a whole although they do result in a reallocation of jobs into expanding export-oriented industries. As the chapter documents the jobs created by increased trade are good jobs offering high pay. But some workers are indeed hurt by more open markets just as some workers are harmed by technological innova- tion even though market-opening initiatives unambiguously benefit the economy as a whole This Administration has realized from the beginning that the government can minimize the impact of dislocations affecting workers who lose their jobs by speeding the adjustment process. For example one of the key provisions of NAFTA involved monitoring those industries that were in danger of being adversely affected by the agreement and the Administration committed itself early on to providing for dislocated workers through retraining programs. The President 's budget includes proposals to expand the scope of trade adjustment assistance and to increase funding for these programs. More generally the Administration 's commitment to investing in people through education and training serves as a strong complement to its policy of trade liberalization A widespread misconception is that one of the benefits of increased trade comes in the form of an improved balance of trade. Economic policies do indeed affect the current account ( the broad measure of U.S. international transactions that includes investment income and transfers as well as trade in goods and services ) but it is budget saving and investment policies not trade liberalization policies that do so. The Nation 's current account deficit equals its borrowing abroad to finance any excess of investment over domestic saving. The current account is therefore a macroeconomic phenomenon that mirrors the gap between what we as a Nation invest and what we save. The large Federal budget deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s were a form of negative saving or dissaving which reduced the total amount of national saving available to cover the Nation 's investment in plant and equipment. In an important sense the Nation was overconsuming in the 1980s financing its consumption binge by borrowing from foreigners. The result was a large and persistent current account deficit We still have a current account deficit today but for a very different reason. The near elimination of the budget deficit has left more saving available for investment in plant and equipment by the private sector. National saving has risen. But because of the investment boom during this expansion the gap between investment and saving has persisted. Once again this shortfall is made up by borrowing from abroad and the result is a current account deficit. But there is a big difference between borrowing to invest as the Nation is doing now and borrowing to consume as it did in the 1980s. In fact running a trade deficit in order to expand the Nation 's productive capacity is not new to American history we did much the same thing in the last century to build up the Nation 's infrastructure most notably during the railroad construction boom. Ironically therefore today 's trade deficit reflects the economy 's current success in growing more rapidly than our trading partners and investing so much and not our free trade policies It is always difficult to explain this macroeconomic perspective on the trade deficit to those who are primarily concerned with the microeconomics of their daily lives. But making the case in favor of trade is particularly important now because real danger threatens should countries turn their backs on a progressive and integrated world economic order. Besides postponing the renewal of the President 's traditional trade-negotiating authority the Congress chose not to support the sort of financial participation in international institutions that is vital for the sound functioning of the international system. Meanwhile financial crises in East Asia have made U.S international engagement more important rather than less. Other emerging-market countries are themselves in danger of reacting to the East Asian crises by turning inward. It is important for their economic well-being as well as our own that they continue along the path toward an outward-oriented market system on which they had until recently been making such astonishing progress. This will require difficult macroeconomic and structural adjustments on their part including reducing their dependence on foreign borrowing. As a result these countries will have to reduce their trade deficits and in some cases even turn them into trade surpluses. This will inevitably lead to an increase in U.S. bilateral trade deficits with some East Asian countries. Again however such deficits are not the proper gauge of the success or failure of U.S. trade policy The Nation faces other broader challenges in shaping economic policies for the 21st century. First we must act to help families address the problems they face in today 's economy. More American workers today are faced with the need to juggle the demands of the workplace with the demands of family and home. Government must act to ease this burden by ensuring that families have access to quality child care and health care. For this reason the President 's budget includes a $ billion increase in funding for child care to make it accessible to more families and raise its quality. An important part of this proposal is increased tax credits for million working families to help them pay for child care as well as an increase in block grants to States that will directly subsidize child care for low-income families. In addition the proposal calls for a new Early Learning Fund along with support for the enforcement of State child care health and safety standards scholarships for up to child care providers per year and funding for research and consumer education We must also continue to invest in our Nation 's children. Chapter of this Report shows that the last years have witnessed notable improvements in children 's well-being along several fronts including decreases in child poverty increases in consumption of basic health care services and improvements in health status and in some measures of educational achievement. However many children remain economically vulnerable. One in five children in the United States lives in a family whose income is below the poverty line one in seven does not have access to health insurance and a large proportion of children fail to achieve basic levels of proficiency in science mathematics and reading. Chapter considers ongoing and proposed Administration initiatives that address these problems Finally this country 's longstanding goal of achieving equality of opportunity among racial and ethnic groups has not yet been attained. Chapter of this Report reviews differences in economic status among blacks Hispanics non-Hispanic whites Asians and American Indians. Although there has been progress in narrowing these gaps in the postwar period it has been very uneven with rapid progress in the 1960s and early 1970s followed by years of stagnation from the early to mid-1970s to the early 1990s. For example since the mid-1970s the wages of young black college graduates have fallen relative to those of their white counterparts. Although the current expansion has brought signs of renewed progress substantial disparities in economic status persist. For example the median wealth of white families is by some estimates times that of black and Hispanic families. More needs to be done to promote equality of opportunity for all Americans. Many of the Administration 's current and proposed policies such as those that encourage community empowerment and education are intended to address these disparities. And this Administration has pledged itself to furthering a dialogue on race in America CONCLUSION The United States today enjoys some of the most favorable economic conditions in a generation : high growth and low unemployment combined with low and stable inflation. And the success of Americans in adapting to the new economy in which they find themselves has been truly remarkable. But that success and the economy 's present strength can not be taken for granted. Recent developments do not herald the end of inflation the conquest of the business cycle or the permanent reversal of such secular trends as weak productivity growth and rising income inequality. Rather there are still long-term changes at work that demand action by individuals businesses and governments alike. This Administration has put in place a set of policies that has allowed the economy to grow and to flourish in particular by putting the Nation 's fiscal house in order. But we must continue to pursue sound policies aimed at opening markets at home and abroad promoting private and public investment and ensuring that all Americans regardless of age or origin have the skills they need to prosper in a world of change and opportunity CHAPTER Macroeconomic Policy and Performance MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE over the past years has been excellent and the record in was truly remarkable. In general the behavior of the economy last year bore out the analysis of macroeconomic conditions presented in last year 's Economic Report of the President which was confident that the economy would continue to grow without rising inflation. What was not anticipated fully at that time however was how rapidly the economy would grow or how strong the pace of job creation would be or that inflation would actually decline Last year the Administration forecast 2-percent growth during with an average unemployment rate of percent. This forecast was not meant as an assessment of the best the economy could do. Rather it represented a conservative and credible set of economic assumptions to be used for forecasting Federal revenues outlays and deficits in the preparation of the budget. Last year 's Report recognized that the actual outcome could be even better. And it was with growth at nearly percent and the unemployment rate averaging only percent. More jobs were created in than in either of the previous years. Yet inflation remained subdued with the consumer price index ( CPI ) rising just percent during the year This chapter 's analysis of macroeconomic policy and performance concludes that the economy should continue to grow with low inflation in The chapter begins with a review of macroeconomic performance and policy in to show in some detail where the year 's growth came from and how inflation remained so tame. The second section examines the important question of whether our understanding of inflation and our ability to predict it have changed in significant ways. This question is part of a broader inquiry into whether the economy has changed in such fundamental ways that standard analyses of how fast it can grow without inflation need to be replaced with a new view. The conclusion reached here is that no sea change has occurred that would justify ignoring the threat of inflation when the labor market is as tight as it is now ; however the unemployment rate at which rising inflation becomes a serious threat appears to be lower than it was in the 1980s and the rate of growth of potential output may be higher Prudence dictates keeping a wary eye on inflationary pressures but as discussed in Chapter the economy remains remarkably free of the kinds of imbalances that often appear at the end of expansions For example the analysis in the third section of this chapter indicates that the financial condition of households remains fundamentally sound even though they took on considerable debt in Two cautionary notes are introduced. First the rise in the stock market over the first months of put price-earnings ratios and other measures of stock market valuation near historical highs. Second households are continuing to consume a very high proportion of their disposable income and are saving little. The implications of this low saving rate for long-term growth are explored in the fourth section of the chapter which also assesses the positive contribution of deficit reduction. The chapter concludes with the Administration 's forecast and outlook OVERVIEW OF : A BURST OF GROWTH Economic growth exceeded expectations in and the unemployment rate declined to a 24-year low. Households and firms both increased their spending at robust rates as continued low inflation low unemployment declining costs of business equipment and lower long-term interest rates contributed to a favorable economic environment for both consumers and producers. Federal Government purchases of goods and services declined in real terms and purchases by State and local governments increased only modestly. Net exports continued to be a restraining influence on growth Strong investment in new productive capacity in the past few years has helped the economy accommodate higher spending without rising inflation. But inflation has also been held in check by several other favorable developments that have kept prices from accelerating even as wage growth has picked up. Chief among these have been the rise in the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets ( which makes imports cheaper ) unusually steep declines in prices for computers and continued moderation in employer costs of health insurance Late in the economy was already operating near the consensus estimate of its noninflationary potential. Continued robust economic growth in the latter part of and early promised to increase resource utilization rates even further raising concerns that inflationary pressures would build and the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates in March. With inflation low and stable and in light of the turmoil in Asian financial markets that began to emerge in mid-1997 the Federal Reserve made no further interest rate moves AGGREGATE SPENDING IN An accounting of the sectoral contributions to growth in shows that increases in private domestic spending for consumption and investment combined exceeded growth in gross domestic product ( GDP ; Table ) Modest increases in State and local government expenditures accounted for the increase in total government spending. Net exports became more negative TABLE Components of GDP and Growth in GDP Contribution to growth Item Billions of dollars Percent of GDP Percentage points Percent of total change Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories Net exports of goods and services Exports Imports Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal State and local GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT MEMORANDUM : FINAL SALES Note. Data are preliminary estimates. Contribution to growth is measured fourth quarter to fourth quarter Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers Private Domestic Spending The factors traditionally thought to determine household spending are household income consumer sentiment and household net worth in the current and recent years. Signals were favorable for all of these fundamentals through most of : real disposable personal income grew percent over the four quarters of the year consumer sentiment remained at or near record highs for most of the year and year-end stock market values were up about percent from a year earlier. Outlays grew even faster than income and as a result the personal saving rate edged down Although consumption was robust over the past year it was not smooth. Real consumption grew in excess of a 5-percent annual rate in the first and third quarters but at only a 0.9-percent annual rate in the second. No reason for this volatility is apparent ; neither fluctuating income changes in consumer confidence nor ups and downs in the stock market explain it. Although the stock market dipped in April after the Federal Reserve 's interest rate hike it had fully recovered by mid-May. At the same time consumer sentiment continued to rise. Most of the volatility was in goods consumption ; services consumption grew at around a to 5-percent annual rate in each quarter. Durable goods which rose at double-digit annual rates in the first and third quarters but fell at a 5-percent annual rate in the second accounted for much of the quarter-to-quarter fluctuations in growth. Light motor vehicle sales of roughly million units in were about the same as in each of the past years ; over this 4-year period sales of light motor vehicles were just shy of the record 4-year pace set in the mid-1980s Like those for consumption the signals for the traditional determinants of business investment lagged GDP growth cash flow growth and the cost of capital were strongly favorable throughout Several special factors added further impetus to investment spending. Business equipment grew percent over the four quarters of the year with strong demand for most types of equipment. Industrial equipment grew a healthy percent over the year and transportation equipment advanced percent with particularly rapid growth in aircraft purchases The standout categories of business equipment investment in were office and computing equipment and telecommunications equipment. Growth in real computer spending was fueled in part by price declines that were even sharper than normal ( percent over the past year ) Real spending on telecommunications equipment increased percent. One factor possibly boosting sales in this industry is the rapidly expanding capacity and availability of cellular telephone and other wireless services. Although nominal spending on computers and telecommunications equipment represents about percent of investment in equipment measured relative declines in computer prices have been rapid so that these categories now account for a rising fraction of real equipment purchases In contrast to the strength in equipment spending investment in nonresidential structures was about flat last year following solid gains in Construction of new office buildings made solid gains as the strength in the economy allowed the sector to grow out from under an overhang of empty office buildings at the beginning of the decade. These gains were offset by small declines in the construction of industrial utility and mining structures A pickup in inventory investment added percentage point to real GDP growth over the four quarters of with an especially large buildup in the first quarter. The demand for inventories was probably a result of strong final sales which increased faster than inventories over the first three quarters of the year. As a result stocks remained lean in relation to sales Residential construction increased percent over the four quarters of with much of that growth occurring in the fourth quarter. The pickup toward the end of year reflected in part the pattern of mortgage rates which after rising through April fell more than percentage point later in the year. Falling mortgage rates together with strong real income growth resulted in an increase in housing affordability in the second half of the year. In addition to new home construction real estate commissions moved up over the year as sales of existing homes grew by percent over as a whole to their highest level ever When consumption and investment are combined real private domestic demand grew percent over the four quarters of ; this was somewhat faster than plausible estimates of the sustainable longrun growth rate of the economy. The impact of this surge of private spending was muted however by an erosion in net exports a continuing decline in real Federal Government spending and slow growth in spending by State and local governments Government Spending and Fiscal Policy Government expenditures made only a modest contribution to growth in real GDP in and all of that came from expenditures by State and local governments. Real Federal Government expenditures were lower last year than in Fiscal policy was tight in with the adjusted structural budget deficit ( the deficit measured at a standardized level of economic activity ) declining by $ billion in fiscal from $ billion in fiscal These developments reflected ongoing efforts to restore Federal fiscal responsibility which culminated in the Balanced Budget Act of The Federal Government 's unified budget deficit for fiscal was $ billion a reduction of $ billion from The Federal budget position has now improved in each of the last years the longest unbroken period of improvement since Last year 's unified deficit was just percent of GDP the smallest by this measure since Relative to the size of the economy last year 's general-government deficit ( the combined deficit of all levels of government ) is estimated to have been smaller than that of any other large industrial country except Canada. Moreover last year 's primary Federal surplus ( defined as revenues less outlays other than net interest ) was $ billion ; as a share of GDP this was the largest since the 1950s It reveals that the overall budget would have shown a substantial surplus last year were it not for the interest obligations on debt run up during the period of large deficits Much of the long-term progress on the deficit can be traced to the effects of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of However last year 's improvement in the deficit was considerably greater than had been anticipated ; as recently as February the projected deficit for fiscal was $ billion The continuing vigor of the economy is clearly responsible for part of this progress toward a balanced budget. Of course sound policies including a credible commitment to deficit reduction have nurtured the expansion. About $ billion of the improvement in the deficit resulted from lower-than-expected expenditures. Robust economic growth also was responsible for some of the $ billion in unanticipated revenues collected by the Treasury. However revenues increased even more than would have been predicted on the basis of observed economic growth ( Box ) Box A ^ eontttiiig for the Dafieit Sui ^ rke Fisenl ? In last year 's budget the current-services deficit for fiscal ? was projected at $ billion. ( The current-services deficit assumes no change in taw. The President 's budget which includes policy proposals was projected at $ billion ) The actual budget deficit was $ billion or $ billion lower than the eurrent ~ services projection * Although a full accounting for this deficit surprise will not be possible for seTeral years ? the ta&le below summarises what is BOW known Of the $ billion difference between the actual and the current-services deficit $ billion was accounted for by Iower4han ~ expected outlays. About one-quarter of these savings were in income security programs such as food stamps unemployment insurance and family support programs ; spending on all of these programs is typically linked to economic performance The remaining $ billion of the difference was attributable to unexpectedly high revenues Only $ billion of this revenue surprise was accounted for by higher-than-expacted collections of corporate social insurance * excise and other taxes. Most ( $ billion ) of the unanticipated revenues caine from individual income taxes. A large portion of the unanticipated individual income tax revenue * $ * billion came in as payments on ? obligations * A full accounting of this surprise will have to wait until tax returns are processed but a large share of the unanticipated collections on liabilities is likely related to better4han ~ expected economic growth in Approximately $ Mlliom in additional individual tax receipts came from payment of back taxes or from taxes on trusts Another $ billion of the revenue surprise arrived in the form of Mgher4han ~ antieipated final payments and Iower4han ~ anticipated refunds on individual income tax liabilities The largest identifiable contributing factor was Mgher4han * anticipated tax liability on capital gain realisations which accounted for $ billion of the $ * billion in unanticipated Box % ~ ls ^ ontmwt $ payments on obligations. The remaining $ * billion came from higher4han-eiqpeeted tax liabilities on pensions dMdenda distributions from Individual Retirement Accounts interest payments and wages and salaries which were partially offg ^ t by higher4han ~ anticipated deductions Accounting for the Fueal Deficit Surprise \ wmm $ mm $ A&tasl mints prated1 ttera Ottfeys Iflfi ^ ffifi ssctif ^ ^ frasis Other _ ~ _ ; * > < _ ._ -U 43J& -j | : ._.,_ IfeCfcJptS iftdiygiudi Jncoifls t3x0 $ <>. <n <> <> < i o * <+ .>.,> <+ ^ ,> <> < ^ > ^ Oa ! 596liabaity ~ ^ ^ W ^ | es a ^ ^ salaiies > Capital ggia $ Jf,+. ^ ^ <.,..,<>,<. ^ ..,,t,<,,. ^ ,t,< ^ < ^ ^ .> o ^ ,<,.+,< ^ .,< ^ ,.+v ^ <t f ^ nsfeD aftd II ? A d } stril>uttofls,,,,> ,OT ^ .w. * > ^ .rt. * ^ ^ ,_ ^ Interest jncosgifi T * Siyietend incoiBS .> ,.,< < <. * t ^ ^ ,v .,+.,+wf ,.<+v- ^ .,,.w ^ < ^ <>,<.> itemized ^ edti ^ tions, ^ ^ * ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Jl ai 4>1 _. ^ ^ ^ ^ 4t ^ ^ ^ ,.> ^ ^ 3J $ ^ Iucf83 $ $ fti ^ afplus &r r ^ uctioti is dsf&it <k ^ <+ <> <k * ^ <> * <> > ,> > ^ ,> < i i n>t &j Co ^ po ^ ate income taxes,. > Social insurance lax&s ,v Ixclse taxes >. * ^ ^ ^ o-o-o-. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ " * * ^ ^ x ^ i iOSJ $ S7 liability Back taxes a ad fl ^ uciafifts .,_ ^ ^ ^ ^ > OUttf Current-sBrvfces projection $ &ur&e& 0eparlm&nl of tha Treasury ^ nd OffiM af Haagg ^ meirt aad 8&dpt ! j In national income accounting terms the slowdown in the growth of government expenditures and the improving general-government budget balance have exerted a moderating influence on overall aggregate demand that has partly offset the robust stimulus coming from private consumption and investment. Nevertheless the combined impetus from private and government spending exceeded the increase in domestic aggregate production so that net exports declined further Net Exports and the Current Account U.S. exporters had a good year in as real exports rose percent. However robust growth in domestic demand pushed real imports up by percent. Real net exports fell by $ billion over the course of the year and their contribution to growth in real GDP was percentage point One useful perspective on the performance of real net exports comes from looking at the pattern of growth in the global economy. At least four major locomotives matter for global economic growth : North America Europe Japan and in the past decade the East Asian industrializing economies. Expectations at the end of were that Box * Turmoil in Asian Economies The outbreak of financial crisis in Asia was one of the most notable and troubling developments in the global economy during Events began in midyear as a currency crisis and intensified over the rest of the year spilling over to the real sectors of the affected economies as well as to the rest of the world By May Thailand was in the throes of the fourth speculative attack on its currency the baht since August By then the buildup of financial difficulties and balance of payments pressures had reached such a point that efforts to defend the baht could not be sustained. Pressures soon spilled over to other emerging Asian economies ( especially Indonesia Malaysia and South Korea ) most of which also had some balance of payments weaknesses * as well as to Eastern Europe * These countries ' difficulties shook financial market confidence elsewhere in Asia and in emerging markets around the world even those with sounder policies and economic fundamentals in a contagion effect Since June four of the countries in the region ( Indonesia the Philippines * South Korea and Thailand ) have requested and received assistance from the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) In each instance the adjustment programs developed by the domestic authorities and the IMF have included a heavy emphasis on financial and structural adjustment measures ( for example to reform bank lending practices and further liberalize the econ0my ) ? as well as the more traditional macroecanomic acijustmente necessary to restore financial market stability For each of the affected economies the question of when their financial and balance of payments situations will stabilize depends first and foremost on whether and how aggressively they implement their policy commitments and second on the easing of the contagion effect from those economies that continue to experience difficulties. In the medium term the return of these economies ' strong growth performance w01 depend significantly upon the degree to which structural and financial sector reforms are implemented growth would slow in the United States and that the other regions ( except Japan ) would easily outpace it. Instead the United States ( and Canada ) saw higher growth rates in ( about percent each ) while growth among our trading partners in the other regions slowed In Japan the recovery from the recession of the early 1990s came to a standstill. In Europe growth continued in especially in a northern tier composed of the British Isles and the Nordic countries. In the developing economies of East Asia slowing growth turned to financial crisis in the second half of the year ( Box ) Growth rates in the United States and its trading partners along with exchange rates are major determinants of short-run fluctuations in real net exports. The fact that income increased more rapidly here in than it did in most other advanced industrial economies worked to increase U.S. imports from those economies more rapidly than their imports from the United States. The negative effects of the East Asian crunch on U.S. net exports to developing countries had barely begun to materialize at the end of the year In analyzing the components of real growth it is appropriate to look at real net exports. But the focus generally shifts to nominal imports and exports when examining current income flows between the United States and the rest of the world. The comprehensive measure of such flows is the current account balance which comprises not only the trade balance in goods and services but also net investment income and transfers In a fundamental sense trends in the current account balance reflect movements in saving and investment. When the demand for investment in the United States exceeds the pool of national saving the difference is made up by borrowing from foreigners. Conversely when saving exceeds investment the surplus is invested abroad. The United States first experienced large current account deficits during the mid-1980s when net investment fell as a share of national income and net national saving fell even faster. The deficit shrank briefly as investment collapsed in the recession but it has reemerged in the current expansion. The good news in this expansion is that investment has been booming. But saving does not appear to have kept pace. ( The interpretation of current trends in saving investment and the current account is complicated by the statistical discrepancy between GDP measured as the sum of all spending on output and GDP measured as the sum of all income generated in producing that output. ) The current account deficit for the first months of was about $ billion greater than in the comparable period in and the deficit for the year is likely to be moderately higher than the $ billion ( percent of GDP ) recorded in Much of the increase reflects the emergence of a deficit in the balance on investment income. As a result of past deficits foreign holdings of U.S. assets are now sufficiently large that the investment income paid to foreigners now exceeds investment income earned on U.S. holdings of foreign assets. The balance on all goods and services may show little change at all from last year 's $ billion. The modest size of the increase in the trade deficit last year is probably related to changes in the exchange rate of the dollar The effect of exchange rates on the nominal trade balance last year is complicated. The trade-weighted exchange rate of the dollar rose about percent during the first quarter of the year ( that is the dollar strengthened against a weighted average of the currencies of our trading partners ) In the long run the effect of a stronger dollar is to slow exports and probably raise spending on imports thereby depressing the trade balance. But in the short run the effects on the nominal trade balance may go the other way. This is because with a stronger dollar importers do not have to pay out as many dollars to obtain the foreign currency they need to pay for previous quantities of imports ( in what is called a valuation effect ) and because it takes time for the quantity demanded to adjust. There can be a lag of years or more before price changes have their full effect on trade volumes but when they do they dominate the valuation effect. ( This pattern of response is often called the J-curve because the dollar value of imports at first declines with a stronger dollar but later rises. ) The difficulty in interpreting what happened in is due to the fact that in before the most recent appreciation the dollar had also increased in value. Thus the lagged effects from that earlier appreciation may have partly canceled out the immediate effects from the appreciation. The delayed effects of the dollar 's appreciation together with the other effects of the East Asian financial crisis are likely to show up in a more marked increase in the trade deficit by all measures in MONETAEY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS The Federal Reserve raised its target Federal funds rate by basis points in March to percent. The proximate cause of the rate increase was the perception that strong demand would boost utilization rates which were already approaching levels that in the past had been associated with rising inflation. The mild deceleration in GDP prices in the second half of the year translated into a slight upward drift in the real Federal funds rate as came to a close putting the real rate slightly above its mid-1995 peak. Moreover the rise in the real short-term rate did not appear to feed through to intermediateand long-term real rates which remained essentially unchanged or by some measures even declined in the second half of the year Short-term interest rates fluctuated within a narrow range over the course of the year whereas long-term rates rose slightly early in the year but then declined finishing the year roughly basis points ( half a percentage point ) lower. Long-term interest rates remain very low The yield on 10-year Treasury notes remained within basis points of its 30-year low while the 30-year Treasury yield stood near its lowest level since that bond 's introduction in This largely reflects two related factors : continued progress in deficit reduction which lowers nominal interest rates by reducing expected future real rates and market participants ' expectations of low future inflation which act to reduce nominal rates. In addition turmoil in foreign asset markets in the second half of the year helped make U.S. securities more attractive to investors ; this " flight to quality " probably boosted demand for U.S assets putting additional downward pressure on nominal interest rates. The net result was a flattening of the yield curve with the spread ( the difference in interest rates ) between 3-month Treasury bills and 10-year Treasury notes falling to roughly basis points by the end of This spread is now well below its historical average of basis points and is roughly equal to the level that prevailed during the 1960s The risk premium on corporate debt measured as the spread between the yield on Baa-rated corporate bonds and the 30-year Treasury bond yield averaged roughly basis points in ( a Baa rating denotes bonds of intermediate credit quality ) ; this spread remains quite narrow by historical standards. The spread between riskier high-yield corporate debt ( " junk " bonds ) and 10-year Treasury securities also remained narrow in but began to rise toward the end of the year. Taken as a whole these low risk premiums suggest that market participants perceive the financial and business sectors to be quite healthy ; most relevant statistics provide support for this view In the banking sector business loan charge-offs and delinquency rates remained low while bank capital ratios remained high. Although business failures increased in a large portion of this increase appears to reflect special one-time factors not a permanent change in trend For equity markets was a noteworthy year. The rise in stock prices was checked only slightly following the Federal Reserve 's March tightening and even sharp declines in some foreign stock markets were unable to do more than temporarily slow the market 's advance. All three major stock price indexes the Dow Jones Industrial Average the Standard & Poor 's ( S&P ) and the NASDAQ composite shattered previous records ; the S&P for example peaked in October at a record high and percent above its October average The runup in stock prices appeared to be fueled by continued high profitability in the corporate sector and forecasts of strong future earnings growth and it pushed aggregate price-earnings ratios up sharply. By some measures price-earnings ratios are at levels not seen in decades Declines in foreign stock markets spread to domestic markets later in the year causing them to retreat from these record highs. On October 27th the Dow posted a 554-point decline the 12th-largest in percentage terms in its history. The drop was steep enough to cause the New York Stock Exchange 's system of " circuit breakers " to suspend trading temporarily for the first time ever ( Box ) The day after the plunge saw the volume of shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange reach a record high of billion ( the market made up much of its previous day 's decline that day ) The stock market rebounded quickly following its October losses with the S&P index and the Dow finishing near their highs for the year. Turmoil in East Asia apparently continued to be a source of downward pressure on stock prices for the remainder of the year The rise in stock prices in represents the continuation of a trend that has seen major indexes more than double over the past years. One explanatory factor is market expectations of strong future corporate earnings. Another possible factor is a reduction of the premium that investors require to hold stocks in lieu of less risky assets Such a reduction could occur if the perception has become more widespread that stocks represent an attractive high-return asset or if investors ' interest in longer term investments for retirement has grown. Still other possible explanations are a reduction in investors ' expectations of future inflation or of future real interest rates or the effect of financial innovations in channeling a larger share of savings into the stock market by way of mutual funds and pension funds There is some scattered evidence that investors have come to view stocks as a less risky investment : for example a survey of individuals ' attitudes toward the stock market shows a marked decline in the perceived riskiness of stocks since Similarly participants in the largest private retirement savings plan in the United States have directed an increasing fraction of their retirement saving contributions to equities since ; however it is unclear how much this reflects a reduction in participants ' tolerance for risk a change in their perception of the riskiness of the stock market or other factors If the risk premium on stocks has declined this could explain why price-earnings ratios are at historically high levels ; a simple calculation indicates that even a relatively small change in the risk premium is sufficient to raise price-earnings ratios sharply. Nevertheless the possibility exists that price-earnings ratios will eventually return to more normal levels given that periods in which price-earnings ratios are high tend to be followed by slower future growth in stock prices INFLATION AND THE LABOR MARKET Inflation remained remarkably subdued in Both GDP and core CPI inflation ( a measure of inflation that excludes the volatile food and energy components ) fell over the course of the year continuing a decline that began in Surprisingly this deceleration of prices occurred in an economic environment that was characterized by extremely low unemployment : as came to a close the unemployment rate had been at or below percent for almost years and at or below per- Box Circuit Breakers ^ Circuit breakers * are rules that automatically halt trading on a securities exchange when prices move by a given amount The hoards of a number of major exchanges induding the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange set up circuit breakers in the wake of the stock market crash The NYSE circuit breakers provide a good example of how such rules operate * Before the October 27th stock market decline * the circuit breakers were set to halt trading for SO minutes if the Dow Jones Industrial Average declined more than points from its morning opening price and for another hour if the Dow were to fan an additional points Both of these Emits were hit on October 27th ? and the circuit breakers operated as designed and dosed the market twice ( the second eTent occurred less than an hour before the closing bell and thus ended trading for the day ) When they were introduced it was argued that circuit breakers would reduce the chance of a major market disruption in three ways ; by preventing an overload of the exchanges ' trading systems during periods of extimordinary price movements ; by reducing the possibility that sharp ( and possibly unchecked ) declines in stock prices would leave market participants unable to make good on their trading commitments ; and by providing a forced pause in trading a chance for market participants to " take a deep breath * * Many observers and market participants criticized the role that the circuit breakers actually played on October 27th The trigger limits had only been adjusted once since and the percentage declines in the Dow that they reflected were only about a third as large as they were when the triggers were set up in Furthermore the securities exchanges now have enormously greater capacity to process trades than they did in ; by all accounts the record trading volumes on October 27th and 28th did not remotely threaten to overload the system * And concerns about fuJfillment of trading commitments appear to have been at least partially allayed because traders now have greater access to emergency credit The " deep breath * * argument is more difficultto assess * because nobody knows what would have happened had the markets not closed early on October 27th. But some critics argue that circuit breakers can add to market volatility by causing a race to the exit a sharp selMf in shares as stock prices approach the threshold for a trading hall Indeed many traders argue that that is just what happened when the NYSE reopened after the first of its tw0 shutdowns on October 27th The NYSE has announced that it will propose modifications to the rule in cent for months. The unemployment rate fell from percent in the fourth quarter of to percent in the fourth quarter of ; all major demographic groups participated with declines of percentage point among blacks percentage point among whites and percentage point among Hispanics The pace of job creation was quite rapid. More than million jobs were created in for an average of new jobs per month a substantially faster rate than in either of the preceding years. Factory employment rose significantly by new jobs while employment at construction sites rose by jobs following a slightly larger gain in Among the service-producing industries growth was particularly rapid in computers and data processing ( which increased percent ) and engineering and management services ( which increased percent ) These hiring gains were matched by large increases in industrial capacity. Nevertheless tightness in labor markets was reflected in a continued acceleration of wages during the year. Hourly wages as measured by the employment cost index ( ECI ) rose by percent in percentage point faster than in The ECI for total hourly compensation accelerated by a slightly smaller amount and continued slow growth in the cost of benefits particularly health insurance kept the growth rate of total hourly compensation percentage point lower than that for hourly wages. Trend unit labor costs ( defined as compensation growth relative to trend productivity growth ) continued to rise moderately through the year while overall price inflation fell slightly ( Chart ) Chart Inflation and Trend Unit Labor Costs Inflation has dropped below growth in trend unit labor costs Percent Four-quarter output price inflation ( nonfarm business less housing ) Trend unit labor costs Note : Trend unit labor costs defined as the four-quarter percent change in compensation as measured by the employment cost index minus percentage points Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers PRODUCTIVITY Growth in output per hour worked picked up sharply in : over the first three quarters of the year the official measure of productivity in the nonfarm business sector rose at an average annual rate of percent This measure has exceeded its trend rate of growth in all but one of the past eight quarters. These recent gains were sufficient to offset the earlier weak performance of this product-side measure of productivity bringing it back to its post-1973 trend. ( Trend growth in productivity is discussed in the " Forecast and Outlook " section of this chapter. ) Part of the surge in productivity probably reflected special factors : productivity growth in the third quarter of was boosted in part by a decline in hours worked by self-employed workers ; these data tend to be more volatile and somewhat less reliable than measures of hours worked by employees. However even when self-employed workers are excluded measured productivity growth in the third quarter remains over twice as fast as its trend rate. The pickup in productivity growth is significant because it occurred at the same time that hourly compensation showed some signs of accelerating. This has kept growth in unit labor costs from rising by as much as compensation thus eliminating a potential source of inflationary pressure EXPLAINING RECENT INFLATION PERFORMANCE Inflation continued to moderate in even as the unemployment rate reached a 24-year low. To what extent can recent inflation performance be explained with the traditional tools of macroeconomic forecasting and analysis ? RECENT INFLATION PERFORMANCE AND THE NAIRU The present combination of low and declining inflation and sustained low unemployment would appear to pose a challenge to models of price inflation based on the concept of a NAIRU or nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment. As discussed in the Economic Report of the President historical experience indicates that the chances are high that inflation will rise in periods when the unemployment rate is very low and fall when unemployment is unusually high. The NAIRU can therefore be defined as the unemployment rate at which absent special factors the odds of falling and rising inflation are roughly balanced Although a specific value of the NAIRU represents a forecaster 's best estimate of the rate of unemployment that can be sustained on average without causing an increase in inflation any estimate of the NAIRU is subject to some degree of imprecision inasmuch as there will be periods when inflation is falling even though unemployment is below the NAIRU and vice versa. In addition the NAIRU itself is not invariant over time but is instead affected by such factors as the demographic composition of the labor force and changes in the structure of labor and product markets The Report indicated that reasonable estimates for the NAIRU lie between and percent with a midpoint of percent. In the unemployment rate averaged percent about one-half percentage point below the midrange estimate of the NAIRU. A forecasting model built around a NAIRU of percent would therefore have predicted some acceleration in prices over the course of ; one reasonable estimate would have been a 0.3-percentage-point increase in core CPI inflation. Instead core CPI inflation finished the year roughly percentage point below its year-earlier rate although percentage point of this deceleration can be accounted for by methodological changes introduced into the calculation of the CPI The observed decline in inflation is consistent with the view that changes in inflation are influenced by other factors besides labor market slack ( measured here by the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the NAIRU ) A number of factors did in fact help mitigate inflationary pressure in First the costs of providing workers with nonwage compensation ( such as health insurance ) continued to rise at a very low rate ; as mentioned above this helped keep growth in labor costs from adding to inflation. Second also as noted above computer prices have recently declined at a faster-than-average rate ; without this decline overall inflation would have risen steadily since early ( Chart ) Although it is always possible to find components of GDP whose prices are growing faster or slower than the average relative price changes for computers are particularly noteworthy in that they are largely driven by technological change as opposed to cyclical forces such as shortages in raw materials bottlenecks in production or rising labor costs Chart Computer Prices and Total Inflation Declines in computer prices have helped to keep overall inflation from increasing in recent years Four-quarter percent change GDP deflator excluding computers Overall GDP deflator i i Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers Overall price inflation has been further reduced by sharp declines in the relative price of imported goods particularly non-oil merchandise imports. Since the second quarter of the relative price of all imported goods has fallen by percent and the relative price of nonoil merchandise imports has declined by percent. In part this decline in import prices reflects two interrelated factors : significant excess capacity and hence low rates of inflation abroad and the dollar 's appreciation against other major currencies. It is difficult to determine precisely what effect this has had on overall inflation but some estimates indicate that this factor could have reversed much if not all of the increase in inflation that would have been predicted solely from the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the estimated NAIRU Judged from the perspective of a NAIRU model therefore it seems possible that the economy is currently operating at an unemployment rate that is inconsistent with stable inflation over the long run but that the influence of special possibly transitory factors has prevented prices and labor costs from accelerating. Although this is a plausible explanation for recent inflation performance it is certainly not the only one ; an alternative hypothesis is that structural changes in labor and product markets have led to further declines in the NAIRU. If true this would imply that at least some portion of the recent decline in the unemployment rate can be sustained without an eventual increase in inflation The rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation would be expected to vary over time in response to such factors as shifts in labor force demographics changes in the relation between workers ' real wage demands and their productivity and structural shifts that alter the degree of mismatch between workers and jobs ( both sectorally and regionally ) For a number of reasons however it is difficult at present to justify a large additional reduction in the estimated NAIRU on the basis of recent experience. First the presence of fortuitous supply shocks clouds the inflation picture significantly ; although it is evident that these shocks have contributed to lower inflation the exact extent of this contribution can not be perfectly gauged. Second although inflation in goods and services prices has not risen as unemployment has fallen below percent some acceleration in wages has occurred ( Chart ) which might reflect labor market tightness. Finally the unemployment rate has been below percent for too short a time to allow any certainty that the risk of a gradual buildup of inflationary pressure is entirely absent However a small downward revision to the estimated range of the NAIRU is indeed justifiable. A portion of recent inflation performance can not be explained by special factors ; moreover the fact that prices have not accelerated as the unemployment rate has fallen below percent suggests that the estimated range should be shifted down. A model that accounts for supply shocks such as recent declines in relative import prices and that allows the NAIRU to vary over time indicates that a reasonable range for the NAIRU now has a midpoint of percent percentage point lower than in previous estimates The Administration 's budget forecast has been revised to reflect this slightly lower estimated midpoint of the NAIRU 's range Chart Wage Growth and the Unemployment Rate Wages have accelerated as the unemployment rate has fallen Percent 12-month percent change Unemployment rate ( left scale ) Wage growth ' ( right scale ) ~ " Note : Wage inflation is measured by the wages and salaries component of the employment cost index Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF UTILIZATION AND CAPACITY The unemployment rate is a useful predictor of future inflation in that it can directly indicate the potential for rising inflationary pressure on the cost side as excess demand in the labor market tends to raise nominal wages and thus nominal labor costs. The unemployment rate can also proxy for the state of aggregate demand in the economy and thus help assess the degree of excess demand in product markets. However the unemployment rate is not the only indicator of resource utilization and demand ( even for the labor market ) nor does it necessarily provide the best forecast of future inflation. It is therefore of interest to consider what other measures of resource utilization and labor market tightness suggest about the current degree of inflationary pressure in the economy Several plausible indicators such as the State insured unemployment rate the demographically adjusted unemployment rate and the unemployment rate for men of prime working age imply a degree of labor market tightness that exceeds that which has historically been associated with stable inflation. In addition an index of help-wanted advertising ( which can be considered a proxy for the job vacancy rate ) fails to reveal a large degree of slack in the labor market at present ; earlier in the expansion some observers argued that this measure indicated a weaker labor market than did the unemployment rate The picture painted by these labor market variables is therefore one in which the potential for inflationary pressure is relatively high The effects of a tight labor market on wages may have been muted by the presence of widespread worker insecurity which has been evident since the recession. Despite a strong job market and a high level of consumer confidence surveys indicate that workers ' fears of job loss remain high relative to the level that prevailed before the recession. Quit rates are low as well which could reflect workers ' unwillingness to leave their current jobs in the hope of " trading up " to better jobs. And strike activity is at a low ebb although this is related at least in part to declines in unionization rates. These factors suggest that workers may be relatively unwilling to press for the wage gains that they could normally command in a labor market as tight as that of today One indicator that tempers somewhat the general conclusion that labor and product markets are tight is the rate of capacity utilization ( both in the manufacturing sector alone and for all industry ) Capacity utilization remains below its peak for this expansion and is roughly at the level historically associated with stable inflation. It is also noteworthy that core producer price inflation which more closely reflects the output price measure that is relevant to manufacturing capacity utilization has declined rapidly since the end of This suggests that industry has not yet reached the point where production bottlenecks or other capacity constraints are putting upward pressure on inflation. Gains in capacity which have followed an increase in real private investment growth have helped keep capacity utilization in the noninflationary zone ; measured capacity growth increased sharply after and has stayed high as real business fixed investment growth has remained strong. In fact recent revisions to the capacity utilization data indicate that the economy had more industrial capacity over the past years than was previously thought ( Box ) making the recent declines in core producer price inflation somewhat less of a mystery. However manufacturing represents only about percent of total output and although total goods output ( which includes manufacturing as well as trade and mining ) accounts for a larger fraction ( percent ) it is still less than half of the economy. The possibility of overheating in the economy as a whole therefore should not be dismissed Bon Raeexit Revisions to Capacity amd Utilisation In December the Federal Reserve revised its estimates of eapndty and industrial production on the ba&is of improved source data * For the preceding years estimates of industrial capacity and utilisation had largely been extrapolated from national accounts data on real investment. The recent revision incorporates direct estimates of utilisation based on survey data ami industry reporfa as well as more comprehensive data on physical output and labor and other inputs The new data indicate that industrial capacity has been growing about percentage point faster than previously estimated Over the past years capacity has grown at an average annual rate of percent In each of the past years average annual capacity growth h& % exceeded every previous growth rate since Similarly recent estimates of the rate of capacity utilization were revised downward by more than a percentage point Currently ; production as a share of total capacity is about percent ; this is only slightly Mgfaer than the series ' long-term average A NEW ERA FOR THE ECONOMY ? To summarize the chapter thus far the past few years have seen rapid growth in output with stable inflation gradual declines in the NAIRU strong growth in profits and stock prices and a pickup in productivity that if sustained would herald a significant departure from past productivity trends. Indeed economic performance in recent years has been so extraordinary that some have wondered whether it reflects fundamental structural change in the economy change so great that a " new paradigm " is needed to describe an economy that is in a " new era. " Many such assessments are extreme and unsupportable. In particular any claim that the business cycle has been vanquished must be viewed with considerable skepticism. Nevertheless it is possible to identify a number of areas in which fundamental changes are probably influencing the economy 's current performance in many cases favorably First U.S. producers face increased foreign and domestic competition. Exports and imports today play a greater role in the U.S economy than at any other time in history. And here at home deregulation has taken place or is under way in a number of industries including telecommunications transportation electricity and banking. Increased competition and more open markets contribute to greater efficiency thus helping raise the level of output. But it is possible that greater competition also fosters a faster pace of innovation inducing long-run improvements in productivity and thus a higher rate of output growth Labor and product markets have also changed in significant ways Since the early 1980s the unionization rate has dropped by nearly half continuing a decline in union membership that began in the late 1960s. In addition the use of temporary and contingent employees is much higher than it was years ago. Although this has probably made labor markets more flexible it might also have contributed to an increase in worker anxiety. Information technology might prove as revolutionary as the steam engine or the automobile. Adoption of justin-time inventory management by manufacturers also represents a significant development since changes in inventories have often been an important source of business-cycle fluctuations. Whether just-intime inventories will be able to dampen future business cycles however remains to be seen Even the public sector has been transformed in recent years. Our system of social welfare has been changed to help welfare recipients make the transition to employment. The end of the Cold War saw a vast amount of defense-related resources freed up for civilian uses The government itself is being reinvented to make it more efficient and responsive. Perhaps most important deficit reduction has increased private sector investment ; this recent expansion in capital investment raises productivity by providing workers with more modern and efficient workplaces Not all of these changes represent unalloyed boons. Nor is it possible to quantify the effects of these changes on the economy or on specific groups or sectors with any degree of precision ( although these factors would have to be very large to reverse the post-1973 productivity slowdown to any significant degree ) And even if these changes are having a significant influence on recent economic performance it may imply not that a new model of the economy is needed but rather that certain key parameters of the current model such as the NAIRU or trend productivity growth have changed. Hence one can not declare with any certainty that the old rules no longer apply. But the factors just described suggest that the economy may be experiencing some important structural changes that will shape our economic analysis and forecasts in the years ahead THE ECONOMIC CONDITION OF HOUSEHOLDS Both aggregate statistics and consumer surveys painted an exceptionally favorable picture of the economic circumstances of American households in The tight labor market that led to a 24-year-low in the unemployment rate also lured enough new workers into the labor market to set an all-time record for the labor force participation rate. The combination of healthy wage growth and increasing employment helped push real disposable personal income up a solid percent over the year. Despite the stock market volatility witnessed in the second half of the year at year 's end all major market indexes remained sharply above their levels at the end of representing a substantial boost to household net worth. Largely reflecting this combination of favorable circumstances and the low inflation rate consumer sentiment reached record highs in early summer and remained near those levels for the rest of the year. Growing income and wealth together with buoyant sentiment led to a 3.8-percent rate of spending growth over the four quarters of outpacing even the robust growth of disposable income Against this backdrop of general prosperity only a few potentially worrisome trends were discernible. The first was the drop in the personal saving rate implied by the excess of consumption growth over income growth. A temporary shortfall in personal saving would not necessarily be a problem but the personal saving rate has remained low for about a decade now raising questions about whether American households are preparing adequately for the future. A second persistent concern has been the ongoing buildup of household debt. Upon analysis however this growth in debt does not appear very menacing both because household assets have risen even faster and because households still appear to be able to service their rising debt loads comfortably. A final potential concern has been the continuing rise in personal bankruptcies despite the robust economy which might seem to suggest an increase in the number of households experiencing sudden financial shocks. However the bankruptcy rate has been trending upward for about years now and the available evidence suggests that the uptrend is attributable to a complex mix of economic legal and social developments rather than a dramatic worsening of the economic shocks hitting households THE CONFIDENT CONSUMER Early in the summer of the Index of Consumer Sentiment constructed by the University of Michigan reached an all-time high ; it remained near that record level for the remainder of the year ( Chart ) Some observers have suggested that consumers have become overly optimistic and that a return to more normal levels of confidence could have adverse economic consequences. But a major part of the surge in consumer sentiment in can be explained by the simultaneously favorable values of all four of the indicators that have historically influenced consumer sentiment : the inflation rate the unemployment rate the performance of the stock market and to a lesser extent the growth rate of household income. Moreover although Chart shows that the actual level of sentiment in has been even higher than would be predicted given the values of these indicators the size of the underprediction is not large compared with typical past prediction errors The Michigan index comprises two subindexes : one for current conditions and one for expected future conditions. Recently both have been hovering near record levels. Roughly two-thirds of the increase in the index of expected conditions over can be attributed to the favorable economic environment and the remaining underprediction is not large by historical standards. This suggests that consumers are not unrealistically optimistic about future developments. However very little of 's increase in the index of current conditions can be explained by changes in observed aggregate variables. Again the magnitude of underprediction is not very large ; moreover there are good reasons not to attribute this prediction error to irrational confidence on the part of consumers. Because the current conditions index largely reflects consumers ' answers to questions about their own individual financial circumstances a plausible interpretation of the prediction error is simply that economy-wide variables such as the inflation rate and the unemployment rate do not fully capture the complex elements that influence consumers ' assessments of their personal financial situation. It therefore seems more appropriate to accept consumers ' rosy assessments of their personal financial circumstances at face value And judging by past episodes when sentiment has exceeded the predicted value the danger appears modest of a sudden sharp plunge in sentiment that would quickly return it to the level that aggregate indicators would predict Chart Consumer Sentiment Much of the increase in consumer sentiment recently can be explained by the exceptional performance of the economy Index : Q1 = Index of Consumer ^ Sentiment Note : Predicted sentiment is calculated from a model in which the inflation rate the unemployment rate stock market performance and wages and salaries are independent variables Sources : University of Michigan and calculations by Council of Economic Advisers Other measures of consumer attitudes also reflect optimism. The Conference Board 's Consumer Confidence Index the main alternative to the Michigan index rose to a 28-year record in December ; as with the Michigan index a large part of the improvement in the Conference Board index can be attributed to observable economic conditions. Both the Michigan and the Conference Board surveys contain many questions that are not incorporated in their overall indexes and answers to these other survey questions have also generally been quite favorable For example throughout the year consumers interviewed for the Michigan survey said they expected low inflation rates to continue and believed it was a good time to buy automobiles and houses THE CONDITION OF HOUSEHOLD BALANCE SHEETS The exceptional performance of the stock market appears to be one of the factors contributing to consumers ' sanguine assessments of their financial circumstances. The rise in the stock market boosted total household net worth by around $ trillion over the course of following similarly strong gains in and Higher stock prices lifted the ratio of household net worth to disposable income to record levels ( Chart ) Chart Ratio of Household Net Worth to Disposable Personal Income The stock market boom helped boost the household net-worth-to-income ratio to a record level in Ratio Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers ' estimate of net worth Despite the recent boost to stock market wealth the family home is still the most valuable single asset most American households own On this front too brought encouraging news : the rate of homeownership reached a new all-time record boosted by robust income growth and relatively low mortgage interest rates. Another factor that has likely contributed to the increase in the homeownership rates in the 1990s is the increasing availability of sub-prime mortgage loans which do not meet traditional industry lending guidelines Such loans carry a higher interest rate to compensate lenders for the extra risk. For example home buyers who put up less than the traditional 20-percent down payment usually have to purchase private mortgage insurance to guarantee repayment of the loan ; the premium for this insurance rises as the size of the down payment declines Indeed mortgages that require no down payment at all are now available for consumers willing to pay very high rates Home buyers who take advantage of these loans of course take on more debt than was typical of past buyers who put up a traditional down payment of percent. The relaxation of down payment constraints is therefore probably part of the explanation for the runup in mortgage debt depicted in Chart Some of this rise however is attributable to the increasing popularity of home equity borrowing. A substantial part of new home equity borrowing likely reflects the growing use of home equity loans to buy motor vehicles to pay for home repairs and additions and to finance other large expenses that might previously have been financed by separate consumer loans Home equity loans are an attractive way of financing such expenditures because their interest is tax deductible whereas the interest on traditional consumer loans lost its tax-deductible status with the tax reform of Chart Household Debt by Type The ratio of household debt to disposable income has risen sharply since the mid-1970s mostly in the form of higher mortgage debt Percent of disposable personal income Revolving credit ( including credit cards ) > o Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The increasing substitution of mortgage debt for other kinds of debt suggests that any assessment of the aggregate household balance sheet needs to look at the value of all debts combined not just mortgage debt. As Chart shows the uptrend in overall household debt is somewhat less dramatic than that for mortgage debt alone ; the ratio of total debt to disposable income increased from percent in to percent in Nevertheless the ratio of overall debt to disposable personal income has been trending upward since the mid1970s except for pauses around the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s The chart does not support the common perception that aggregate credit card borrowing has soared out of control. Although revolving debt ( which consists mainly of credit card debt ) has grown more rapidly than other kinds of borrowing it still represents only a modest fraction of consumers ' debt load. Most of the runup in total debt instead reflects the sharp rise in mortgage debt Chart Household Debt Delinquency Rates After rising from to delinquency rates on credit cards and consumer loans have stabilized. Mortgage delinquencies edged down to the lowest rate since Percent Consumer loans Note : The mortgage delinquency rate is the percentage of all loans days or more past due The consumer loan and credit card delinquency rate is the percentage of loan balances that are days or more past due or nonaccruing Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Mortgage Bankers Association The dominance of mortgage debt in household balance sheets implies that the mortgage delinquency rate is a particularly important indicator of the magnitude of debt repayment problems. Chart shows that the mortgage delinquency rate has actually edged down over the last year and remains well below rates posted in the mid-1980s suggesting that comparatively few consumers have found their rising mortgage debt insupportable. The chart also shows that although delinquency rates on credit card borrowing and consumer loans have gone up they remain below their peak levels of the early 1990s and appear to have flattened off in the past year or so One probable reason why the continuing runup in debt has not caused greater repayment problems is that interest rates have fallen reducing the payments required to service the outstanding stock of debt ( the debt service burden ) The debt service burden has also been lightened by an increase in the average duration of loans. Chart shows that although the aggregate debt service burden has risen substantially since its trough in it is still below the level attained in the late 1980s and certainly does not exhibit the relentless uptrend evident in the ratio of total debt to disposable income Chart Household Debt Service Payments The debt service burden fell after the recession but has risen since Although high by historical standards it remains below late-1980s levels Percent of disposable personal income Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System On the whole then aggregate statistics paint a favorable picture of the financial condition of households. Although household debt has risen the aggregate value of household assets has risen even more leading to a net gain in aggregate household net worth. Judging from mortgage delinquency rates the recent rise in the debt service burden does not seem to be causing unusual strain. And although credit card debt has been growing this category still represents a relatively minor fraction of the aggregate debt households owe Aggregate statistics however can sometimes mask divergent trends among different subgroups of the population. If for example the rise in household assets were occurring entirely among the affluent and if the rise in household debt were concentrated among lower income households then the increase in aggregate household net worth would not provide much reassurance about the ability of the indebted households to repay their debt. In practice however household-level data do not seem to be telling a story very different from that told by the aggregate data. Although affluent households still hold disproportionate amounts of stock the surging popularity of mutual funds and the rise of ( k ) and other tax-sheltered retirement plans have considerably increased the fraction of households who benefit directly from stock market gains. Indeed a recent poll found that roughly half of American families own stock in some form. And as Table shows although the debt service burden for the median household increased somewhat between and by the combination of falling interest rates and lengthening debt maturities had reduced the median household 's burden to near its level ; the fraction of households with high or very high debt service burdens ( defined as debt service payments greater than and percent of income respectively ) was actually lower in than in TABLE Household Debt Service Burden Item Debt service burden of the median household ( percent of income ) ' Percent of households with debt service burden : Over percent Over percent Debt service burden is required debt service payments as a percent of income Note. Data are for households whose heads are employed Sources-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and calculations of the Council of Economic Advisers THE PERSONAL SAVING RATE The personal saving rate has been trending downward since the mid-1980s. According to the preliminary figures currently available the personal saving rate in was only percent down from percent in Given the exuberant level of consumer sentiment and the large gains in household wealth last year the fact that there was a modest decline in the saving rate from to is neither surprising nor disturbing ; such modest annual fluctuations are of little consequence. The longer term decline in personal saving however has aroused considerable concern among academic economists and policymakers for at least three reasons. First because national saving is the sum of personal business and government saving low personal saving contributes to a low national saving rate and low national saving has a variety of negative consequences which are discussed in more detail later in this chapter. Second the falling saving rate raises questions about whether many American consumers are preparing adequately for their retirement. Finally families with too little savings may be unprepared to deal successfully with financial emergencies such as a spell of unemployment or large medical expenses Personal Saving and Retirement One of the most obvious reasons for households to save is to provide for a comfortable standard of living in retirement. One way to judge whether personal saving is too low then is to ask whether consumers appear to be saving enough for retirement. Several recent studies have examined whether the baby-boom generation in particular is doing enough retirement saving. One set of studies has concluded that typical baby-boomers need to roughly triple their saving rates if they hope to maintain their living standards in retirement. Another study however asserts that even if they do not change their saving behavior at all the majority of boomers probably will not experience a sharp drop in living standards upon retirement These different conclusions largely reflect a difference in approach The first set of studies begins by calculating the gap between the income that baby-boomers can expect to receive from the combination of Social Security and traditional pensions and the income that would be required to maintain their preretirement standard of living These studies then calculate the " target " saving rates that babyboomers would need to achieve to plug that income gap and show that the saving rates of typical baby-boom households are only about a third of the target rates leading to a " baby boom retirement adequacy index " of percent Critics point out that this approach can be misleading in part because it is not a measure of the consequences if consumers decide not to increase their saving. In particular an index value of percent does not imply that retirement spending will have to be one-third the level of preretirement spending. For example consider a household for whom Social Security and pensions will provide sufficient retirement income to finance spending at percent of preretirement income and suppose that the household only needs percent of preretirement income to maintain its accustomed standard of living ( Spending needs could decline in retirement for several reasons notably the decline in commuting and other work-related expenses. ) Such a household could save nothing and therefore would have an index value of zero yet would only experience about a 5-percent decline in its standard of living at retirement An alternative way to evaluate the adequacy of retirement saving is to calculate the ratio of the level of sustainable retirement spending to the level of spending necessary to maintain standards of living Using this measure of retirement adequacy a recent study calculated that under plausible assumptions about the rate of return on savings and assuming no changes in saving behavior or in the Social Security system almost half of married-couple baby-boomer households in which the husband works full-time are saving enough to maintain their standard of living in retirement. ( Single baby-boomers are probably not faring as well however. ) And only about a third of these married-couple baby-boomer households are projected to suffer large cuts in their standard of living. These figures improve if home equity is included in the measure of retirement savings although there is some debate whether including home equity is appropriate The recent runup in the stock market would improve the picture further although most of the improvement would likely be concentrated among the third of households who are already best prepared for retirement to the extent that they hold a disproportionate share of equity investments Even the optimists however acknowledge that current saving rates of most baby-boom households are not high enough to provide much of a cushion against the many uncertainties that they face. In particular if their retirement savings earn low rates of return or if rising medical costs or other unexpected expenses increase their spending needs in retirement or if retirement income from sources other than personal savings falls substantially short of the projections made on the basis of current pension and social insurance programs then many baby-boomers may end up wishing they had saved much more. And even under optimistic assumptions it appears likely that unless they boost their saving most unmarried boomers will reach normal retirement age with insufficient assets to fully maintain their preretirement standard of living On the whole therefore it does appear that unless their saving rates rise a very substantial proportion of the baby-boom generation is at risk of reaching retirement age with insufficient assets to maintain their standard of living. One response may be for them to delay retirement. Since Social Security and many other pension benefits are adjusted upward for those who delay retirement some of the boomers who are not saving enough to retire at the normal retirement age may nevertheless be able to retire in relative comfort several years later. Of course those who have saved little but whose state of health or line of work prevents them from remaining in the work force may have no choice but to accept significantly lower living standards in their retirement years Personal Saving and Financial Emergencies When consumers are asked about their primary reasons for saving the most common answer is that saving is important in order to build up resources that can be drawn upon in case of emergency. Although precautionary saving of this kind can not plausibly explain either the practice of regular payroll deductions for pension plans or the accumulation of wealth held by the richest few percent of households it can account for the consistent finding by consumer surveys that most households usually have on hand an amount of liquid assets that corresponds to between a few weeks ' and a few months ' worth of spending It is difficult to judge whether these liquid assets are enough to cushion consumers against financial emergencies. Certainly they alone would not be enough to fully maintain spending through the worst possible emergencies such as a long spell of unemployment. But most households could probably substantially cut their spending during an extended unemployment spell. Also in today 's economy most consumers have the option of credit card home equity or other kinds of borrowing to finance emergency spending. Indeed a potential partial explanation of the drop in the personal saving rate over the past decade is that some consumers have decided that credit cards or other consumer credit sources can help fill the buffer role traditionally served by liquid assets Unquestionably credit card availability has risen in recent years Particularly notable has been the increase in availability of credit cards to consumers in lower income and wealth brackets : in only percent of consumers with annual incomes of less than $ ( in dollars ) held credit cards but by the ownership rate for that group had increased to percent. In addition those groups of consumers who already had credit cards in have seen a large increase in their credit limits in recent years : the median total credit limit among all consumers with cards increased from about $ in to over $ in ( both in dollars ) As might be expected credit card borrowing has increased as credit has become more available. But the increases in borrowing have been fairly modest compared with the increases in credit limits Table shows the distribution of credit balances ( the part of the credit card bill that consumers choose not to pay off at the end of the month ) as a percentage of income for employed working-age consumers in and Whereas the median ratio of credit card balance to income was close to zero in all years consumers at the 75th and 95th percentiles of the distribution had increasingly large balances relative to their incomes. Still even in consumers at the 95th percentile of the distribution had credit card debt equal to only percent of annual income a substantial but by no means unbearable burden TABLE Household Credit Card Balances as a Percent of Income Point in distribution ' Median household Household at 75th percentile Household at 95th percentile Distribution is that of households according to credit card balances as a fraction of income Note. Data are for households whose heads are employed Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and calculations of the Council of Economic Advisers The available data are consistent with the idea that the expanding availability of credit card debt may have somewhat reduced the need for consumers to hold buffer stocks of liquid assets and thus may have contributed at least modestly to the drop in the personal saving rate. But for most households credit availability appears to have increased considerably more than credit use so that there appears to be little reason to worry that typical households have less capacity to withstand financial shocks. Even the small subset of consumers who have run up quite substantial credit card debts could plausibly expect to be able to repay those debts if they do not experience a major disruption to their income or a large unavoidable expenditure. On the other hand consumers with large credit card debts who do experience a major financial blow may be forced into bankruptcy THE LONG-TERM UPTREND IN THE BANKRUPTCY RATE After remaining roughly stable over much of the 1960s and 1970s the personal bankruptcy rate began rising sharply sometime around the late 1970s or early 1980s. Some have argued that this uptrend resulted from passage of the Bankruptcy Act of which eased some of the burdens of bankruptcy. Other analysts argue that the approximate correspondence between passage of that act and the beginning of the uptrend in bankruptcies is just a coincidence and that rising bankruptcy rates reflect other social and economic developments that would have led to a rising bankruptcy rate even if the law had remained unchanged One intuitively plausible explanation is that the rise in bankruptcies reflects the increasingly aggressive marketing of credit cards to high-risk consumers who previously would not have been granted credit at all. As noted above it is true that some households have bor- rowed increasingly large amounts on credit cards. Some of those highly indebted individuals presumably end up in bankruptcy if they lose their jobs or experience other large financial shocks. But there are reasons to doubt that increased availability of credit cards provides a full explanation of the rise in bankruptcies. First some suggestive evidence indicates that credit card debt is not a large fraction of the total debt of consumers who declare bankruptcy ; consumers who end up in bankruptcy court must therefore have borrowed heavily from non-credit card sources. Second much of the increase in bankruptcy appears to have come not from low-income consumers who until recently could not get cards but from the kinds of middle-income consumers who have presumably had access to credit cards all along If excessive credit card borrowing is not a complete explanation for the rising bankruptcy rate what does explain the rise ? One possibility is that an increasing number of consumers are simply taking on more debt than they can manage in non-credit card form as well as with credit cards. On its face this explanation seems plausible in light of the large increases in aggregate household debt over the past years depicted in Chart But as noted above although the aggregate debt service burden has climbed recently it remains below its late-1980s levels yet the bankruptcy rate has continued to rise And as shown in Table the proportion of households who had either high or very high debt service burdens was actually lower in than in Hence the available data do not seem to support the theory that bankruptcy has risen simply because increasingly large numbers of ordinary consumers have unwisely taken out so much debt that any financial shock will send them into bankruptcy Unfortunately the evidence on alternative explanations is scant and no consensus has emerged among experts. One researcher points out that under the post-1978 bankruptcy law up to percent of households could increase their net worth by declaring bankruptcy ; this researcher and others argue that the rise in the bankruptcy rate over time largely reflects consumers learning about the costs and benefits of declaring bankruptcy perhaps partly through advertising by bankruptcy lawyers. A related hypothesis is that there has been a decline in the stigma associated with bankruptcy. This theory is consistent with evidence showing that controlling for other factors people who live in areas where the bankruptcy rate has been high in the past are more likely to declare bankruptcy Other authors have suggested that increasing divorce rates skyrocketing medical costs or large legal judgments or settlements may have contributed to the rise in the bankruptcy rate. However although each of these factors is clearly important in many individual bankruptcy cases none appears to be sufficient to explain more than a small fraction of the increase in bankruptcies. For example the divorce rate stabilized in the mid- to late-1980s yet bankruptcies have continued to rise. And some evidence indicates that only a modest fraction of bankrupt consumers have significant amounts of medical debt or large legal judgments against them Whatever is driving the increase in bankruptcies the rising bankruptcy rate has focused attention on the bankruptcy system. In response in the Congress established a commission to recommend reforms in the bankruptcy system. The National Bankruptcy Review Commission released its final report in October ( Box ) LONG-TERM GROWTH : BUDGET DEFICITS AND NATIONAL SAVING Since its first budget proposal in this Administration has demonstrated a strong commitment to reducing the Federal budget deficit. As a result the deficit has declined from $ billion in to only $ billion in or from percent to percent of GDP BOK * * ~ T ! te National Bankruptcy Review Commission The National Bankruptcy Review Commission created by Ckmgreas in and charged with recommending bankruptcy reforms released its final report in October The commission 's proposals for business bankruptcy reform are largely uncontrwersiaL Perhaps partly because of a lack of compelling evidence the commissioners were unable to achieve consensus on what has caused the rise in personal bankruptcies * and therefore could not agree on a set of final recommendations for personal bankruptcy reform. Many of the commission 's final recommendations regarding personal bankruptcy were approved by a bare * majority of commissioners and the minority wrote a series of detailed dissents explaining their objections. The dissenting commissioners argue that the recommendations of the report are too lenient toward debtors. For example the majority ^ reform plan does not mandate that consumers with incomes over some threshold be forced to repay a portion of their debts out of future earnings In August the President and the Congress sealed a historic agreement that was projected to lead to a balanced budget by ; the continuing robust performance of the economy since August has improved the outlook further leading the President to propose a balanced budget for fiscal Balancing the budget has been achieved in large part through a combination of expenditure restraint and increases in income taxes for the percent of households with the highest incomes. Both budget cuts and tax increases are difficult and painful measures Why did the Administration judge that taking such measures was so important ? Principally because persistent budget deficits as large as those of the 1980s and early 1990s constitute an unacceptable drain on national saving To see why budget deficits reduce national saving it is useful to imagine the private saving of all Americans as flowing into a common national pool. This pool of saving is then made available to borrowers The budget deficit measures how much of this pool of saving is drawn down by the government ; national saving is the amount left in the pool after the government has borrowed what it needs to pay for that portion of current expenses that exceed its current revenues Because of the reduction in Federal borrowing net national saving ( gross national saving less depreciation of the private and public capital stock ) has increased from percent of GDP in to percent in ( on the basis of incomplete data for the year ) But even this net national saving rate is far below the 10-percent average over the period Given the Nation 's favorable recent economic performance even without a high national saving rate it might be tempting to conclude that the low national saving rate does not matter. But such a conclusion would be a mistake. There are still good reasons to believe that the benefits of boosting national saving would outweigh the short-term pain of cutting back on spending SAVING IN A CLOSED ECONOMY One way of thinking about whether more saving would make the Nation better off is to ask whether the aggregate capital stock is at the " golden rule " level the level that maximizes sustainable per capita consumption. ( Economists call this the golden rule level because every generation must resist the temptation to consume more than its share and thereby leave less for future generations. ) Whether an economy is at the golden rule level can be determined by comparing the net extra output that would be produced by more capital against the cost of equipping the growing work force with that extra capital. If the extra output is greater than this cost then total national output could be increased by adding to the capital stock. In the United States economists estimate that the before-tax rate of return on additional capital is much higher than the cost of equipping the work force with extra capital implying that the Nation 's capital stock is well below the golden rule level The golden rule however is an imperfect way to judge whether saving should be higher. The principal problem is that the rule provides no way to weigh the short-term pain from lower current consumption against the long-term gain from eventually higher future consumption. A more flexible framework is provided by the " modified golden rule " which makes explicit assumptions about how current consumption should be traded off against future consumption. The modified golden rule assumes that society as a whole is slightly impatient in the sense of preferring current consumption to future consumption and that consumers prefer gradual changes in the level of consumption and dislike abrupt changes. But under plausible assumptions about the before-tax rate of return the rate of impatience and the degree to which one year 's consumption is substitutable for another year 's even the modified golden rule implies that the saving rate is too low SAVING IN AN OPEN ECONOMY In an economy closed to foreign trade and capital all domestic investment must be financed by domestic saving. One of the principal benefits of increasing globalization of trade and capital markets is that the ability to borrow and lend in foreign markets relaxes the need to balance national saving with national investment in every year. If attractive investment opportunities are available at home but domestic saving is insufficient to pursue them foreign investors can step in ; the resulting excess of investment over national saving is manifested in a current account deficit. This aspect of globalization has been a favorable development for the United States because it has allowed the economy recently to invest in capital equipment at high rates despite the persistently low national saving rate. The high rates of investment in capital equipment over the past few years have been critical in preventing the kinds of production bottlenecks that have often led to rising inflation rates at comparable points in past business cycles But maintaining national investment above national saving over long periods does come at a price : growing indebtedness to foreign investors. In the long run increased foreign indebtedness means that apportion of the extra future output generated by the extra investment will be needed to pay a return to foreign lenders. In light of the demands that will be placed on the economy over the next or years by the retirement of the baby-boom generation and considering that countries that are currently lending to us face similar demographic challenges there remains a strong argument that it would be better to finance our high investment rates more through higher national saving and less by borrowing abroad IMPLICATIONS This Administration has believed from the beginning that the case for a higher national saving rate is compelling. That conviction led to the Administration 's steadfast commitment to reducing the budget deficit. But as important as the progress on the budget deficit has been the net national saving rate is still too low. One important priority for the Administration and the Nation is to address the actuarial imbalance in the Nation 's entitlement programs in a way that increases the national saving rate and thereby increases the resources available to meet the impending demographic crunch FORECAST AND OUTLOOK THE ADMINISTRATION FORECAST The Administration projects GDP growth over the long term at about percent per year a figure consistent with the experience so far during this business cycle as well as with reasonable growth rates of its supply-side components. From the business-cycle peak in the third quarter of until the third quarter of real output growth has averaged percent per year. This figure is the average of real growth rates of the product side ( gross domestic product percent ) and the income side ( gross domestic income percent ) Because the unemployment rate fell by percentage point per year over this period the empirical regularity known as Okun 's law sug gests that these growth rates overstate the growth of trend output by percentage point a calculation that results in a backward-looking estimate of 2.2-percent growth of potential output This estimate is likely understated by about percentage point because of methodological problems with the CPI that have been or will soon be corrected ( Box ) By lowering measured inflation while leaving nominal GDP unaffected these methodological changes will boost measured real output ( and better capture its true value ) Box Methodological Changes in the Consumer Index The Bureau of Labor Statistics has recently made several methodological changes that have improved the accuracy of the consumer prise iiutex ; a few more changes are planned over the ne&t several year ( Table ) Moat of these improvements have redueed the measured increase in the CPI> and many of these also will affect the deflation of nominal output and therefore will raiae the growth rate of measure * ! real CJDB Changes made through include the substitution of generic drags when patents e&pire on proprietary brands ; the correction of a problem in rotating new etores into the survey through a procedure called ^ seasoning * * ( a problem that was corrected first in the food category and later in other categories of goods ) ; the modification of Hie formula for measuring increases in rent ; and a change to measuring transaction rather than list prices for hospital services * Changes scheduled to be made in the aaxt years include a switch to measuring computer prices by their intrinsic characteristics ( " hedonics * } ; an update of the market basket from to * ; the use of geometric rather than arithmetic means to address substitution bias within categories ; and more frequent rotation of the items sampled in categories with many new product introductions The changes made through have a combined effect of lowering the CPI inflation rate by percentage point per ye&r and raising real GBP growth by percentage point per year * Tfeepost * ? changes lower CPI inflation by &41 percentage point per year and raise real GDP iprowth by percentage point per year In addition continued capital deepening may add a bit to productivity growth as the net capital stock grows faster than GDP. This would not happen in a steady state where capital and output are growing at the same pace. But the economy is projected not to reach a steady state during the forecast period as the relative price of capital is expected to continue to fall TABLE Expected Effects on Changes in the CPI and Real GDP ofCPI Methodological Changes Percentage-point effect on : Year introduced Change in method Real GDP percent change CPI percent change Pre-1998 Generic prescription drugs Food at home seasoning Owners ' equivalent rent formula Rent composite estimator General seasoning Hospital services index and after Personal computer hedonics Updated market basket Geometric means Rotation by item Total Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers COMPONENTS OF LONG-TERM GROWTH After rising rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s the labor force participation rate was relatively flat between and But the participation rate rose percentage point to percent in the first year in which it surpassed the level ( after correcting for the redesign of the Current Population Survey ) One might interpret the pickup in participation in as a return toward the rapid growth of earlier decades but other explanations which suggest that the increase in the rate of participation growth will not endure are also likely. Given the strong growth of labor demand it seems that some of last year 's labor force pickup ought to be interpreted as a cyclical response to a tight labor market The welfare reform law passed in the summer of may also have boosted labor force participation growth last year and can be expected to do so for several years to come. The legislation requires that by States either reduce their welfare caseloads by percent or have percent of the caseload either working or engaged in work-related activities ( such as vocational or job skills training ) or some combination or the two ( with some exemptions ) This legislation also set a 2-year time limit on any spell of welfare recipiency and a 5year lifetime limit except that percent of a State 's caseload may be exempted from this requirement. Rough calculations suggest that the requirement for work-related activities and the 2-year limit on welfare spells together could cause the labor force participation rate to grow by almost percentage point per year over the next several years At the same time the long-term demographic forces that have restrained growth in labor force participation in the 1990s are expected to remain in place. The stalling of the overall participation rate in the 1990s is accounted for largely by a deceleration in the participation rate of women ; the participation rate for men has fallen no faster than in earlier years. The child dependency ratio ( the number of children per woman aged ) fell between the late 1960s and the early 1980s echoing the earlier pattern in the birth rate. The decline in this ratio allowed an increasing fraction of women to enter the labor force between the mid-1970s and the 1980s but its subsequent flattening in the late 1980s has limited further increases in participation Balancing these influences the Administration 's long-term outlook includes a 0.1-percent per year increase in the participation rate through Together with population growth of percent per year for the working-age population this implies labor force growth of percent per year ( Table ) PRODUCTIVITY A good way to begin the analysis of productivity growth is by examining the recent past. Labor productivity ( that is worker output per hour ) can be measured using either the product-side or the incomeside measure of output ( Chart ) By the product-side measure labor productivity has grown at a 1.1-percent annual rate since the business-cycle peak in the third quarter of whereas the incomeside measure shows productivity growth at a more robust 1.5-percent annual rate. Because neither of these two measures is perfect an argument can be made for averaging them to yield an estimated annual rate of percent over this business cycle By either measure productivity growth was particularly rapid over the first three quarters of as noted earlier. An acceleration in productivity is not usually observed in the latter part of an expansion ( Chart ) ; historically productivity growth has tended to slow as the economy returns to full employment. This tendency could reflect several factors such as overly optimistic hiring decisions by firms or firms ' having to hire less productive workers as the labor market tightens. Whatever the explanation the fact that no such slowdown is now apparent is evidence that none of these imbalances are currently present and that the economy is behaving as if it remains in a mid-expansion phase rather than an end-ofexpansion phase TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GDP [ Average annual percent change ] to IV Item IV to III III to III III to ) PLUS- Civilian employment rate ' ) EQUALS- Civilian employment ' ) PLUS : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) PLUS- Civilian labor force participation rate ' ) EQUALS : Civilian labor force ' ) PLUS : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS- Nonfarm business employment ) PLUS-. Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) EQUALS- Nonfarm business output ) LESS : Nonfarm business output as a share of real GDP * ) EQUALS- Real GDP ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Adjusted for revision of the Current Population Survey Line translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Income-side definition Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government GDP growth is projected to fall below its long-term trend ( percent ) as the employment rate is projected to fall percent per year over this period Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Except for time periods are from business-cycle peak to business-cycle peak to avoid cyclical variation Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Because hours worked usually reacts to changes in output with a lag hours probably have not caught up with the acceleration in GDP in As a result the growth of productivity over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of likely exceeded its trend rate as it often does midway through an expansion. A better estimate of trend productivity growth comes from a model that takes this lagged adjustment into account. This procedure estimates that the trend rate of productivity thus far in this business cycle has been similar to the 1.1-percent annual rate that has prevailed since Looking ahead measured productivity can be expected to grow at a 1.3-percent annual rate because of the 0.2-percentage-point effect that the CPI methodological adjustments will have on real GDP Chart Alternative Measures of Productivity Since the last business-cycle peak the income-side measure of productivity has grown significantly faster than the product-side measure Index : Q3 = ( ratio scale ) Income-side measure Official ( product-side ) measure i i i i i Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers i Chart Productivity Growth and the End-of-Expansion Effect Nonfarm business productivity growth has slowed in the late stages of almost all previous postwar expansions. Over the past year productivity accelerated Average annual percent change D Average productivity growth : full expansion less last four quarters Average productivity growth : last ( most recent ) four quarters of previous ( current ) expansion ( s ) I : Expansion dates ( trough to peak ) Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and National Bureau of Economic Research INFLATION CONSIDERATIONS Continued labor market tightness can be expected to put some upward pressure on inflation. With the relative price of investment goods continuing to fall strong growth of investment is expected to keep industrial capacity relatively more ample than labor supply. And the future development of inflation will also be affected by the factors that have thus far suppressed it. The restructuring of the Asian economies virtually guarantees that the price of imports from these economies will remain low and may fall further. The relative price of computers will continue to fall although the rate of decline is expected to return to the roughly 15-percent annual rate that has prevailed over much of the 1990s. Finally the methodological changes to the CPI planned to be implemented before are eventually expected to lower annual CPI inflation by another percentage point and the price index for GDP by percentage point. With these considerations in mind the Administration projects CPI inflation to creep up by about percentage point over the next few years to percent by THE DEMAND FOR HOUSING A surge in the fourth quarter raised residential investment growth above that of GDP during the past year. New home construction ( housing starts and shipments of mobile homes ) was roughly unchanged in from its year-earlier pace despite a jump in the fourth quarter Demographic trends indicate stable demand for housing during the next decade The current shape of the age distribution reflects the legacy of the baby boom and the baby bust. Because most new households are formed by young adults the passage of the first wave of baby-boomers into the prime years of household formation in the late 1970s was associated with a rapid pace of home construction and rising house prices. But household formation fell to an annual rate of about million per year during the first half of the 1990s as the smaller baby-bust cohort moved into adulthood. Demographic forecasts project a similar rate of household formation over the second half of the 1990s In addition to growth in the number of households demand for new homes is created by the replacement of homes that are scrapped or destroyed and by the increase in the number of second homes and vacant homes ( Table ) Replacement demand ( which can be estimated over long periods only ) has averaged about units per year The increase in " vacant " homes ( which includes second homes ) is highly cyclical and has reflected the general economic strength of recent years but tends to average about units per year. Altogether housing demand has averaged million units per year thus far in the 1990s and in light of the demographic forecast is expected to continue at a similar pace for the next decade This projection of the long-run demand for housing is slightly stronger than what has prevailed thus far in the 1990s but not quite as strong as demand in the past years. As Table shows long-run demand is consistent with a rate of housing starts of roughly million units per year slightly below the 1.48-million-unit pace of homebuilding in Of course economic conditions can push housing starts away from their demographic fundamentals. Recessions generally slow the pace of both home construction and household formation as young people remain longer in their parents ' homes this is what happened in In good times people spend more on larger homes and second homes. If the current good times continue homebuilding could exceed these projections of its demographic determinants TABLE Contribution of Selected Determinants of Demand and Supply for New Homes [ Millions annual average ] Determinant 1970s 1980s Demand : Household growth Single-family homes Multifamily homes Change in vacancies Net removals Total demand Supply : Mobile homes Total supply Measurement error Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers THE NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK Both supply- and demand-side considerations argue for some moderation in real GDP growth from its rapid 3.6-percent annual pace of the past years ( Table ) On the supply side the unemployment rate has fallen about a percentage point over the past years and it is therefore doubtful whether a further decline of this magnitude could be accommodated without inflationary consequences. Labor force growth has not kept up with demand in the past years nor can it be expected to keep up with a repetition of that kind of demand growth On the demand side some restraint is likely to come from the international economy where the recent rise in the dollar and the restructuring of several Asian economies may slow the demand for American-built products. Because the direction of trade responds with a lag to changes in the exchange rate the large rise in the dollar over the past years is likely to boost demand for imports and limit growth of our exports. The recent movements of the Asian currencies are particularly dramatic and will make imports from these economies less expensive. Even so the cloud formed by the Asian restructuring has a silver lining : aggressive competition from foreign producers is likely to restrain domestic inflation as it has during the past years TABLE Administration Forecast Actual Item Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Nominal GDP >5.8 Real GDP ( chain-type ) '3.9 GDP price index ( chain-type ) Consumer price index ( CPI-U ) Calendar year average Unemployment rate ( percent ) Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Interest rate 10-year Treasury notes ( percent ) Nonfarm payroll employment ( millions ) Preliminary Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce Department of Labor Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Other factors also are expected to slow the growth of demand Business purchases of capital goods have been growing faster than the overall economy and because the relative price of equipment investment is falling this trend is expected to continue. However some moderation of the recent torrid pace is expected as business demand for capital goods becomes more sated. A similar effect may limit expenditures on consumer durables where given the length and strength of this expansion pent-up demand has been exhausted The rate of inventory investment was particularly strong during the first half of and remained high despite tapering off somewhat in the second half of the year. Because output grew so rapidly inventories remain lean with respect to sales and certainly no overhang of excess inventories exists at this point. Still the rate of inventory growth during at about percent is in excess of what will be needed once demand moderates to its trend. As a result inventory investment is also expected to restrain near-term growth in demand As in recent Administration projections a moderation in output growth to percent is projected in the near term slightly below the economy 's long-run growth rate but in line with the consensus of professional economic forecasters. The balance of the Administration 's forecast is built around a growth rate for potential output of percent per year. The Administration does not think that 2.4-percent annual real growth is the best that the economy can do ; rather this projected growth reflects a conservative estimate of the effects of Administration policies to promote education and investment and to balance the budget. The outcome could be even better as it has been in the past years. But the Administration 's forecast is used for a very important purpose : to project Federal revenues and outlays and the Federal budget deficit. For this purpose excessive optimism is dangerous and can stand in the way of making difficult but necessary budget decisions. In the final analysis the most important goal is the creation of a sound forecast that accurately captures likely economic trends As of December the current expansion had lasted months making it the third longest in the postwar record. There is no foreseeable reason why this expansion can not continue. As the Report argued expansions do not die of old age. Instead recent postwar expansions have ended because of rising inflation financial imbalances or inventory overhangs. None of these conditions exists at present. The most likely prognosis is therefore for sustained job creation and continued noninflationary growth CHAPTER The Economic Weil-Being of Children AFTER DROPPING SHARPLY IN THE 1960s the official poverty rate among children trended upward from to reflecting increases in the share of children in single-parent families and declines in real wages at the bottom of the income distribution Recently however the picture has improved as the child poverty rate declined by percentage points from to Other measures of children 's material well-being have improved recently as well. Since the early 1990s the share of children in households reporting that they did not have enough food to eat has decreased the share of households with children living in inadequate housing has fallen and children 's use of basic health services has increased. Continued declines have also been recorded in infant and child mortality rates and some measures of children 's educational achievement have improved Nevertheless many children remain economically vulnerable. In one in five children was officially poor ; in one in nine lived in households paying more than half of their income for housing and one in seven did not have health insurance ; and in one in lived in households where children experienced hunger due to inadequate resources for food. These factors place children at risk of both current and future hardship as many of these factors may be critical to children 's long-term development This Administration has adopted a range of strategies to improve the economic and social well-being of children. The first of these is to put in place a system that guarantees that children 's basic needs are met. For this reason the Administration has supported major initiatives to expand health insurance child care and subsidized housing and has substantially strengthened the child support enforcement system. The second strategy is to provide financial support to needy families in a way that promotes work and personal responsibility. To achieve these goals the Administration proposed and the Congress enacted increases in the minimum wage an expansion in the earned income tax credit ( EITC ) and a major restructuring of the welfare system. The third strategy is to invest in programs that enrich children 's educational opportunities by expanding the Head Start program and encouraging higher standards for elementary and secondary schools This chapter begins by describing recent economic and demographic trends that have influenced the economic well-being of children and recent programs designed to improve the economic status of families with children. The second section reports on changes in two key components of children 's material well-being : food sufficiency and housing conditions. The third section describes recent changes in children 's health outcomes access to health care and health insurance coverage rates. The concluding section discusses child care and educational programs for children TRENDS IN THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF CHILDREN THE LINK BETWEEN INCOME AND CHILDREN 'S WELL-BEING The adequacy of family income is a critical predictor of both the present and the future well-being of children. Children who grow up in low-income families score lower on standardized academic achievement tests are less likely to complete high school complete fewer years of school and are likely to have lower earnings when they enter the labor market than children who grow up in higher income families. Most studies find that family income is more strongly correlated with children 's achievement than parental schooling or family structure Low family income might affect children 's well-being for any of several reasons. One is that low-income parents may not be able to afford to invest as much in the things that improve their children 's wellbeing such as food shelter medical care and education. A second is that the poor are more likely to live in neighborhoods with a high concentration of poverty and thus may face higher crime rates poorer quality schools and more limited connections to mainstream economic activity. A third is that low-income families may experience higher levels of emotional distress due to the economic pressures of living on a limited income Finally income may be highly correlated with children 's achievement not because income directly affects child well-being but because income is associated with some other hard-to-measure factor that does affect child well-being such as the value that parents place on education. For example children from high-income families may perform better on standardized academic tests than children from low-income families not because they have higher incomes but because their parents encouraged them to work harder in school. If this is so increasing family income will not necessarily increase children 's academic achievement unless it also increases parents ' commitment to their children 's education. A recent study found that more sophisticated techniques that control for potential differences across families produced lower estimated impacts of family income on child well-being than suggested by simple correlations of family income and child well-being MEASURING TRENDS IN CHILD POVERTY RATES One of the most commonly used measures of the adequacy of family income is the poverty rate. The poverty rate is the percentage of the population who live in families with before-tax cash incomes below a defined level of need called the poverty line. The official poverty line in use today was devised in the early 1960s and based on the minimum cost of a nutritionally adequate diet. This amount was multiplied by three because data from the late 1950s suggested that the typical family spent one-third of its income on food. Since then the poverty line has been updated annually for inflation using the consumer price index for all urban consumers. In the poverty line for a family of two adults and two children was $ Many people have argued that the official poverty measure should be modified to account for family income and family income requirements differently. Box describes a recent proposal by the National Research Council to change the way we measure poverty Boss ~ JL Bow Does Our Poverty Measure Affect Gtn ? Conception of P0wrty ? A report by the National Besearch Council ( NEC ) recommended a number of changes in the way we measure poverty Its recommendations include the following : * Defimmg income * On the one hand * the definition of family income should be expanded to include other important sources of purchasing power such as the MTC ? food stampSj and housing subsidies. On the other hand some necessary eispenditiires that reduce a famil/s resources available for basic consumption needs should be subtracted from income such as taxes * necessary child care and other work-related expenditure ^ child support payments ^ and out-of-pocket medical esqpendltures Setting & threshold * Poverty thresholds should ha adjusted to provide a more accurate measure of family income requirements * Pirstt the consumption bundle used to derive thresholds should be based om food * clothing * and shelter * not food < ^ naumption alone Seeond * thresholds should reflect regional variations in housing costs fHiird thresholds should be adjusted for family si ^ e in a more consistent way than earrentiy Finally thresholds should be updated to reflect changes to expenditure patterns over time Box ~ A recent study t is&d key elements $ f the NEC proposal to estimate alternative poverty rates from to 199ft Th&ie estimates profaeed in poverty fri>m to similar to * am<i decreases in pweiiy from 19SS to somewhat largertiban ^ those winder the offieial t&easiire. In addition wider the alternative nieasw a emdObr pr0p0rtiim of the poor are children * blaek or members of femate * tieaded Iioiiadboida. These reflect the faet that tiba n0w meamire'mora aDmpIetelj for in-Madl transfer ^ gneh as food stamps and homing benefite 0&<i for work-related es ^ fenditiires AB a re ^ alt ^ the new measure tends to deewaae ttie rd&tiw pwarty rate of persons who are more lifetly to reeeiw in-Mmd teBaftra ^ and to iiKareaw the relative pover ^ jmte of employed I&w4wmm persona with Mgher work-related Chart shows that the poverty rate for children declined sharply from to and has since trended upward with peaks in and ( Throughout this chapter " children " refers to persons under age except where stated to the contrary. ) Chart also illustrates an experimental poverty measure developed by the Bureau of the Chart Poverty Rates of Children The child poverty rate rose between and after falling steeply in the 1960s. It has declined again since especially after including taxes and in-kind benefits Percent " " \ ^ Official measure \ / v / Including taxes and in-kind benefits I Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Census which includes taxes and in-kind transfers in family income Including taxes and transfers reduces the estimated poverty rate in each year but does not substantially affect the trend in poverty from to Since poverty rates have declined more rapidly under the experimental than under the official measure. This is largely attributable to recent expansions in the EITC which affect the experimental but not the official measure of poverty Estimates of changes in the poverty rate are sensitive to the method used to adjust the poverty line for inflation. Some have argued that the price index used in the official poverty measure has overestimated the actual level of inflation. ( See the Economic Report of the President for a discussion of this issue. ) Under some alternative estimates of poverty that incorporate different inflation estimates poverty trends for children are flat or down over the last several decades Table shows poverty rates for children of different ages races family status and incomes in In that year percent of all children were poor percent were in extreme poverty ( defined here TABLE Children with Family Incomes Below Different Income Cutoffs [ Percent of children in each category ] Family income Demographic category Less than half of poverty line Less than poverty line Less than twice poverty line Age of child : Under Race/ethnicity of child : White Black Hispanic Female-headed Married couple All children Family status : Children in families Note. Income is before-tax cash income Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) as family income less than half the poverty line ) and percent were poor or near poor ( defined here as family income less than twice the poverty line ) The poverty rate for children under age was times that for children aged the rate for black and Hispanic children was times that for white children and the rate for children in female-headed households with no husband present was nearly five times that for children in married-couple families. Over one-quar ter of children in female-headed families lived in families with incomes below half the poverty line and over three-quarters of this group lived in families with incomes below twice the poverty line EXPLAINING RECENT CHANGES IN CHILD POVERTY Changes in family structure labor market opportunities and transfers are all likely to have an important influence on child poverty. This section briefly describes each of these three factors. It then estimates the relative influence of these factors on changes in child poverty since Family Structure Changes in family structure are likely to have had a substantial influence on child poverty rates over the past few decades. The percentage of children living with their mother only has nearly tripled since This reflects increases both in the percentage of children living with a mother who is divorced or who is married but not currently living with her husband and in the percentage living with a never-married mother ( Chart ) Because children in female-headed households have poverty rates nearly five times those of children in married-couple households an increase in the percentage of children in female-headed households is likely to increase child poverty Chart Children Living with Their Mother Only by Marital Status of Mother The percent of children living with their mother only has nearly tripled since Percent of all children Mother widowed Mother divorced or spouse absent Mother never married Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Children in female-headed households have a higher risk of living in poverty for two reasons. First most single mothers do not receive child support and must therefore rely on a single income. Nearly twothirds of all divorced separated or never-married women with children did not receive child support payments in Second that single income is likely to be lower in a female-headed than in a maleheaded household because women typically earn less in the labor market than men. In the median earnings of full-time yearround workers were about percent lower for women than for men Macroeconomic and Labor Market Conditions Both macroeconomic and labor market conditions can affect child poverty because they influence the quality and quantity of jobs available to parents. Table shows how changes in child poverty rates are related to two key indicators of macroeconomic performance : the unemployment rate and the economic growth rate as measured by annual growth in real gross domestic product per capita. The marked decline in child poverty from to coincided with both high economic growth rates and decreases in unemployment. Some studies have attributed the decline in poverty over this period to these strong macroeconomic conditions TABLE Changes in Child Poverty Rate and Selected Macroeconomic Indicators Change in official poverty rate of children ( percentage points ) Period Average annual growth rate in real GDP per capita ( percent ) Change in unemployment rate ( percentage points ) Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Despite continued strong rates of economic growth the child poverty rate increased during the 1970s and 1980s. This was partly a result of the increase in the unemployment rate from to and partly attributable to an increase in wage inequality since the 1970s ( See Chapter of the Economic Report of the President for a discussion of these trends. ) Two recent studies have concluded that the increases in overall poverty in the 1980s were largely attributable to increases in wage inequality and to decreases in the real wages of low-wage workers During the 1990s changes in child poverty have been more closely aligned with changes in unemployment and economic growth rates The increase in child poverty from to coincided with increases in unemployment and low economic growth rates whereas the decrease from to coincided with lower unemployment and higher rates of economic growth Changes in Transfer Policy One other factor that has had an important influence on child poverty is changes in the generosity of the tax-and-transfer system The real value of cash transfers available to low-income families with children has deteriorated significantly since the 1970s. This reflects a decline in the real value of benefits under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) program the main cash assistance program for low-income families with children until Although this decline was offset somewhat by expansions in food stamps combined benefits from both AFDC and food stamps have also decreased ( Chart ) Since expansions of the EITC have increased the transfers available to low-income working families. In addition the welfare system has been restructured to promote work and family responsibility These changes are described further below Chart Monthly AFDC and Food Stamp Benefits for a Family of Four The purchasing power of AFDC and food stamp benefits has eroded since AFDC payments alone have lost nearly half their real value dollars x AFDC and food stamps \ Note : Each data point represents the maximum benefit paid by the median State Sources : U.S. House of Representatives ( Committee on Ways and Means ) Department of Health and Human Services and Department of Agriculture Assessing Relative Magnitudes A Decomposition Table presents estimates of the impact of changes in family composition earnings and other before-tax-and-transfer income and taxes and transfers on the change in child poverty since It presents two measures of poverty : the official measure which is based on before-tax cash income and an alternative measure which includes both taxes and means-tested food and housing transfers. These estimates may not accurately reflect the full impact of each of these factors on poverty over this period because they assume that the observed changes in family composition have not been influenced by changes in underlying poverty rates for married couples and singleparent families. These estimates may also be sensitive to the order in which each income source is accounted for in the analysis The first line of the table shows the impact of changes in family structure on changes in the child poverty rate for various periods since It shows how changes in the percentage of children living in each of three family types married couples female householders with no husband present and male householders with no wife present would have affected child poverty in each period if the poverty rates of each group had not changed. The second line shows the impact of market earnings. It shows the effect of changes in beforetax-and-transfer poverty rates of children in each family category The third line shows the impact of cash transfers ( social insurance and welfare payments ) It shows the effect of changes in the percentage of children within each family category whose incomes are brought above the poverty line when cash transfers are included in income. The fifth and sixth lines show similar calculations for meanstested food and housing transfers and for taxes TABLE Accounting for Changes in Child Poverty [ Percentage points ] Factor Change in official poverty measure attributable to changes in : Family structure Earnings and other before-tax-and-transfer income Social insurance and welfare payments Total change m official poverty measure Change in extended poverty measure attributable to changes in : Means-tested food and housing transfers Taxes Total change in extended poverty measure Note. A positive number indicates an increase and a negative number a decrease in the child poverty rate resulting from that factor Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Office of Management and Budget These calculations imply that the increase of percentage points in the official poverty rate from to is attributable to changes in family structure ( percentage points ) increases in before-tax-and-transfer poverty ( percentage points ) and decreases in social insurance and welfare payments ( percentage point ) Changes in food and housing transfer payments further increased the extended poverty measure by percentage point By contrast the 2.9-percentage-point increase in the extended child poverty measure from to is mainly attributable to an increase in before-tax-and-transfer poverty ( percentage points ) and to changes in family composition ( percentage point ) These factors were offset by transfers which tended to decrease poverty over this period Finally the table suggests that the 4.7-percentage-point decline in the after-tax-and-transfer extended child poverty measure from to is attributable to both a 3.0-percentage-point decrease in before-tax-and-transfer poverty and a 2.0-percentage-point increase in the proportion of children moved out of poverty by taxes and transfers ( primarily the EITC ) Changes in family structure had a small impact on child poverty during this period increasing the poverty rate by percentage point from to Overall this table suggests that changes in family structure have put upward pressure on child poverty rates since The long-term increase in wage inequality has been reflected in an increase in before-tax-and-transfer poverty since although there have also been cyclical fluctuations in before-tax-and-transfer poverty in the 1980s and 1990s. Finally the tax-and-transfer system did more to reduce child poverty in than in This largely reflects the recent expansion of the EITC POLICY INITIATIVES TO SUPPORT FAMILY INCOMES This Administration has established a number of initiatives to expand the resources available to families with children in a way that creates positive incentives for work and personal responsibility Recent policy initiatives include : A higher minimum wage. The Congress and the Administration increased the minimum wage from $ to $ per hour in October and to $ per hour in September bringing the minimum wage to its highest level in real terms since An expanded EITC. In the Congress approved the Administration 's proposal to expand the EITC. The EITC is a refundable tax credit designed primarily for low-income working families with children. In the maximum credit for a family with one child was $ ( a 54-percent increase since ) and that for a family with two or more children was $ ( a 140-percent increase since ) Welfare reform. The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of dramatically restructured the welfare system to promote work and personal responsibility and to allow States greater flexibility in designing welfare assistance programs The law converted the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program into a new block grant called Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. To promote work and personal responsibility the law includes new work requirements a 5-year limit on the length of time that families can receive assistance and new measures to strengthen child support enforcement. The law also expands funding for child care to make it easier for families to move from welfare to work. Even before the new welfare law was enacted the Administration had granted waivers to States to allow them to reform their welfare systems to require work make work pay and encourage parental responsibility Increased child support enforcement. Federal legislation in and included measures designed to make the child support enforcement system more effective. Key reforms include streamlined procedures to establish paternity a new-hire reporting system to track delinquent parents across State lines uniform interstate child support laws computerized registries of statewide child support collections and tough new penalties such as revocation of the driver 's licenses of delinquents These initiatives have already had noticeable effects. The combination of a higher minimum wage with an expanded EITC guarantees a more adequate income to working families with children. A single mother with two children can now earn enough if she works full-time to bring her income with the EITC above the poverty line. In addition because the EITC benefit increases the financial reward to working it encourages parents to enter the labor market Research has shown that expansions in the EITC have been associated with increases in the employment rate of single mothers with children The changes to the welfare system have already been associated with a large decline in welfare caseloads. The number of children on welfare declined by percent from January to June Research suggests that the decline in welfare caseloads from January to January was due to a strong economy and to recent State welfare reforms that the Federal waiver process facilitated Finally the child support enforcement system has become more effective in guaranteeing that absent parents fulfill their obligations to pay child support. From to child support collections increased by percent to a record $ billion. In addition the number of paternities established for children born to unmarried women rose to million in almost double the number in These changes are reflected in a substantial increase from to in the percentage of never-married mothers who received child support payments OTHER MEASURES OF CHILDREN 'S MATERIAL WELL-BEING Two alternative measures of the adequacy of housing conditions and the sufficiency of household food supply suggest that the material well-being of children has improved since These trends are consistent with the reduction in child poverty over this period under the extended measure of child poverty that includes taxes and meanstested food and housing benefits AVAILABILITY OF FOOD One alternative measure of children 's material well-being is the adequacy of household food supply. It has been shown that households that report having an insufficient food supply consume smaller quantities of essential nutrients than other households Estimates from the Department of Agriculture 's Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals ( CSFII ) provide information on the percentage of children living in households where there sometimes or often was not enough to eat in the last months. These estimates may overstate the prevalence of hunger among children if many adults typically go without food before they let their children go hungry. Estimates from the CSFII suggest that the percentage of children living in households without enough to eat has fallen from percent in to percent in for all children and from percent to percent for children in households with incomes below percent of the poverty line ( Table ) TABLE Children in Households Reporting That There Was Sometimes or Often Not Enough to Eat During the Last Months [ Percent ] Category Children in households at or below percent of poverty line All children Children in households above percent of poverty line Source.- Department of Agriculture The Department of Agriculture 's Food and Nutrition Service has recently developed a detailed questionnaire that makes it possible to separately identify whether children or adults in the household experienced hunger. This questionnaire was incorporated into the April Current Population Survey. The survey found evidence that hunger is more likely among adults than among children : among households with children percent had adult members who had been hungry in the last year due to insufficient resources but only percent had children who had been hungry in the last months because the parents could not afford to buy more food. This survey also suggests that it is unusual for children to go without food for an extended period : percent of households with children reported that at least one of their children had skipped a meal in the past year and percent reported that their children had not eaten for a whole day at least once in the past year because of insufficient resources ADEQUACY OF HOUSING Estimates from the Annual Housing Survey and the American Housing Survey present a mixed picture of the changes in housing conditions of households with children. On the one hand the percentage of these households that have high rent burdens has increased substantially. The percentage of households with children that spend more than half their income on housing has increased from percent in to percent in ( Table ) For renters with very low incomes ( defined as households with incomes below percent of the median income for their area ) this figure has increased from percent to percent TABLE Housing Problems Among Households with Children [ Percent of all households with children ] Housing cost or condition All households with children : Housing costs more than percent of income Housing costs percent of income Severe physical problems with housing Moderate physical problems with housing Crowding ( more than person per room ) Housing costs more than percent of income Housing costs percent of income Severe physical problems with housing Moderate physical problems with housing Crowding ( more than person per room ) Very low income households with children : Note. Income is before-tax cash income. Very low income is defined as family income below half the median for the area Source : Department of Housing and Urban Development ( Office of Policy Development and Research ) On the other hand measures of housing quality for households with children have shown improvement. The percentage of all households with children living in housing with either moderate or severe physical problems fell from percent in to percent in and from percent to percent for very low income renters. In addition households with children were less likely to live in crowded living situations in than in : the percentage living in housing with more than one person per room dropped from percent to percent for all households and from percent to percent for very low income renters These findings are consistent with the results of a recent study which found that many measures of the housing quality of children in households in the bottom income quintile had improved since the early 1970s. These children were more likely to live in modern ( that is post-1940 vintage ) housing and more likely to have air conditioning in the 1990s than in the early 1970s. On the other hand this study also found that children in the bottom household income quintile were more likely to live in neighborhoods where their parents reported that crime was a serious problem in than in NEW HOUSING POLICY INITIATIVES This Administration will continue to make housing quality and affordability high priorities in fiscal Key initiatives include : Expanding the low-income housing tax credit. The low-income housing tax credit gives States the authority to allocate a fixed pool of tax credits to developers of affordable housing. For fiscal the President has proposed increasing the total amount of tax credits available to each State from $ to $ per State resident The HOME Investments Partnerships Program. The Administration has expanded funding for the HOME program by percent since to $ billion in fiscal This program offers funding to States cities and counties to develop affordable housing options for low-income families. These funds can be used for rehabilitation of existing housing new housing development and tenant-based rental subsidies. To date almost families have been awarded assistance through this program HEALTH STATUS AND HEALTH INSURANCE HEALTH OUTCOMES Over the past years infant and child mortality rates have continued to decline. Other measures however such as the incidence of chronic health conditions and of low birthweight are stable or increasing One of the most frequently cited measures of children 's health status is the infant mortality rate. Infant mortality has continued its decades-long decline in the 1990s falling from deaths per thousand live births in to per thousand in ( Chart ) During the same period the incidence of low birthweight ( weight at birth below grams or about pounds ) has increased slightly from percent of live births in to percent in This shows that the improvement in infant mortality in the 1990s has been entirely due to factors other than reductions in low-birthweight births. This improvement has been attributed in part to two key interventions. First new medical treatments have been developed for infant respiratory disorders an important cause of mortality among preterm infants. Second there has been a marked decline in sudden infant death syndrome since researchers discovered that these deaths could be prevented by placing babies on their backs to sleep The slightly increased incidence of low birthweight since the mid1980s is due in part to an increase in multiple births and births to older women. Failure to prevent low-birthweight births is costly to society because many of these infants require more-expensive medical interventions than do infants born at normal weight. In addition lowbirthweight infants have a much higher risk of infant mortality. In nearly two-thirds of all infant deaths occurred among the percent of all infants born at low birthweight Chart Infant Mortality Rates and Incidence of Low Birthweight Infant mortality has continued to decrease since despite an increase in low-birthweight births Deaths per thousand live births Percent of live births Infant mortality ( left scale ) ^ Low brrthweight ( right scale ) i Source : Department of Health and Human Services Mortality rates of older children have also fallen throughout the 1990s continuing a steady decline since ( Chart ) Much of the decline in the 1960s has been attributed to medical interventions which have minimized the risk of death from such conditions as congenital anomalies of the heart infectious diseases and certain childhood cancers. By contrast the reduction in mortality during the 1980s has been primarily attributed to a decline in injury-related mortality The one exception to this pattern is among those aged whose mortality rates have increased since This largely reflects the more than doubling in homicides among adolescents since The homicide rate for black male adolescents has nearly tripled since and in it was nearly seven times higher than the homicide rate for all adolescents Other indicators of child health have shown less progress in the 1980s and 1990s. The prevalence of asthma among children has increased substantially since the mid-1980s. The prevalence of most other chronic health conditions has fluctuated without a consistent upward or downward trend Chart Child and Youth Mortality Rates Mortality rates have continued to decline since the mid-1980s for all children and youths except those aged Deaths per hundred thousand Source : Department of Health and Human Services HEALTH INSURANCE One of the critical determinants of children 's access to health care is whether or not they have health insurance. Research has shown that children with health insurance coverage are more likely to receive preventive and primary care and more likely to have a regular relationship with a primary care provider than uninsured children. Insured children are also more likely to receive treatment for such conditions ( when they are present ) as injury asthma and acute earache. They are less likely to be hospitalized for conditions that appropriate outpatient care could have prevented and they receive less intensive hospital services when admitted to the hospital Since the Congress and the Administration have substantially expanded children 's access to health insurance through Medicaid the primary government program offering health insurance to lowincome children. Before Medicaid was mainly restricted to children in very low income single-parent families. Since then a series of legislative initiatives have extended Medicaid to much broader groups of children. By all pregnant women and all children under age who had family incomes below percent of the poverty line and all children age and younger with family incomes below percent of the poverty line were eligible for Medicaid Coverage will continue to be phased in for all children born after September until poor children of all ages are covered. In addition many States have expanded children 's eligibility for Medicaid beyond these federally required levels The net result of these expansions is that a much larger share of the child population are now enrolled in Medicaid. Estimates from the Current Population Survey suggest that the proportion of children who are enrolled in Medicaid increased from percent in to percent in ( Table ) For children under age the increase in Medicaid coverage was even larger and by percent of all children under age were covered by Medicaid TABLE Children with Health Insurance by Age of Child and Type of Coverage [ Percent ] Medicaid Any insurance Private insurance Age of child Current Population Survey : Under Under AH children Health Interview Survey : All children Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Health and Human Services ( National Center for Health Statistics ) At the same time that Medicaid eligibility has increased there has been a reduction in children 's private insurance coverage. This decline is likely to have been driven in part by a general reduction in employer-provided health insurance which has affected both lowand high-income families. It may also have resulted in part from newly eligible families dropping their private insurance coverage in order to enroll in Medicaid Studies have tried to estimate the extent to which the expansion in Medicaid eligibility has crowded out private insurance coverage These studies have produced a wide range of estimates. One study found that at least one person dropped private insurance coverage for every two persons made eligible for Medicaid. Two other studies estimated that anywhere between and percent of new Medicaid coverage displaced existing private coverage Table presents estimates of the change in insurance coverage for children from to from two large household-based surveys the March Current Population Survey and the Health Interview Survey. Both surveys suggest that the percentage of children under age with health insurance from any source remained constant from to These surveys provide a somewhat different picture however of the change in total insurance coverage for young children. Whereas the Health Interview Survey finds a moderate increase in insurance coverage for children under age the Current Population Survey finds no increase for this group. This may result from changes in question content in the Health Interview Survey in It may also reflect differences in the way the two surveys ask about health insurance coverage Even though there have not been substantial increases in the percentage of children with health insurance the recent increase in the percentage of children covered by Medicaid may have important implications for the quality of children 's medical care. On the one hand since Medicaid requires no copayments from the insured covers prescription drugs and in many States covers services such as dental care it may promote greater utilization of medical care than private insurance. On the other hand since provider reimbursement levels tend to be much lower under Medicaid than under other insurance plans fewer providers may be willing to provide care to children with Medicaid coverage than to children with private insurance Although research to date on the impact of the recent Medicaid expansion on children 's utilization of medical care is inconclusive Table suggests that basic medical care services received by lowincome children have increased. The average number of physician visits per year rose by more than percent for poor children in fair or poor health and by more than percent for poor children in excellent or good health from to By contrast during the same period the average annual number of physician visits decreased for children with family incomes above twice the poverty level TABLE Average Number of Physician Contacts in Last Year for Children Under by Family Income [ Number of contacts ] Fair or poor health Good or excellent health Family income Below poverty fine Poverty line to twice poverty line Above twice poverty line Note. tacome is before-tax cash income Source : Department of Health and Human Services ( National Center for Hearth Statistics ) This evidence is also consistent with data pointing to an increase in the share of pregnant women and children receiving at least a minimal level of primary care. The percentage of children under age who did not see a doctor during the previous year fell from percent in to percent in while the comparable percentage of children aged decreased from percent to percent ( Chart ) In addition the percentage of pregnant women who initiated care in the first trimester of pregnancy increased to a record high of percent in from percent in Chart Children Without Physician Visit Within Past Year Fewer children went without regular doctor visits in the mid-1990s than a decade before Percent Ages \ Under years of age \ i Source : Department of Health and Human Services i RECENT INITIATIVES TO EXPAND CHILDREN 'S ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE Despite recent efforts to expand children 's access to health insurance a large share of children remain uninsured. Estimates from the Current Population Survey suggest that percent of all children did not have health insurance in Table presents estimates from the Current Population Survey on the characteristics of these children Roughly percent are potentially eligible for Medicaid because they TABLE Uninsured Children by Family Income Percent of all uninsured children Family income and age of child Below poverty line Under Between and percent of poverty line Between and percent of poverty line Above twice poverty line Note. Income is before-tax cash income Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) are under age and have family incomes below the poverty level. An additional percent either are poor children aged and over or have family incomes between percent and percent of the poverty level. Their family incomes are low enough so that the cost of health insurance may pose a significant barrier but probably not low enough to guarantee them eligibility for Medicaid This Administration has developed a two-pronged effort to continue progress in increasing insurance coverage for low-income children The first component is to extend insurance coverage to more lowincome children through the new Children 's Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) This program offers $ billion in new Federal funding to States over the next years to expand health insurance programs for uninsured low-income children. States have the option of using the funding to expand children 's health insurance coverage through Medicaid separate State programs or a combination of the two. In general States must use their allocation to cover children in families below twice the poverty level or within percent of the State 's current Medicaid income limits for children if the State already covers children at or near twice the poverty level. States must contribute some of their own funds to the program in order to receive these Federal funds and they must maintain Medicaid eligibility standards at least equal to those in effect in June In addition the President will make enrolling eligible uninsured children in both Medicaid and CHIP a priority. In partnership with the States health care providers and business and community groups the Administration will identify and encourage successful outreach campaigns to enroll up to million uninsured children. To facilitate this effort the proposed budget for fiscal includes an option for States to determine presumptive eligibility for Medicaid among children at sites such as schools and day care centers. It will also allow States to receive Federal funding for outreach activities at a 90-percent matching rate from a fixed pool of funds. These legislative proposals will be complemented by administrative actions to simplify enrollment of uninsured children CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION CHILD CARE Over the past two decades the adequacy and affordability of day care have become increasingly salient issues as a growing proportion of mothers with young children have entered the work force. Whereas percent of married mothers with one or more children under age were working in by that figure had risen to percent This increase in employment of women with young children has translated into a substantial increase in nonparental child care Between and the number of children under in nonparental child care whose mother was working more than doubled. By percent of young children with employed mothers had their primary day care arrangement in a day care center or a family day care home and only percent were cared for by a nonrelative in the child 's home The affordability of child care is an especially critical issue for lowincome working families. Although Federal programs subsidize day care costs for low-income families a large share of these families do not have access to subsidized care. Approximately million lowincome children under received federally subsidized care in fiscal This compares with the approximately million children under with employed mothers and family incomes below percent of the poverty level For families without access to subsidies the cost of child care can represent a substantial financial burden. In child care expenditures represented percent of annual income for those families with annual incomes below $ with employed mothers and preschool children in paid child care. Comparable families with annual incomes above $ spent only percent of their income on child care The quality of child care is also a critical issue. Two recent studies of regulated child care providers offer reason for concern. One study found that percent of child care centers surveyed provided mediocre or poor care when judged from the perspective of child development and percent were of such poor quality that the children 's health and safety needs were only partly met. The second study of family day care homes found that percent were of only adequate quality or less The President 's fiscal budget includes a dramatic increase in Federal investments in child care to increase its affordability and quality. Key initiatives would : Expand child care subsidies. The proposed budget builds on the increases in child care subsidies legislated in by expanding funding for the Child Care and Development Block Grant Program by $ billion over years. These new funds combined with funds provided in welfare reform would allow States to provide child care subsidies to more than million low-income children by more than double the number of children served in fiscal Increase tax credits for child care expenses. The proposed budget would increase tax subsidies for working parents who pay for child care expenditures by expanding the child and dependent care tax credit. The President 's proposal would offer more help to million families with annual incomes below $ providing nearly $ billion in aid over the next years. The President 's proposal also includes a new tax credit for private employers that offer child care services for their employees Expand after-school care for school-age children. The President 's proposed budget includes $ million in new funding over years to dramatically expand the 21st Century Community Learning Program. This program provides funding to school-community partnerships to establish or expand before- and after-school programs for school-age children. The program will serve up to half a million children each year Improve early learning and child care quality. The President 's proposed Early Learning Fund would provide $ billion over years in challenge grants to communities for programs that improve early learning and the quality and safety of child care for young children The " President 's proposed budget also includes funding for scholarships for up to child care providers per year and for improved enforcement of State health and safety standards EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Early childhood education programs can play a critical role in preparing children aged for entry into school and can have an important effect on children 's short-run and long-run development Research has found that children who participate in early childhood education programs show large short-run gains in IQ which persist until entry into kindergarten. Research has also linked early childhood education to a number of longer term outcomes such as grade retention and placement in special education programs. Studies of a smaller number of programs have also shown early childhood education to be associated with increases in high school graduation rates and post-high school monthly earnings and with a lower probability of teen pregnancy One of the principal Federal programs supporting early childhood education for disadvantaged children is the Head Start program. The major focus of Head Start is support for enriched preschool programs and development services for children aged Federal guidelines require that percent of all children served be from families with incomes below the poverty line. Head Start offers disadvantaged children and their parents a range of services that focus on education social and emotional development and health and nutrition. With the establishment of the Early Head Start program in for which disadvantaged children under age are eligible the range of Head Start services was extended to younger children as well A recent nationwide study found that participation in Head Start was associated with increased performance on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test and a reduction in grade repetition for white and Hispanic children although it did not find similar gains for black children. The study also found that both white and black children who participated in Head Start were more likely to be immunized against measles than nonparticipating children from the same family The President 's proposed budget includes $ billion in additional funding over years to help reach the goal of expanding participation in Head Start to million children in from in fiscal This funding would also allow a doubling of participation in Early Head Start to children by ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION One of our society 's most important investments in children is elementary and secondary education. Elementary and secondary schools play a critical role in preparing children for college and for entry into the labor market. Research has shown that increases in educational attainment are associated with increases in labor market earnings : each year invested in elementary or secondary education is estimated to increase annual earnings by to percent. Investments in elementary and secondary education can also achieve other important social goals such as the development of an informed electorate Measures of Student Performance One of the key tools used in assessing the performance of our elementary and secondary school students is the National Assessment of Educational Progress ( NAEP ) The NAEP has two parts : the longterm trends assessment which has repeated the same set of questions since the early 1970s to provide a consistent record of progress over time and the main assessment a more recent set of tests designed to reflect current testing methodology and educational content. The main assessment also groups students into three levels of achievement based upon collective judgments about what students should know and be able to do in each subject area Evidence from the NAEP long-term assessment suggests that achievement in science mathematics and reading has improved since the late 1970s. Charts and show average NAEP long-term Chart NAEP Long-Term Trend Assessment : Science and Mathematics Scores Science and mathematics achievement scores have improved modestly since the mid-1970s for white black and Hispanic 13-year-olds Score SCIENCE Hispanic V Black \ i i i Score White MATHEMATICS Hispanic \ Black o ' Source : Department of Education ( National Center for Education Statistics ) assessment scores for 13-year-old white black and Hispanic students in these subjects. Chart reveals increases in mathematics and science scores since the late 1970s which have been larger for black and Hispanic than for white children. Improvement in reading scores has been somewhat less dramatic overall ( Chart ) but both white and black children have recorded measurable improvement since Despite these recent gains significant challenges remain for the Nation 's educational system. Evidence from the main NAEP assessments suggests that many students do not achieve basic competency in mathematics science or reading. The most recent main assessments found that percent of eighth-grade children performed below the basic level in mathematics as did percent in science and percent in reading. In addition U.S. students do not perform well in comparison with students in other countries. According to the Third International Mathematics and Science Study a study of half a million children in countries U.S. eighth-graders had average mathematics scores that were below those of other countries Although U.S. eighth-graders performed better in science they were still outperformed by students in nine other countries A second challenge facing the Nation 's educational system is the substantial variation in the performance of schools across the country. A recent study of first-grade students found that those attending the top quarter of schools with respect to student performance had average scores in both reading and mathematics nearly points Chart NAEP Long-Term Trend Assessment : Reading Scores Reading achievement scores have changed little for white and Hispanic 13-year-olds and improved modestly for black 13-year-olds since Score READING White Hispanic Black Source : Department of Education ( National Center for Education Statistics ) higher than those of students in the bottom quarter. This difference is approximately equal to the average achievement gain of students from the spring of first grade to the spring of second grade. In other words by the end of second grade the average student 's achievement in the bottom-ranked schools will just about equal that of students finishing first grade in the top schools Differences in student performance are evident across States as well. For example in the share of fourth-graders in public schools who scored at or above the basic level in reading ranged across States from a low of percent to a high of percent and in the share of eighth-graders in public schools who attained at least the basic level of proficiency in mathematics ranged across States from a low of percent to a high of percent Impact of School Inputs on School Performance A substantial body of research has investigated the extent to which school quality is related to measurable inputs such as expenditures per pupil pupil-teacher ratios or the level of teacher training. This research has had mixed results. On the one hand most studies that attempt to relate school resources to students ' achievement on standardized tests tend to find only weak evidence that these resources do influence school quality. This may be because most research in this area is based on samples that are not large enough to find a statistically measurable effect. A recent study which combined the results from a large number of other studies found stronger evidence that school expenditures per pupil are positively associated with student achievement On the other hand studies that estimate the relationship between school resources and students ' earnings later in life tend to find much larger effects. A recent study used data from the Census to estimate the relationship between the average level of school resources in the State in which workers were born and their subsequent earnings This study found that workers who had been born ( and probably attended school ) in States with more abundant school resources earned higher rates of return to each additional year of schooling than other workers. A decrease in the pupil-teacher ratio by five students was associated with an increase in the rate of return to each additional year of school of percentage point and a 10-percent increase in teachers ' pay was associated with a 0.1-percentage-point increase. ( The average rate of return for all workers in the sample was to percent. ) This literature also found that there are important dimensions of school and teacher quality that are unrelated to school expenditure patterns. After controlling for student and parent characteristics likely to affect student performance and even after controlling for measurable characteristics of schools and classrooms it is clear that students in particular schools or enrolled in particular teachers ' classes consistently perform better than average. This suggests that certain aspects of teacher or school quality that are not easily measured such as the teacher 's level of enthusiasm or the school 's management style may be critically related to student performance Recent Federal Initiatives in Primary and Secondary Education Recognizing that the quality of primary and secondary education can have an important influence on children 's later economic opportunities the Administration has developed and supported a number of initiatives to improve the quality of America 's schools. In his State of the Union address the President proposed two major new initiatives that would increase the financial resources available to public schools : Smaller classes with qualified teachers in grades The President is proposing that $ billion be devoted over years ( $ billion over years ) to reducing class sizes in public schools in grades to from a nationwide average of pupils to an average of and to helping local school districts hire an additional well-prepared teachers. The initiative will also provide funds to States and local school districts to test new teachers develop more rigorous teacher testing and certification requirements and train teachers in effective reading instruction. This initiative will help ensure that every child receives personal attention learns to read independently and gets a solid foundation for further learning New construction and renovation of school buildings. The President is proposing Federal tax credits to pay interest on nearly $ billion in bonds to build and renovate public schools. This initiative provides more than double the assistance of the Administration 's earlier school construction proposal which covered half the interest on an estimated $ billion in bonds. Half of this new bond authority would be allocated to the school districts with the largest number of low-income children and the other half would be allocated to the States These proposals build on a number of ongoing Administration efforts to improve the quality of primary and secondary education. To increase the educational opportunities of disadvantaged children the Administration has expanded the Title I program which targets resources to children in high-poverty schools. In addition since it is clear that some important differences in the quality of individual teachers and schools are not directly related to the level of a school 's financial resources the Administration has supported initiatives to change the way schools operate to better reward performance and to grant schools more flexibility in meeting measurable performance standards. These are the key emphases of the Goals and the Charter Schools programs. Finally the Administration has developed two new initiatives to improve literacy and to increase students ' access to the Internet : Title I ^ -Education for the Disadvantaged. Title I provides funds to raise the achievement of disadvantaged children. In the President proposed and the Congress adopted changes to Title I to focus resources on schools with a high percentage of children from poor families to raise standards of achievement for disadvantaged students and to give schools greater flexibility in helping students meet these standards. The appropriation for Title I grants to local education agencies was increased by about percent from fiscal to fiscal Goals Enacted in the Goals program encourages States to set rigorous academic standards for student performance and to determine whether students are making progress in meeting these goals. It also provides funding to support reform of individual schools and for parental information and resource centers in each State to help parents become more involved in their children 's education Charter Schools. The Federal Charter Schools program supports the efforts of parents teachers and communities to develop innovative public schools that are free from most of the rules and regulations that apply to most public schools and are held accountable for raising student achievement. Since the program 's inception in over charter schools have been established and Federal funding has increased from $ million in fiscal to $ million in fiscal The America Reads Challenge. The proposed America Reads program is a multipronged effort to help States and communities ensure that all children are reading well and independently by the end of the third grade. Key initiatives include recruiting and training volunteer reading tutors and helping families help their children build literacy skills. In addition the Administration has recruited work-study students in universities to help with tutoring initiatives Technology. The Technology Literacy Challenge Fund and the Technology Innovation Grants program are aimed at meeting four goals : to connect all schools to the Internet to provide teachers with professional development in the use of technology to put modern computers in all schools and to provide challenging software that encourages children to learn more. These initiatives should help prepare our children for the 21st century and keep the Nation competitive in a global economy CONCLUSION It is clear that children have shared in the benefits of the economic recovery of the past years. The child poverty rate fell from to and under an extended poverty measure that includes taxes and means-tested food and housing benefits the rate was lower in than in Other measures of well-being such as health status educational achievement food sufficiency and housing quality have also shown improvements during the 1990s. Yet many children remain vulnerable either because they have low family incomes or because they lack access to health insurance or because they are not learning basic mathematics science and reading skills in school. For this reason the Administration will continue to invest in initiatives to improve the well-being of children. Key initiatives for fiscal will focus on increasing access to child care and early childhood education improving the quality of primary and secondary education and increasing access to affordable housing for families with children CHAPTER Economic Inequality Among Racial and Ethnic Groups THIRTY-FOUR YEARS AGO the signing of the Civil Rights Act of set the Nation on a course toward racial equality. As the economy surged income differences narrowed for a full decade. The sharp recessions of the mid-1970s and early 1980s hit black and Hispanic Americans particularly hard however. And in the expansion of the 1980s economic growth was accompanied by sharp increases in overall income inequality. As a result despite the economic growth of this period income differences between black and Hispanic families on the one hand and non-Hispanic white families on the other did not diminish. The recession of the early 1990s brought further economic hardship as the poverty rate climbed to near a 30-year high Since incomes have once again been rising. But the present recovery differs from those of the 1970s and 1980s in one important respect : economic growth has not been accompanied by sharp increases in income inequality. Moreover this recovery has been accompanied by a narrowing of some measures of racial inequality. The median black family income reached a new high and the poverty rate for blacks fell to a new low. After nearly years of stagnation these developments have again raised hope for sustained progress toward economic equality among racial and ethnic groups This chapter reviews statistics on the differences in economic status among racial and ethnic groups whites blacks Hispanics Asians and American Indians and evaluates various explanations for those differences ( Box ) Three themes are developed in this review. First although some narrowing of gaps in economic status among racial and ethnic groups has occurred it has been uneven faster in some periods and for some groups than others and substantial differences persist. The median incomes of non-Hispanic white families and of Asian families are nearly double those of black and Hispanic families The median wealth of non-Hispanic white households is times that of blacks and Hispanics. Poverty rates among Hispanics and blacks are more than triple those of non-Hispanic whites. Unemployment rates for blacks are twice those for whites Second the sources or causes of current differences in economic status across racial and ethnic groups are numerous and complex The economic status of a person a household or a family reflects a mixture of current conditions such as the state of the economy and more permanent characteristics such as educational background occupational experience and family background which have antecedents in constraints faced in childhood and by previous generations. This commingling of short-term and long-term influences poses a challenge for the interpretation of trends in racial inequality For example current progress toward racial equality is due both to the recent effects of the strong economy and to longer term developments such as improvements in educational attainment and reduced discrimination over the past half-century. The complexity of these social and economic processes cautions against a simple explanation of trends in racial and ethnic economic equality A third theme of the chapter is that racial inequality and related policy issues are intertwined with the long-term general increase in economic inequality that extends beyond racial differences Lack of progress toward racial economic equality between the early to mid-1970s and the early 1990s coincided with marked increases in inequality both overall and within racial and ethnic groups data presented in The increase in income inequality has two major implications First since blacks Hispanics and American Indians are disproportionately represented at the bottom of the income distribution they are affected disproportionately by developments that make all those at the bottom worse off relative to the middle or the top. A second and more subtle implication is that inequality within racial and ethnic groups has grown relative to inequality between such groups Growing income inequality within the previously largely impoverished black population is partly a product of black economic progress : by some measures more than half of black families have attained middle-class incomes or higher. Despite persistent gaps in income between blacks and whites the growth of the black middle class combined with widening inequality within the white population and the general slowdown of economic growth in the 1970s and 1980s may have fueled opposition to measures or programs perceived to benefit members of minority groups without regard to individual economic circumstances Box eon/mwe * / % The terms % merieaB Ita&aii * and ^ Mfativa American * &ra & -'speed * mid writing Iix thfe ' chapter ' rathfer that * " Native Amedeaa1 * m ng&t'to awid eoaftsim 'catwecl by the uae in mm Federal ym ^ mm of the term * % fciye Amerteatf * to iitgbide Natiw Hawaiia&s OK October S0 # % tihe O&m of Matogem ^ iit and Bmdgat announced its decision to wvifle fcha jstaAdards fer olasBtfytog ^ Federal data on race and ethnicity. The new standards recognize to mark ' m ^ re tttaii toe raw on th ^ ^ Aiaum Fadfie a tdtel. offiw ethnic toteg ^ ry } * ISia has been dianffd .'jfco % laek & ? Federal itgepde ^ will pr $ dp $ e data on ilswhoi ^ trkoul ; well as tliose who mark more than one aMm Al a ^ beItog ' ! M UM iwrw ^ ' S ^ V rj ^ /'ft&Baa ^ ^ ^ ./fi ^ ^ ^ W,j ^ l ^ lkH0 ^ ttart ^ fbr ^ Ml' ' The chapter begins with a brief description of recent and projected changes in the racial and ethnic composition of the population. The most prominent of these changes are the increase in the proportion of the population that is Asian or Hispanic and the decrease in the proportion that is non-Hispanic white. The chapter then provides a detailed description of differences among racial and ethnic groups in traditional indicators of economic status : family income poverty and wealth. The next two sections of the chapter review the evidence and the economic literature in two arenas critical to the determination of economic status : education and the labor market. The chapter ends with a review of evidence of contemporary racial discrimination Although it is difficult to quantify the precise contribution of contemporary acts of discrimination to the wide economic disparities across racial and ethnic groups there is substantial evidence that such discrimination persists in many areas of the economy. Such evidence highlights the need for racial reconciliation as promoted in the President 's Initiative on Race as well as the President 's proposals to strengthen enforcement of the civil rights laws ( Box ) POPULATION COMPOSITION Since the percentage of the population that is non-Hispanic and white has fallen substantially ; the percentages that are Hispanic American Indian and Asian ( including Pacific Islanders ) have risen rapidly and the percentage that is black has risen slowly ( Table ) The large increases in the Hispanic and Asian populations are largely due to immigration and reflect changes in immigration laws especially the Immigration Act which raised the ceiling on admissions and ended the system of national origin quotas that had restricted immigration from the developing worldi The Immigration Reform and Control Act of which legalized a large number of immigrants also contributed to these changes. Under the assumption that these trends will continue the non-Hispanic white population currently the majority is projected to fall to about half of the total population in the middle of the next century. ( These projections assume there will be no change in rates of intermarriage although these rates have been increasing. ) These national population changes mask differences across and within regions. The geographic distribution of racial and ethnic groups is important both because it influences the potential for social and economic interaction among them and because it affects their economic fortunes. For example over this century employment has shifted from rural to urban areas and within urban areas from the central cities to the suburbs Hispanics and American Indians are heavily concentrated in the West and to some extent the South. Asians are concentrated in the West. Within the South Hispanics are concentrated in Florida Texas Box The President 's Initiative on Race OtoJime 14,188T fi * e Bre&ideiit Ram The P&esidte&t iwMoii& for all * responsibility from all and one cc ^ mm ^ iiiity ^ of -alt American Bsce relations ramains an that too often <Mmitei ' otir NatioiL The Presidettfte ^ Moi * fe : to haw diverse demoemfe * ic <x ) mmiiMty In wMeh all Americans tw | ) ect and eyaa ^ eleferate 'their diffimosces wMe jembmdtag tiba ' iham 1b readb &is goal'the FtesMaat : b ^ latmcfeed a effort to deal oparij and honestly with oar effort indhides 0todyf-diak ^ ii % and action',to tog dbatienga of how to live antd work mom prodtietiwly togetfaer n witti the he " Vice Fresidmi-aimo-ypcad on Jfannaiy Lntiher King fo Day ' at the tat Atlanta ^ a p&ekage of new d ? fl rights enfo- ^ TOBiit m ~ S ; on : the ability of tfaeTcderaTsiiri fight * a ^ fietes'to ' ^ P ^ UlStti ^ OH law * * ! * 1& ^ djDG ^ Oti ^ t ^ t't ^ Oll $ f ^ lKJEl m ^ PEN ^ fe1 " m aonr as for ^ mpliapfm re ^ ri ^ ^ s and fetofeal assMitti ^ knd ^ offeiB ^ altematIy0i to Mti ^ attoi ! by feo ^ tag ^ paimoii of alfemafee dispute resolution mechanisms. Hie plan would set performance tto would piwida for better eoordmatioxi a ^ ioss Federal offices $ he AdmiBfetratloB % budget prop< ^ i omtaftas ^ 8ft2 ^ mlMoii for civfl ^ hts eirfoK ^ i ^ ent and offio0 h ^ aa in. eroa ^ of $ million ^ or mote tha ^ Ei peroeiat ^ oror fim&ig. * TABLE Racial and Ethnic Composition of the U.S. Population [ Percent of population ] Year American Indian Asian1 Black Hispanic Non-Hispanic white ( estimated ) ( projected ) by region2 : Northeast Midwest South West Includes Pacific Islanders Detail may not add to percent because data for the category " other " are not shown Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Washington D.C. And despite massive outmigration over much of the 20th century the majority of blacks continue to live in the South. In fact net black migration from the South to the North ended some time in the 1960s There are also differences within regions in the racial and ethnic distribution of populations. In Hispanics Asians and blacks were much more likely than whites or American Indians to live in the central cities of metropolitan areas. Hispanics Asians and whites were much more likely than blacks or American Indians to live in the parts of metropolitan areas outside the central city. Nearly half of American Indians lived in rural areas ; percent lived on reservations or other American Indian and Alaska Native areas ECONOMIC STATUS FAMILY INCOME Annual income is the most widely accepted indicator of current economic status. This section reports incomes for families where a family is defined as two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption who reside together. In the median income of Asian families was about $ the highest among the groups considered in this chapter. Asians are followed closely by non-Hispanic whites ( $ ) and with a $ gap by blacks ( $ ) and Hispanics ( $ ; Chart ) Because of the smaller size of the American Indian population reliable national data on their incomes are not available for every year. However according to the most recent data ( from the Census ) American Indians had the lowest median family income ( and the highest poverty rate ) of the five racial and ethnic groups. With few exceptions these rankings have been stable over the past years Black and non-Hispanic white real median family incomes are somewhat higher than they were years ago and Hispanic incomes are somewhat lower. Since when data for Hispanics first became available on an annual basis real median family income has increased percent among non-Hispanic whites and percent among blacks but has fallen percent among Hispanics As a result of faster income growth for non-Hispanic whites the Hispanic median family income has dropped sharply relative to nonHispanic white income over the past years and the relative incomes of blacks has also dropped somewhat over the same period However the Hispanic population has grown tremendously over this period primarily because of immigration. The relative decline in the Hispanic median income reflects at least in part compositional changes in the Hispanic population resulting from the immigration of persons with relatively little education. The median incomes of both Chart Median Family Income Family income of non-Hispanic whites and Asians has been well above that of blacks and Hispanics Thousands of dollars Non-Hispanic white .>0 Note : Prior to data for whites include Hispanic whites and data for blacks include Hispanic blacks Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) black and Hispanic families are about percent of the non-Hispanic white median lower than in Because these ratios vary by a fair amount from year to year it is difficult to identify turning points precisely. But it is clear that between the early to mid-1970s and the early 1990s black and Hispanic family incomes declined relative to non-Hispanic white family incomes. Since however black family incomes have increased faster than those of non-Hispanic white families Inequality Within Groups and the Growth of the Middle Class Although a useful summary measure median family income is an incomplete indicator of the economic status of entire groups. For example trends in median income do not reveal the dramatic increases in overall income inequality between the early 1970s and the early 1990s nor do they speak to inequality within groups Consideration of other indicators of economic status may alter conclusions about the nature of economic inequality among racial and ethnic groups. For example despite their higher median family income the poverty rate for Asians exceeds the rate for nonHispanic whites by nearly percentage points indicating that this population is economically heterogeneous Definitions of " middle class " are necessarily arbitrary. By one indicator household income between two and five times the poverty line a large middle class emerged among both blacks and whites between and ( Charts and ) The poverty line used here to adjust income corresponds to a 1960s ' standard since the poverty line was developed in the early 1960s and reflects societal standards of economic need at that time Chart Distribution of White Persons by Household Income Between and the white middle class grew. Since the percent of high-income whites has also grown substantially Note : " Very poor " is household income less than percent of the poverty line " poor " is to percent " near poor " is to percent " middle income " is to percent and " high income " is percent or higher Sources : University of Michigan Population Studies Center and Reynolds Farley Russell Sage Foundation Chart Distribution of Black Persons by Household Income Between and the proportion of blacks who were poor or very poor fell and the black middle class grew Note : " Very poor " is household income less than percent of the poverty line " poor " is to percent " near poor " is to percent " middle income " is to percent and " high income " is percent or higher Sources : University of Michigan Population Studies Center and Reynolds Farley Russell Sage Foundation According to this measure the white middle class expanded considerably in each decade from to whereas the expansion of the black middle class was greatest in the 1960s. Some scholars have pointed to figures such as these as evidence of tremendous black economic progress since However that progress has not been steady. Progress clearly slowed in the 1970s and 1980s. Furthermore although Chart suggests that moderate growth of the black middle class continued over the 1970s annual data show little growth between the early to mid-1970s and the early 1990s. In sum a substantial economic expansion of the black middle class between the 1940s and the early 1970s was followed by to years of stagnation between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s with perhaps a resumption of growth in the mid-1990s Chart Gini Index for Family Income Overall and within-group inequality grew steadily from the early 1970s to the early 1990s Inequality has been consistently higher for blacks than for whites or Hispanics Gini index Break in series ^ Black White Note : The Gini index is a measure of inequality ranging from zero to one where zero indicates perfect equality Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Since the early 1970s income inequality has increased not only overall but also within racial groups ( Chart ) However only among Hispanics has increased inequality taken the form of growth in the proportions of both upper income and poor families at the expense of the middle. Although both whites and Hispanics experienced declines in the proportion of middle-income families among whites there was rapid growth in the proportion at the top and a small decline in the proportion at the bottom. The proportion of black families in the middle- and upper income groups combined has changed little since the mid-1970s but by some measures there has been movement of families from the middle of the income distribution to the top Poverty Gaps in poverty rates between non-Hispanic whites and Asians on the one hand and blacks and Hispanics on the other remain substantial ( Chart ) However the gaps in poverty rates between blacks and whites have decreased since after remaining largely stagnant from the mid-1970s to the early 1990s. In the black poverty rate reached its lowest level ever as did the difference in poverty rates between blacks and whites. The decline in the black poverty rate in the current recovery exceeds slightly the declines recorded in the recoveries of the 1970s and 1980s. The poverty rate for Hispanics fell slightly from to although it is still high exceeding the rate for blacks. The poverty rate for Asians has been flat since Chart Poverty Rates for Persons Poverty rates fell over the 1960s and early 1970s and since then differences across groups have been relatively stable Percent Black Non-Hispanic white i i i i Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Child Poverty Differences across racial and ethnic groups in the prevalence of child poverty not only indicate inequality in the current well-being of children but also represent differences in economic opportunity that contribute to future inequality among adults and in subsequent generations. Although child poverty is associated with health developmental and educational disadvantages the importance of low family income per se as compared with parental education family structure or other characteristics associated with poverty remains in dispute ( see Chapter ) Since child poverty rates have generally fallen but they remain too high and differences in child poverty rates across racial and ethnic groups are stark. Between and the poverty rate for white children fell percentage points to percent. The rate for black children fell even more from percent to percent the lowest rate in more than years but still very high. The rate for Hispanic children fell marginally after and stood at percent in higher than the rate for black children. The poverty rate for Asian children rose percentage points to percent between and HOUSEHOLD WEALTH Household wealth the total value of a household 's material and financial assets minus its liabilities contributes to economic well-being independently of income. Greater wealth allows a household to maintain its standard of living when income falls because of job loss family changes such as divorce or widowhood or retirement. Financial wealth may also be particularly important in the presence of borrowing constraints. For example evidence that the receipt of an inheritance increases entry into self-employment suggests that a lack of personal financial capital limits small business ownership Wealth has been measured less frequently than income in government statistics. There are two major Federal sources of data on household wealth for the population : the Survey of Income and Program Participation ( SIPP ) and the Survey of Consumer Finances ( SCF ) Figures are not comparable across the two surveys for many reasons : for example the SCF and the SIPP employ different definitions of " family " and " household. " Measures of wealth show even greater disparities across racial and ethnic groups than do measures of income. For example according to data from the SIPP the median net worth of white households ( $ ) was over times that of black or Hispanic households ( $ and $ in dollars respectively ) Figures from the SCF are $ for non-Hispanic whites and $ for all other groups combined ( in dollars ) Very substantial wealth gaps between whites on the one hand and blacks and Hispanics on the other are found even among families with similar incomes Differences in wealth result primarily from differences in lifetime labor market compensation differences in saving rates and the return on those savings ( including appreciation of the value of assets ) and differences in inheritances or other transfers from relatives Holdings among non-Hispanic whites in all major categories of wealth exceed those of blacks and Hispanics. Three important components of wealth for families are housing equity holdings of stocks and mutual funds and private pension wealth Home Equity The most important asset for most households is the equity in their home. Differences in home equity arise from differences in homeownership rates in home values and among homes of a given value in the level of equity accumulated. Since there have been increases in homeownership among all groups but the homeownership rate among non-Hispanic whites is more than percent higher than that of blacks or Hispanics Some evidence suggests that gaps among racial groups in home values although large are narrowing. For example between and the median value of the primary residence was unchanged at about $ for non-Hispanic whites but increased from $ to $ for all other groups combined. In the median equity among homeowners was about $ for whites ( in dollars ) $ for blacks and $ for Hispanics. These values were $ to $ higher in than in ( in dollars ) This Administration 's efforts may have contributed to recent increases in homeownership and home values among blacks and Hispanics. The Administration has strengthened regulations under the Community Reinvestment Act and has stepped up enforcement of fair lending laws. Data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act show that between and conventional home mortgage lending to blacks has increased percent ; such lending to Hispanics has increased percent. These increases are much larger than the percentage increase in conventional home mortgage lending overall in this period Discrimination in Mortgage Lending There are a variety of possible explanations for differences in homeownership rates among racial and ethnic groups. Research has documented substantially higher denial rates in applications for home mortgages among blacks and Hispanics than among whites. An analysis of lending practices in Boston found that applications from blacks and Hispanics were rejected about percent of the time compared with percent for whites. However applications from whites blacks and Hispanics differed along many economic dimensions including income loan-to-value ratios and the presence of private mortgage insurance as well as other characteristics of properties and applicants which together explained about two-thirds of the difference in rejection rates. Still about one-third of the gap remained unexplained by these factors The remaining gap has three possible explanations. The first is that some relevant economic characteristics correlated with race are observed by the lender but not by the analyst and average differences in those characteristics across racial and ethnic groups account for the higher denial rate among minorities. However the Boston study was careful to incorporate extensive controls including all factors that lenders underwriters and others reported to be important in making lending decisions. The second explanation is that the higher denial rate reflects lenders ' expectations of higher default rates among minorities with similar qualifications and other characteristics. This practice rejecting applications on the basis of group characteristics is known as statistical discrimination and is illegal The third possible explanation " noneconomic " or prejudice-based discrimination in which lenders discriminate against minorities and lower their profits as a result is also illegal The authors of the Boston study argue that no clear-cut evidence exists of differences by race in default rates after adjusting for other characteristics of applicants and properties such as those measured in the study. However this argument and the study itself have been challenged in subsequent studies which claim to find evidence of higher default rates among minorities. Other researchers have argued in response that differences in default rates between minorities and whites may not be a good indication of their creditworthiness because for example whites might be treated more favorably in foreclosure proceedings. As discussed in the concluding section of this chapter audit studies provide additional evidence of discrimination in home mortgage lending although continued research is needed on the extent and nature of discrimination in this area Holdings of Major Financial Assets Whites have higher rates of ownership of every kind of major financial asset than do blacks or Hispanics and among those holding each kind of asset holdings by whites are much more valuable. This is not surprising given whites7 greater median wealth. But some gaps are particularly striking. For example as of nearly percent of black households owned no stocks or mutual funds and percent reported owning no private pension wealth ( the corresponding figure for whites is about percent in each category ) Differences in stock ownership in are particularly important because between and the value of common stock appreciated enormously : for example the Standard and Poor 's index roughly doubled in value Another striking difference is in transaction accounts ( such as checking accounts ) which are held by the vast majority ( percent ) of non-Hispanic white families but by only percent of all other racial and ethnic groups combined THE ROLE OF FAMILY STRUCTURE IN INCOME AND POVERTY Increases in family income and decreases in poverty rates for both blacks and whites were rapid in the postwar period especially in the 1960s. Blacks also made progress relative to whites in the 1960s. But black family income was flat from the early to mid-1970s to the early 1990s and the ratio of black to white family income generally fell over this period. For example since the ratio of black to white average income for all families has fallen slightly from to However black-white ratios of income within family types have increased from to among married-couple families and from to among female-headed families. ( The overall ratio of income is lower than the ratios among these subgroups because a larger proportion of black families are female headed a group with much lower average income than other family types. ) During this period the shift toward female-headed families was faster for blacks than for whites ( Chart ) Some observers have suggested that these trends particularly the rise of female-headed families may largely explain the persistence of differences in family income and poverty rates among racial and ethnic groups. However an adjustment for changes in family structure since suggests that such changes explain only about one-fifth of the income and poverty gaps between blacks and whites observed today. Moreover this adjustment may overstate perhaps greatly the adverse effects of family structure on income if those with lower income or lower expected income are less likely to marry or to stay married Chart Family Structure Since all groups have experienced increases in the proportion of families headed by single women. The rise has been most pronounced for black families Married couple Q Male-headed no spouse EH Female-headed no spouse Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) The adjustment amounts to taking a weighted average in which the average income or poverty rate specific to a racial group and family type in is weighted by the corresponding percentage of families of that racial group and family type in The adjustment shows that if family structure for blacks and whites had not changed since in the black-white ratio of family income would have been rather than and the ratio of poverty rates would have been rather than Thus these ratios indicate that roughly onefifth of both the income gap and the poverty gap in is explained by changes in family structure after These are surprisingly modest effects when one considers that since the proportion of female-headed families increased from percent to percent among black families and from percent to percent among white families. ( Results are similar if the difference in family incomes rather than their ratio is used to measure the income gap between blacks and whites ; differences in poverty rates rather than ratios suggest a somewhat larger effect of family structure changes since on the poverty gap. Also similar adjustments demonstrate that family structure can account for only a small portion of the difference in income and poverty between Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites. ) If the dramatic changes in family structure since the 1960s account for only a modest portion of current income gaps among whites blacks and Hispanics what accounts for the remainder ? Since the labor market is the most important source of family income a later section of this chapter investigates gaps among racial and ethnic groups in labor market outcomes such as earnings and employment However such outcomes are linked to the skills that workers bring to the labor market many of which are developed prior to labor market entry. The next section therefore discusses differences in education across racial and ethnic groups EDUCATION Education is one of the most powerful predictors of economic status Many dimensions of education are important including the quality of schooling the quantity of schooling ( often called " attainment " for example the number of years completed ) and student achievement or learning. The link between educational attainment and earnings has been well established in part because data on attainment have been collected in the Census and in labor market surveys over a number of years. There is less agreement on the measurement and economic importance of other dimensions of education. Furthermore the economic importance of a college education has increased dramatically over the past years as the relative demand for highly educated workers has risen sharply. The focus of this section is on secondary and postsecondary educational attainment. Of course differences in later educational attainment among racial and ethnic groups can result from effects of discrimination and social and economic disad- vantages experienced in early childhood or in elementary education ( Chapter discusses early childhood and elementary education. ) DIFFERENCES AND TRENDS IN EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT Differences Substantial gaps in educational attainment persist among racial and ethnic groups. The most recent year for which comparable national data are available for all groups discussed in this chapter is Asians had the highest average attainment : in percent of Asians years and older had completed or more years of college compared with percent of whites percent of blacks and about percent of Hispanics and American Indians. About percent of whites and Asians had at least completed high school versus twothirds of American Indians and blacks and about half of Hispanics For Hispanics attainment also varies considerably between immigrants and the native-born. For example Hispanic immigrants have much lower rates of high school completion than native-born Hispanics. Asian immigrants on the other hand have educational attainment similar to that of their native-born counterparts Trends To provide an indication of recent changes in educational attainment across racial and ethnic groups this section examines attainment for younger persons ( those aged years ) High school. High school completion rates have increased steadily over the 20th century. As educational attainment has increased gaps in high school completion among racial and ethnic groups have generally narrowed at least among the native-born. In the gap between blacks and whites in high school completion rates was percentage points. This gap has narrowed considerably but a 7-percentage-point difference remains between blacks and non-Hispanic whites ( Chart ) And although their high school completion rate has risen since the early 1970s Hispanics lag far behind and have not gained ground relative to non-Hispanic whites. In interpreting these trends however it is important to recall that the composition of the Hispanic population has changed rapidly. The Hispanic population has roughly doubled in size between and and the fraction that is foreign-born has been growing. In fact the slow progress in high school attainment among Hispanics is in large part explained by the increasing representation of immigrants with less education. For example between and the proportion of to 21-year-old dropouts ( those who were neither enrolled in nor had completed high school ) fell from percent to percent among native-born Hispanics but remained at percent for foreign-born Hispanics Still as of a substantial gap in high school completion rates remained between native-born Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites Postsecondary education. Educational attainment beyond high school has increased dramatically for blacks Hispanics and whites over the past years although Hispanics have shown little increase in the 1980s and 1990s. The percentage of non-Hispanic whites with a bachelor 's degree or higher is more than twice that of their black and Hispanic counterparts. High school completion rates college enrollment rates among high school graduates and college completion rates among college enrollees combine to determine rates of college completion. Some of the gaps in college completion rates reflect differences in high school completion rates. For example the gap between blacks and Hispanics in completing or more years of college is explained almost entirely by lower high school completion rates among Hispanics. But even among those who have completed high school non-Hispanic whites are more likely to enter and to complete college than blacks or Hispanics. Again Hispanics ' low college attainment rates appear to be due partly to low rates among immigrants : between and the proportion of to 24-year-olds enrolled in college increased from percent to percent among native-born Hispanics but remained at about percent for foreignborn Hispanics Among women aged college completion gaps widened between whites on the one hand and blacks and Hispanics on the other over the 1980s. In fact except among white women there was Chart High School Completion Rates for to 29-Year-Olds High school completion rates have risen since the late 1960s and blacks are closing the gap with whites. The completion rate for Hispanics remains low Non-Hispanic white >0 Note : Prior to data for whites include Hispanic whites and data for blacks include Hispanic blacks Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Education ( National Center for Education Statistics ) relatively little increase in college completion rates over the 1980s for men or women of these ages ( Charts and ) However in the 1990s rates of college completion among black men and women began to pick up reflecting an increase in college enrollment rates of black high school graduates in the mid-1980s. College completion also increased among white men in the early 1990s EXPLAINING EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT GAPS High school completion rates increased sharply in the postwar period. Compared with the rather steady increase in high school completion college attendance and completion have fluctuated especially for males although they have increased steadily since the mid-1980s. Increases in college attainment have been attributed to two developments. First since the late 1970s growth in demand for highly educated workers has raised the relative wages of college graduates. Second because educational attainment has generally increased over time the parents of recent high school graduates tend to be better educated than the parents of high school graduates some years ago. This is important because parents ' and children 's education levels are highly correlated. Federal financial aid has also expanded dramatically in the 1990s doubling in real terms since This expansion is expected to increase college enrollment and attainment among low-income students but it is too early to assess the magnitude of this effect Levels Most studies in the economics literature of gaps in college-level educational attainment among racial and ethnic groups have focused on college entry. Parental education and family income are important determinants of gaps in college entry among racial and ethnic groups. Both factors affect high school completion as well For example one detailed recent study concluded that differences among blacks whites and Hispanics in family background ( primarily parental education and income ) can account for all the gaps in rates of high school completion and college entry among racial and ethnic groups. The study found that among young people with similar family income and parental education rates of college entry appear to be higher among blacks and Hispanics than among whites. The importance of family background and income differences is reduced when achievement test scores are controlled for but the interpretation of this finding is the subject of great controversy. For example low test scores result at least partly from disadvantages relating to family background and may therefore be a mechanism whereby such disadvantages are translated into low educational attainment Chart Women Aged with 4-Year College Degree or Higher The fraction of women with at least a 4-year college degree has increased for non-Hispanic whites blacks and Hispanics but considerable gaps persist Percent Non-Hispanic white \ Notes : Prior to data for whites include Hispanic whites and data for blacks include Hispanic blacks. Data for blacks and Hispanics are 3-year centered averages. Prior to series shows fraction of women completing or more years of college Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Education ( National Center for Education Statistics ) Chart Men Aged with 4-Year College Degree or Higher The fraction of men with a 4-year college degree or higher has tripled for blacks and nearly doubled for whites and Hispanics but considerable gaps persist Percent \ Non-Hispanic white Notes : Prior to data for whites include Hispanic whites and data for blacks include Hispanic blacks. Data for blacks and Hispanics are 3-year centered averages. Prior to series shows fraction of men completing or more years of college Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Department of Education ( National Center for Education Statistics ) Trends More attention has been paid to explaining differences in educational attainment among racial and ethnic groups than to explaining their trends. Large inflows of less educated immigrants have kept the average educational attainment of Hispanics relatively flat. As noted above high school graduation rates have increased for native-born Hispanics but continue to be much lower among immigrants. The narrowing of differences in high school attainment between blacks and whites over the past years can be largely explained by increases relative to whites in black parental educational attainment As high school completion gaps between blacks and whites were decreasing steadily differences in earnings between college and high school graduates of all races were increasing markedly. Naturally attention has turned to explaining differences among racial and ethnic groups in college enrollment and completion. College attendance among high school graduates has increased for all groups. However the enrollment rate among recent graduates began to increase for whites around about years before the rate for blacks began to increase. Therefore the disparity in college enrollment rates widened in the early 1980s and translated into wider differences in college completion among racial and ethnic groups in the late 1980s or early 1990s ( Charts and ) One possible explanation of these differences is the increasing direct costs of college. A recent study found that the schooling decisions of blacks are more sensitive than those of whites with similar incomes to tuition and other direct costs perhaps because of lower wealth among blacks than among whites with similar incomes. It also found that the rise in the direct cost of higher education explains some but no more than one-third of the lower propensity of blacks to enter college in the 1980s. However college tuition and other costs continued to increase in the late 1980s a time when black college enrollment began to increase The study concluded that the positive effects of rising parental education appear to have more than offset the negative effects of rising costs AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION ADMISSIONS The term " affirmative action " encompasses a variety of activities and programs ranging from outreach and recruitment efforts to programs that consider race as a factor in an evaluation process which are intended to increase minority representation in employment education or contracting. Under the law and as reflected in Department of Education guidelines colleges and universities may not establish quotas for admission or set aside a certain number or percentage of admissions slots based on race. However they may consider race or national origin as one factor in making admissions decisions for the purpose of remedying the effects of past discrimination or achieving a diverse student body Affirmative action in admissions has been the subject of recent contention. The Board of Regents of the University of California voted in to prohibit universities within its system from considering race in admissions. The California Civil Rights Initiative known as Proposition prohibits the State from utilizing race- or genderbased affirmative action programs in State employment public contracting and education. In Texas et al. v. Hopwood the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held that the admissions procedure used by the University of Texas Law School in was unconstitutional However this Administration strongly supports affirmative action in higher education and the practice remains widespread Such programs are intended to serve a variety of societal purposes including to remedy past or present discrimination to secure the educational benefits of a diverse campus community to compensate for educational or other disadvantages faced by promising applicants to prepare students for an increasingly diverse society and to train students to serve the needs of diverse communities. But what are the more narrow economic effects of affirmative action in higher education admissions ? A recent study found that black and Hispanic students are more likely to be admitted to " elite " institutions of higher education ( that is those with average Scholastic Aptitude Test or SAT scores in the top percent of 4-year institutions ) than non-Hispanic white or Asian students with similar grade point averages ( GPAs ) and test scores. Of course in assessing student merit and making admissions decisions universities consider many criteria such as letters of recommendation extracurricular activities region of residence and adverse personal circumstances. The study also found no evidence of differences by race after controlling for test scores and grades in admissions to the less elite institutions where percent of college students are educated. Nonetheless admission to elite institutions is of interest because of the strong link between college selectivity and later earnings Critics of affirmative action programs in higher education admissions argue that some of the intended beneficiaries may actually be harmed by such policies. ( The same criticism could also be made of programs for children of alumni or faculty. ) They contend that affirmative action programs impede the academic performance of minority students and increase their college dropout rates by encouraging them to enter colleges for which they may not be well prepared However the study discussed above found little evidence of economic harm to these students as measured by graduation rates and earnings. The key question this criticism raises is whether students admitted to elite institutions because of affirmative action would have fared better had they instead attended less selective institutions. In fact attending an elite institution is associated with a lower college GPA but a higher graduation rate and higher earnings for all students after controlling for SAT scores and high school GPA. The relationship between college selectivity and both college completion and earnings is similar for blacks and Hispanics and others The higher graduation rate among similar students attending more elite institutions raises questions about which practices at elite institutions increase graduation rates. Possibilities range from more engaging professors or classes to better support services. It is also possible that students expect a higher economic return to additional investment in education at an elite college and are therefore more highly motivated to obtain a degree The authors of the study argue that the number of applicants denied admission because of affirmative action programs is small But many other students who are rejected may erroneously conclude that they would have been admitted in the absence of such programs As a result affirmative action in admissions may generate resentment far in excess of its actual aggregate effects. Nonetheless individuals denied admission as a result of these policies may bear some costs even if those individuals are difficult to identify and are few in number As an alternative to race-conscious admissions policies some have called for " color-blind " policies that might target low parental income or education. Blacks and Hispanics are of course a minority of the population and account for a small minority of the population of youths with high SAT scores. As a result although blacks and Hispanics are much more likely than whites to be poor they make up a relatively small share of the low-income population with the SAT scores or GPA needed to gain admission to elite colleges. Therefore targeting low-income applicants alone would very likely result in a dramatic reduction in minority representation at elite colleges. Classbased color-blind admissions standards would not yield substantial numbers of blacks and Hispanics at most top-ranked institutions at present. Some commentators have therefore concluded that raceconscious admissions policies are needed to retain a semblance of racial diversity on elite college campuses LABOR MARKETS The largest share of most families ' income is derived from earnings from labor. Changes in labor markets can therefore have considerable effects on economic inequality across racial groups. Differences in labor market outcomes among racial and ethnic groups are intertwined with general developments in labor markets. Among the most important recent developments are technological changes that have increased the demand for highly educated labor growing immigration and international trade declining trade union membership increased participation of women in the labor market and most recently increases in the minimum wage and expansions of the earned income tax credit. ( See Chapter for a discussion of the effects of international trade on labor markets. ) Developments that appear race-neutral may nonetheless affect racial and ethnic groups differently. For example since Hispanics on average have much lower educational attainment than whites and blacks they are more likely to be harmed by falling demand for less educated workers. However lower demand for less skilled workers would not necessarily be expected to increase wage gaps among racial and ethnic groups for workers with similar levels of education In analyzing changes in racial inequality in labor markets it is important to bear in mind the growing economic diversity within racial groups that began to be observed in the mid-1960s. For example the growing income inequality among blacks described above is mirrored in the labor market with college-educated professionals at one extreme and labor force dropouts at the other. Although both groups face substantial barriers in the labor market related to race the nature of these barriers could be quite different. The growing labor market diversity within racial groups cautions against the search for a single explanation for changes over time in differences among racial groups Three periods mark changes in black-white inequality in the labor market since : a period of rapid progress from to the mid1970s ; a period of stagnation or erosion of gains between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s ; and a period of mixed results since the early 1990s. The beginnings and ends of these periods are difficult to determine precisely because focusing on different data series and different subgroups can yield somewhat different results TRENDS IN LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES Unemployment and Employment Gaps The current economic recovery has reduced unemployment substantially for all groups. The overall unemployment rate has been below percent for over years and has been at percent or below since April Improvement in the employment situation overall has been accompanied by a reduction in the difference in the unemployment rate between blacks and Hispanics on the one hand and whites on the other. The proportion of black women employed has risen above that for white women in recent months. However unemployment rates for blacks are more than double those for whites and fluctuate more sharply over the business cycle ( Chart ) Men. In the unemployment rate for black men years and older was percent its lowest annual average since At percent the white male unemployment rate for was also near a 20-year low. Although the ratio of black unemployment to white unemployment is thus more than to as it has been for many years for the past years the difference in rates has been roughly to percentage points smaller than the gaps that prevailed from to Among men aged the labor force participation rate for blacks is about percent about percentage points lower than the rate for whites. These rates have fallen in the past years for both blacks and whites although the decline has been somewhat larger among blacks Chart Unemployment Rates Unemployment rates for blacks and Hispanics are higher and increase more in recessions than unemployment rates for whites Percent Note : Prior to data for blacks include all nonwhites Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Women. Labor market outcomes for women are important for understanding differences in economic well-being among racial groups for two reasons. First women 's earnings have historically made up a larger proportion of two-parent family income among blacks than among whites. Second because of their much higher rate of single parenthood black families rely more heavily on female earnings than do white families. For women aged and above the most striking employment trend is a long-term increase in labor force participation. Participation rates for black women have long exceeded rates for white women but the difference has narrowed considerably and nearly disappeared by the early 1990s. However beginning in participation rates of black women accelerated reaching percent in The rate for white women appears to have reached a plateau at about percent. But because black women also have higher unemployment rates than white women their employment-topopulation ratios are much more similar than are their participation rates. Still the black female employment-to-population ratio sur passed the white ratio in Labor force participation rates for Hispanic women are lower than those for either blacks or whites Gaps ( both ratios and differences ) among racial groups in unemployment rates for women are similar to those for men. The black-white unemployment ratio for women has remained above but the difference has been somewhat smaller in the 1990s than in the 1980s Occupations Like educational attainment occupation is regarded as an indicator of more permanent economic and social status than are wages or income in a single year or month. Workers in different occupations are affected differently by changes in the economy. For example workers in blue-collar occupations are more likely than white-collar workers to be laid off in recessions Over the postwar period black men and women have both experienced tremendous change in the occupations in which they work Some of these changes were experienced by all workers black and white but some are specific to blacks due for example to reduction in the most overt forms of discrimination and to large migration flows out of the rural South Women. In percent of employed black women worked in domestic service occupations more than triple the percentage among all employed women. The proportion of black women employed in domestic service fell to percent by and to percent by Over the same period black ( and white ) women moved in large numbers into other service occupations as well as into clerical and sales jobs. The proportion of black women in managerial and professional occupations increased slowly between and then jumped in the 1960s and 1970s reaching about percent in A major revision of the occupational classification system implemented after makes tracking changes over the entire 1980s difficult. Since the fraction of black women employed in managerial and professional occupations grew steadily but increased less than that of white women. As a result the gap between white and black v/omen in the percentage working in managerial and professional occupations widened by more than percentage points over the past years. Hispanic women are less likely than black or white women to be employed in managerial and professional occupations and more likely to be employed in private household service and in the relatively low skill blue-collar occupations of operators and fabricators Men. In percent of black men worked as farmers or farm laborers ; that share had fallen to only percent in ( The corresponding percentages for all men were percent and percent respectively. ) By employed black men were more likely than other employed men to work in blue-collar occupations ( percent compared with percent ) Black men were therefore concentrated in those occupations that were the most affected by the severe cyclical downturns of the 1970s and early 1980s and at least until recently by the long-term decline in manufacturing employment. By only about percent of employed black men and percent of all employed men worked in blue-collar jobs In the period between and the percentages of black men and black women who worked in professional and managerial occupations were roughly equal and both increased by about percentage points. But since black men have not moved into professional and managerial occupations as rapidly as black or white women. In the share of black men working in managerial and professional occupations stood percentage points behind that of black women percentage points behind that of white men and percentage points behind that of white women Hispanic men are the least likely of all the groups considered here to work in managerial and professional occupations. They are far more likely than black or white men to work in farming and related occupations more likely than black men to work in precision production ( " craft " ) occupations and slightly less likely than black men to work in the lower skill blue-collar occupations Earnings Gaps Black-white earnings gaps. By all available measures the wages of blacks increased rapidly relative to those of whites in the 1960s and early 1970s but progress slowed or reversed between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s ( Charts and ) Trends in earnings inequality among racial groups in the 1990s are less clear. Most wage series show little progress in the pay of blacks relative to that of whites. However one wage series median annual earnings for fulltime year-round male workers does show substantial recent progress among black men relative to white men with the blackwhite ratio reaching a new high of about in Firm conclusions about black-white pay gaps for men in the 1990s are therefore difficult to reach. Explanations for the narrowing of the pay gap in the 1960s as well as the widening between the mid-1970s and the early 1990s are discussed below. Researchers have just begun to examine the record of the 1990s Wage growth in the 1960s and early 1970s was faster for black women than for black men both relative to white women ( Chart ) and relative to white men. Between and the gap in median wages between white and black women fell from about to about percentage points. Among younger women the differential disappeared and there is even evidence that young college-educated black women were paid more than comparable white women in the 1970s But the earnings gap increased starting in the mid-1970s and stood at about percentage points in Black and white women have both gained relative to white men Chart Ratios of Median Weekly Earnings of Male Full-Time Workers Since the 1970s black men 's earnings have held roughly constant relative to those of white men while Hispanic men have lost ground Percent of white male earnings i i i i i i i i r Notes : Prior to the series for blacks includes other nonwhites. Beginning in data are for workers aged and over Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Chart Ratios of Median Weekly Earnings of Female Full-Time Workers Black women nearly closed the pay gap with white women by the early 1970s but relative wages of black and Hispanic women have been falling since then Percent of white female earnings Break in series Notes : Prior to the series for blacks includes other nonwhites. Beginning in data are for workers aged and over Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) As noted above whites on average have higher educational attainment than blacks. But sizable pay gaps among racial and ethnic groups remain for workers with similar educational attainment ( Table ) At least until the 1990s these trends in black-white pay gaps were more pronounced for younger workers who tend to bear the brunt of labor market adjustment. For example the pay gap between blacks and whites narrowed most among young college graduates in the 1960s and early 1970s and then widened most among this group after TABLE Ratios of Black and Hispanic to White Median Weekly Earnings H ispanic-white rati Black-white ratio Sex Workers with high school diploma only Workers with bachelor 's degree only All workers Workers with high school diploma only All workers Men Women Workers with bachelor 's degree only Note Data are for full-time workers aged and over Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Earnings gaps for other groups. Less information is available about differences in pay between whites and other minority groups. The pay of Hispanic men and women fell relative to that of whites over the 1970s and 1980s. Much of the deterioration in the pay of Hispanics is linked to educational differences and immigration. For example differences in pay between Hispanics and whites with similar educational attainment are much smaller than the overall differences ( Table ) In fact a recent study reported that between and differences in pay between whites and minorities living in the same metropolitan areas with comparable levels of schooling and working in similar occupations widened by percentage points for blacks and percentage points for American Indians but by less than percentage point for Hispanics and Asians EXPLAINING EARNINGS GAPS Differences in pay among racial and ethnic groups can result from differences in the average quantities of factors related to labor market success such as educational attainment and from differences in the " prices " of such factors that is their value in the labor market Differences among racial and ethnic groups in the prices these factors command have been attributed to labor market discrimination. But differences in the quantities of these factors may also reflect discrimination outside the labor market or even within it. For example if blacks with higher educational attainment are discriminated against in the labor market their returns to investing in education may be artificially reduced. Facing a lower return blacks may invest less in higher education Historically blacks have received less schooling and attended schools with larger class sizes and smaller budgets than those attended by whites. Largely as a result of the Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education the Civil Rights Act of and the decision in Green v. County School Board which required active integration of schools schools became increasingly integrated in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Schooling gains can account for perhaps percent of the gains in black workers ' relative earnings in the 1960s and early 1970s Other factors that explain trends in wage gaps among various racial groups include migration ( especially before the 1960s ) regional and industry demand conditions macroeconomic shocks and government intervention. Government intervention to increase economic opportunities for disadvantaged minorities has taken many forms including education and training programs the enactment and enforcement of civil rights and equal opportunity laws requirements ( under Executive Order ) that Federal contractors engage in affirmative action programs and court-monitored affirmative action programs intended to remedy past practices of discrimination Changes to the Mid-1970s Between and blacks experienced two periods of rapid progress relative to whites in the labor market : the first was during the wartime economy of the 1940s and the second was the period from to Migration from the South was substantial in the 1940s 1950s and into the 1960s : to percent of all blacks and roughly to percent of young black men migrated in each of these decades. Wage gaps between blacks and whites were much larger in the South than in other regions. For example in the black-white gap in wages was about twice as large in the South ( to percent compared with to percent outside the South ) Following passage of the Civil Rights Act of the relative wages of black workers increased sharply more than can be explained by macroeconomic factors such as growth in gross domestic product. The improvement in relative wages was by far the greatest in the South where State fair-employment laws were weakest where institutional discrimination was greatest and where Federal antidiscrimination efforts were focused. Although there was some progress in the relative earnings of blacks before the evidence is overwhelming that progress accelerated substantially in the period from to and that Federal attacks on racial exclusion in the South were critical to this acceleration As noted above gains in years of schooling and school quality explain perhaps percent of the gain in relative wages for blacks in this period. There were large increases in the economic returns to schooling for blacks. In principle these could result from either increased quality of schooling or decreased discrimination in the labor market. However decreased discrimination is the more compelling explanation since returns to education increased even among older cohorts whose education had been completed prior to But part of the improvement in schooling and school quality is also attributable to Federal actions. The Supreme Court ruled in the Brown decision that segregated schools are unconstitutional. Yet despite the Brown decision and provisions of the Civil Rights Act that threatened to cut off Federal aid to segregated schools in the mid1960s black children in the South still overwhelmingly went to segregated schools. The dramatic changes came after the and Supreme Court decisions that required immediate integration Therefore improvements in school quality that resulted from school desegregation do not explain improvements in black wages in the South between and Demand forces seem responsible for much of the improvement in relative wages between and Partly because Federal actions coincided with a strong economy the precise role of Federal action including the associated voluntary compliance has been difficult to establish statistically. However the observation that the most rapid progress came in the South where Federal efforts were concentrated supports the importance of the Federal role. Detailed studies show that blacks moved into industries in the South from which they had previously been excluded. For example after years of neartotal exclusion black employment advanced rapidly in South Carolina 's textile industry from to A recent evaluation of the impact of the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of confirms earlier findings of the importance of Federal equal opportunity law to the labor market progress of blacks The act expanded civil rights coverage of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act to employers with to employees ( previously only larger establishments were covered ) as well as to State and local governments. Blacks employed in the newly covered small establishments in States where small employers were not already covered by State fairemployment practice laws largely in the South were most affected by this legal change. Blacks gained in relative employment earnings and occupational status in small establishments in Southern States after Changes Since the Mid-1970s Men. In the mid-1970s and 1980s wages for less educated workers and for black and Hispanic workers deteriorated. Wage differences between blacks and whites grew fastest in the North Central region where employment and earnings declined more generally. On the demand side the heavy concentration of blacks in central-city manufacturing jobs in the Midwest in the 1970s made them particularly vulnerable to recessions and the decline of manufacturing employment. Ironically then the movement out of the South and into manufacturing employment that had contributed so much to black economic progress in the 1960s and early 1970s also contributed to the deterioration of the late 1970s and 1980s Labor supply responses such as migration and training can help offset the effects of reductions in labor demand. Lower mobility will produce larger wage and employment declines in response to demand shocks. There appears to have been slower adjustment out of declining areas and industries among blacks and less educated workers on average although it is unclear whether this supply adjustment was slower for minorities than for whites with similar educational attainment Perhaps the most important change in the labor market over the past years has been the increase in the demand for more educated workers. But wage inequality has generally increased even for workers with the same educational attainment. Although growing wage differences between blacks and whites could be a symptom of increased discrimination the increase in general wage inequality makes this inference more difficult. The increase in general wage inequality for workers of the same age and educational attainment could lead to widening differences in wages between blacks and whites as the following example illustrates. Suppose that in the median wage for black men aged with a high school degree stood at the 35th percentile of the distribution of wages for the corresponding group of white men. Suppose further that wage inequality increased generally after so that by wages at the 35th percentile of the white wage distribution had fallen percent relative to the white median ( for this group ) Then even if the black median wage remained at the 35th percentile of the white wage distribution the general growth of wage inequality would have resulted in a 10-percent decline in the black-white ratio of median wages Scholars have recently attempted to quantify these effects Estimates vary however regarding the extent to which the widening of pay gaps between blacks and whites is accounted for by increasing general wage inequality. One early study concluded that such effects could account for the entire increase in black-white wage differences among young workers in the 1980s. But this conclusion has been challenged. For example the increase in wage gaps between blacks and whites has been greatest among young college-educated workers. But the median wages of black and white workers for this group were similar in the mid-1970s. Therefore a general decline at the bottom of the wage distribution relative to the median can not account for the fall of the black median relative to the white median for this group For other groups of workers however increases in general wage inequality appear to be more important Researchers have also hypothesized that the increase in general wage inequality among workers of similar ages and education levels is due to the growing value in the labor market of " unmeasured skills " ( skills not measured by years of schooling or age ) Some have hypoth esized further that the growth in wage differences between blacks and whites is related to differences in unmeasured skills between blacks and whites. For example skills differences between blacks and whites with the same years of schooling might result from differences in the quality of the schools that blacks and whites attend. Some studies have attempted to explore this issue by directly examining school quality or measures of " skill " such as performance on tests of cognitive achievement or ability. However important aspects of school quality may be difficult to measure. Studies find that differences in test scores can explain a substantial portion of black-white differences in wages in a given year but have not been able empirically to account for the reversal in black-white wage convergence since the mid-1970s In addition a recent study concludes that growing returns to unmeasured skills are simply not large enough to account for the stagnation of black economic progress after the mid-1970s. First changes in school quality can not explain the widening of pay gaps over time within cohorts whose schooling is of fixed quality over their lifetimes. In principle an increase in the labor market return to school quality could lead to a widening of pay gaps between blacks and whites even within cohorts if blacks attended lower quality schools. But second the study found that even after differences in schooling age location and unmeasured skills are taken into account young college-educated black men experienced at least a 13percent drop in wages relative to their white counterparts in the 1980s In sum black men 's earnings fell relative to those of white men of similar age and educational attainment in the late 1970s and 1980s The evidence available indicates that increasing overall wage inequality may have contributed to this deterioration and may be linked to unmeasured skill differences but these explanations are incomplete. For example this explanation does a poor job with young college-educated black men for whom the erosion of relative pay was substantial. These investigations therefore provide indirect evidence that discrimination also contributed to widening pay gaps across racial groups Women. Less attention has been paid to recent increases in the wage gap between black and white women. Since the early 1970s working women have made substantial gains in earnings relative to men. The narrowing of the gender pay gap has been attributed to greater lifetime labor force participation among women and the dramatic increase in the value of education and work force experience As noted above black women reached virtual pay parity with white women in the early 1970s after a long period of steady improvement ( Chart ) Since the mid-1970s however the wages of young black women have fallen about percentage points relative to those of young white women. The relative decline was more rapid among young college graduates. Chart shows only ratios of weekly earnings of full-time workers but the trends in pay gaps among racial and ethnic groups for women are similar in other data series ( such as annual earnings of full-time year-round workers ) and for workers of similar ages and educational attainment Both labor force participation rates and attainment of a college degree rose more for white women than for black women in the 1980s Over the 1980s the returns to education also increased. Changes in demand for specific occupations and the decline in unionization rates appear to have hurt black women relative to white women. Black women were also more likely to be employed in declining industries than white women Studies document a widening of pay gaps among racial groups for women of similar ages and educational attainment. But since white women 's labor force participation rates have increased relative to those of black women ( at least until the mid-1990s ) their labor market experience at any age may also have increased relative to that of black women. And pay tends to rise with greater labor market experience. Thus a possible yet unexplored explanation for the decrease in the pay of black women relative to white women since the mid1970s is the increasing relative attachment of white women to the labor force. Discrimination could also have contributed to the decline in the black-white earnings ratio among women Affirmative Action in Employment Aside from labor market changes that increased the demand for more skilled labor weaker enforcement of antidiscrimination laws during the 1980s may have contributed to the decline in black workers ' relative earnings between the mid-1970s and the late 1980s There is evidence that enforcement of equal opportunity and affirmative action laws has an effect on hiring decisions Affirmative action programs have proved controversial but their aggregate effects remain unclear. Because a variety of civil rights and antidiscrimination measures were undertaken in a relatively short time it has been difficult to distinguish the effects of affirmative action from those of broader civil rights enforcement. The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs ( OFCCP ) is responsible for monitoring the hiring and promotion practices of Federal contractors Large government contractors ( those with or more employees and $ or more in Federal contracts ) must develop an affirmative action program to remedy any underutilization of minorities and women and must make good faith efforts to implement the program One approach to assessing the effects of affirmative action on employment therefore is to compare government contractors ( who are covered by OFCCP enforcement ) with firms that are not government contractors ( noncontractors ) This approach however is subject to biases that can lead it to overstate or understate the effects of affir mative action plans. On the one hand noncontractors often take steps to ensure diversity and compliance with equal opportunity laws even though they are not covered by OFCCP rules. This would lead the method to understate the effects of affirmative action. On the other hand increased employment at contractor firms could also result from a shift of employment from noncontractors to contractors. In this case the difference between contractor and noncontractor hiring could overstate the employment effects of affirmative action According to these studies active enforcement by OFCCP during the 1970s appears to be related to government contractors ' increasing their hiring of minority workers although the effect is relatively modest. For example one study found that the employment share of black males in contractor firms increased from percent to percent between and In noncontractor firms the share increased from percent to percent. The literature also finds that OFCCP had a significantly positive effect on the employment of black females and a smaller but still positive effect on white females A study concluded that in contrast to findings for the 1970s there was no consistent evidence of the success of government antidiscrimination efforts in the 1980s. As noted in the 1980s OFCCP enforcement was greatly weakened. Debarments of contractors found to be noncompliant awards of back pay to affected employees and conciliation agreements following violations all decreased during the decade. Enforcement has apparently increased in the 1990s as new initiatives have been adopted that focus enforcement on the worst offenders target areas of obvious noncompliance and strengthen sanctions DISCRIMINATION No discussion of differences in economic status among racial and ethnic groups would be complete without a consideration of the ongoing importance of discrimination. Two statements appear to be true First discrimination is far less pervasive and overt today than it was before the Civil Rights Act of Second audit studies and significant judgments in favor of victims of discrimination make it clear that discrimination against members of racial and ethnic minority groups persists in many areas of the economy. However there is far less agreement about the degree to which current acts of discrimination are responsible for differences in economic status among racial and ethnic groups Many States ' laws dictated a system of race-based classifications that placed blacks at a disadvantage in the economy in education and before the law. As late as the early 1960s overt racial discrimination was common. For example newspaper advertisements clearly stated employer preferences for whites or blacks for specific jobs. The practice was common even in States like New York where antidiscrimination legislation predated national civil rights legislation Evidence of continued racial discrimination takes a variety of forms. Perhaps the most convincing evidence comes from audit studies in which similar white and minority candidates are sent to the same sources to seek jobs rent apartments or apply for loans for home mortgages. For example a white and a black job seeker may be given similar resumes and sent to the same set of firms to apply for a job. These studies typically find that employers are less likely to interview or offer a job to minority applicants and that minority applicants are treated less favorably by real estate agents and lenders and in some types of consumer purchases ( such as automobiles and meals in restaurants ) For example one national study found that the incidence of unfavorable treatment in the housing market was to percentage points higher for a black or Hispanic auditor than for his or her " matched " white counterpart. In the area of housing discrimination the Department of Justice recently launched a national program to test housing developments seeking evidence of discriminatory practices. Pairs of black and white persons are trained to pose as prospective tenants and sent to ask about the availability of units In a case brought using evidence developed with this technique the Department of Justice obtained a consent decree against housing providers in suburban Detroit that resulted in a $ civil penalty paid to the Treasury and required the defendants to make $ available to the victims of their discrimination Various Federal agencies also receive and resolve thousands of discrimination complaints each year. On the one hand although a settlement of charges does not always involve admission of discriminatory practice at a minimum the bringing of a charge indicates the perception that discrimination has occurred. On the other hand only a portion of employees who experience discrimination actually bring charges. In fiscal alone the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission which is responsible for enforcing the principal Federal statutes prohibiting employment discrimination including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of obtained $ million in monetary benefits ( excluding litigation awards ) for parties bringing discrimination charges through settlement and conciliation. From to the OFCCP conducted compliance reviews and complaint investigations and obtained over $ million in financial settlements including over $ million in back pay for victims of employment discrimination by Federal contractors. During the first term of this Administration the Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) reached out-of-court settlements on housing discrimination cases. HUD took enforcement action on cases either issuing housing discrimination charges or referring cases to the Department of Justice. During this period HUD obtained $ million in compensation for victims of housing discrimination The Department of Justice settled major mortgage lending discrimination suits in the 1990s including suits against large lenders in the Atlanta and Boston areas. In fiscal the Department of Education 's Office of Civil Rights received complaints alleging discrimination based on race color or national origin in access to equal educational opportunities. The office facilitated a change in of these cases Less direct evidence of discrimination comes from earnings comparisons such as those described earlier in this chapter. As noted there even after adjusting for many characteristics that affect earnings these studies typically find that blacks are paid less than their white counterparts. The traditional interpretation is that the unexplained differential reflects discrimination in pay. However these studies are not uniformly accepted as providing evidence of discrimination in the labor market : some researchers have argued that the studies fail to control adequately for differences in average characteristics between groups. Others argue that controlling for such characteristics may not be appropriate if differences in characteristics such as education and labor market experience are themselves partly the result of discrimination both outside and within the labor market More direct evidence of labor market discrimination in addition to that from audit studies comes from lawsuits that prove in a court of law a pattern and practice of discriminatory behavior. But these narrow albeit powerful pieces of evidence do not translate easily into estimates of the aggregate economic impacts on employment or economic well-being of discriminatory behavior. Significant analytical challenges requiring a combination of approaches remain in assessing the contribution of current acts of discrimination to current differences in economic status among racial and ethnic groups. For example minorities who face discrimination by one employer may be able to find employment with another nondiscriminatory employer ( But even in this case discrimination imposes psychological costs and additional job search costs on minorities. ) This example also suggests sthat especially where discrimination is prevalent reducing discrimination can yield substantial economic benefits by increasing the number of nondiscriminatory employers It is an important goal of social and economic policy to ensure that discrimination does not limit the economic opportunities available to members of racial and ethnic minority groups. This Administration remains committed to ensuring equal opportunity for all Americans CHAPTER Improving Economic Efficiency : Environmental and Health Issues THE U.S. ECONOMY RELIES PRIMARILY on market forces and price signals to allocate economic resources efficiently. Economists have long recognized that a system of decentralized competitive markets in which businesses and households act in their own best interest promotes economic growth and well-being. Market prices signal how resources should be used to produce goods and services of the highest value and facilitate the distribution of these goods and services to those willing and able to pay the most for them. In a wellfunctioning market the price of a good or service reflects both its marginal value to the consumer and its marginal cost to the producer. So long as there is no divergence between the private and the social values and costs of these goods and services the market system is likely to bring about the most efficient allocation of economic resources. Although economic efficiency is not the only concern of policymakers it is important because it largely determines the total quantity of goods and services available. However economists also recognize that sometimes prices might be distorted and that a market economy may fail to allocate resources efficiently. When market failures occur appropriate government action may be able to improve upon market performance and enhance overall economic well-being. Examples of such action include protecting the environment promoting health and safety providing intellectual and physical infrastructure and promoting competition Potential sources of market failure are : Externalities. An externality arises when production or consumption by one person or group provides a benefit to others ( for example by revealing a useful scientific discovery ) without receiving compensation equal to the benefit or imposes a cost on others ( for example by polluting the environment ) without paying compensation for the full cost Incomplete or asymmetric information. When two parties to an economic transaction do not have complete information or do not have the same information about the goods or services being exchanged they may face distorted incentives that prevent markets from supplying the amount or the type of products most desired. These information problems are especially prevalent in the market for health care where incomplete or asymmetric information about a patient 's health status or the value of a provider 's services can adversely affect the decisions of both provider and consumer Public goods. A public good is one that many people can use simultaneously without reducing its availability to others and whose benefits are such that one person can not exclude others from enjoying them. An example of a public good is national security which once provided can not be denied to anyone residing in the protected nation Imperfect competition. Imperfect competition may result when a few suppliers or buyers can exercise market power to limit supply keep prices high and prevent new competitors from entering the market Economics provides important insights into the circumstances in which governments can act to improve upon market performance how they can do so in a cost-effective manner and how the costs and benefits of such actions are likely to be distributed. Economics has shown that market mechanisms can be a powerful instrument for achieving desired policy outcomes without incurring unnecessary costs. A prime example is the use of tradable pollution permits in environmental policy described in detail later in this chapter This chapter presents several examples of market failures in the areas of environmental protection and health care and discusses new approaches to addressing them. Recent environmental initiatives include policies to improve air quality address global climate change and reduce non-point source water pollution from agriculture. These policies are designed to build upon the considerable success of past efforts in improving the quality of our environmental resources. In the domain of health care and consumer safety rules governing health insurance and drug approval have been reformed and new policies are being proposed to improve the performance of health maintenance organizations and reduce teenage smoking. These policies are intended to further enhance the health and well-being of our Nation 's people. Recent antitrust reforms designed to increase market competition are discussed in Chapter COST-EFFECTIVE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION Achieving environmental targets at the lowest possible cost is an important policy objective. The President 's Executive Order issued in directs Federal agencies to design regulations in the most cost-effective manner to achieve the regulatory objective and to propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that its benefits justify its costs. Further the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act requires agencies either to certify that the regulatory approaches they adopt to achieve policy goals are the least burdensome the most cost-effective or the least costly among available alternatives or to state the reasons for choosing an alternative approach TRADABLE EMISSIONS PERMITS In implementing environmental policy economists often advocate the use of market-based mechanisms such as tradable emissions permits for environmental pollutants to encourage emissions reduction from those sources where the cost of emissions reduction is lowest and to foster innovation in emissions control technology. Tradable permits can be especially useful in achieving quantitative targets for emissions control or abatement Under the traditional regulatory approach to environmental protection a regulatory agency may specify an allowable emissions level for each firm or facility or require firms to use specific technologies to reduce emissions. This is often inefficient because the cost of reducing emissions by a given amount differs from firm to firm. A tradable permit system instead caps total emissions from all firms but neither places limits on emissions by any one firm nor dictates how the reduction in emissions must be achieved. Instead the regulatory agency issues permits for emissions in a total amount equal to the cap and prohibits emissions without a permit. After their initial allocation ( methods for which are discussed below ) firms may freely buy and sell permits among themselves. Any firm that can reduce its emissions for less than the going price of a permit has an incentive to do so and then sell its unused permits to other firms for which emissions reduction is more costly. With tradable emissions permits firms thus have more choices and can meet environmental standards at lower cost than under traditional regulation An emission permit trading system also gives firms an incentive to innovate. Firms that develop more effective and cheaper pollution control measures can sell not only their unused permits but the technology itself. Furthermore trading systems that allow unused permits to be saved or " banked " for future use encourage the early adoption of unanticipated technological improvements that lower the cost of emissions controls. These features lower the cost of emissions reductions still further Economists have identified some other key features of successful emissions permit trading programs. First firms should perceive that owning a permit is like owning any other asset. A firm will purchase a permit only if it expects that the permit conveys a legitimate right to emit. Similarly a firm will reduce emissions in order to sell unused permits only if it believes that the permit will be valuable to other firms. Thus if there is a risk that the right to emit or the right to trade will be revoked both the trading price and the volume of permits traded will be depressed and some of the efficiency gains from permit trading will be lost. Of course the government retains its authority to restrict or revoke trades for legitimate compliance and enforcement purposes under terms and conditions specified by law A second key feature is broad scope : because trading lowers costs it should be permitted among all sources of emissions that cause the same type of environmental harm. Excluding some sources may raise costs if emissions from these sources can be reduced at relatively low cost. However including all sources of a pollutant in the emissions cap may not always be practical. For example emissions from natural sources and from other countries may affect our Nation 's environment but be beyond the control of U.S. regulatory authorities Even within our borders measuring pollutant discharges from all sources may be prohibitively costly especially when discharges are dispersed or affected by weather as is the case with fertilizer and pesticide runoff from cropland. One way to broaden the scope of a program is to offer firms subject to the emissions cap a credit for emissions if they contract with uncapped sources to reduce their emissions. So long as a satisfactory means of measuring and verifying these reductions can be established this approach can provide further opportunities to lower the cost of meeting environmental objectives To ensure the broadest possible scope for permit trading permits should reflect units of environmental damage from emissions not necessarily units of emissions. Permit trading then lowers costs by allowing trades in emissions that differ with respect to location time period chemical or pathway ( by air or by water for example ) If suitable conversion factors can be devised trades in different emissions representing equivalent amounts of environmental damage can be made. This approach could also help prevent local environmental " hot spots " from developing. Suppose for example emissions from an area far upwind of a heavily polluted area have half the environmental effect there of local emissions of the same quantity of the contaminant. Then tons of upwind emissions could trade for ton of local emissions without changing total effects on the environment Likewise to the extent that different chemicals affect the environment similarly ( as for example both carbon dioxide and methane contribute to the global greenhouse effect ) the permit trading system could allow reductions in one pollutant to substitute for reductions in another by an amount that causes equivalent environmental effects Finally suppose a certain pollutant causes similar environmental damage whether it is introduced into lakes through the air or by surface water. Then permits for air emissions could be tradable for permits for water discharges again encouraging reductions from those sources with the least costly control opportunities A final key feature of a successful emissions permit trading system is an effective compliance mechanism that ensures the integrity and fairness of the system and at the same time ensures that transaction costs are relatively low. The compliance mechanism will normally include monitoring and reporting requirements as well as enforcement provisions. Transaction costs include the costs of paperwork recordkeeping notification and prior-approval requirements for permit trading. Although some requirements are inevitable in operating a credible trading system they should be balanced against the need to keep transaction costs low. High transaction costs could discourage trading thus eroding the potential gains from trade and may make participation in the program prohibitively expensive for some firms Initial Allocation of Permits A tradable permit system achieves its environmental benefit by capping pollutant emissions below the level that would otherwise occur. The costs of reducing emissions are then borne by the firms responsible for the emissions and ( through higher prices ) those who buy their products as well as by suppliers of inputs such as labor and capital equipment to these firms. Firms and consumers in related markets such as those for substitutes and complements of the goods produced by the regulated firms will also be affected The government could arrange the initial allocation of permits in any of a number of ways for example by auction by free allocation in proportion to firms ' historical emissions ( " grandfathering " ) or even by lottery. Anyone receiving permits may then sell all or some of them or use them as needed to keep actual emissions within regulatory requirements. So long as a permit trading system imposes low transaction costs the choice of allocation system does not generally affect the efficiency with which emissions reductions are achieved ; after the permits are first allocated the trading of permits itself minimizes the cost of pollution reduction. However the choice of allocation method does have other consequences. If the method chosen yields revenue to the government the program presents an opportunity to lower taxes such as those on earnings from labor and investments without affecting budget balance. Shifting the tax burden in this way called " revenue recycling " could enhance economic efficiency and growth as lower taxes increase incentives to work and save. These economic benefits can significantly lower the net economic cost of reducing emissions The allocation system has further implications for who bears the cost of monitoring and reducing emissions. The extent to which firms can pass on some of the costs to consumers in the form of higher product prices depends on the degree of competition and the price elasticities of supply and demand for goods in the markets affected by the emissions constraint. In some cases granting free permits to participants in the permit market could go beyond compensating them for their cost share of emissions reductions leaving them better off than before the permit system was introduced Lessons from the Sulfur Dioxide Program Practical experience in designing and implementing trading programs for pollution emissions permits is still limited. The highly acclaimed sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) program also called the acid rain program administered by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) relies on among other things a system of tradable permits to reduce emissions of SO2 from electric utilities. Trading of emissions permits began in and to date the program is the only emissions permit trading program that is national in scope. The SO2 program is being implemented in two phases. The first phase covers the most heavily polluting electric generating plants. Phase II beginning in will impose a more stringent emissions cap and include a total of more than units. The program has been successful in several ways : a large number of utilities engage in trading SO2 emissions and ambient concentrations have fallen and the costs of reducing emissions have been considerably lower than originally forecast Why the early cost estimates were higher than the costs actually realized is a matter of considerable discussion. One contributing factor was a greater-than-expected decline in rail freight rates which made low-sulfur coal from the Powder River Basin of Wyoming more competitive with locally mined high-sulfur coal in Midwestern markets. Use of low-sulfur coal proved a less costly means of reducing SO2 emissions than the smokestack scrubbers that utilities had anticipated using. A second factor was lower-than-predicted costs of using scrubbers in part because of unexpectedly high utilization rates. The average cost of reducing SO2 emissions using retrofitted smokestack scrubbers was about $ per ton in far below early estimates of around $ to $ per ton One measure of the decline in cost relative to expectations is the trend in emission permit prices ( Chart ) Currently at approximately $ per ton of SO2 permit prices are well below earlier estimates of around $ to $ per ton. These prices reflect the short-run marginal cost of reducing SO2. Prices are low partly because firms believing that permit prices would be much higher overinvested in scrubbers. Average total control costs are likely to be higher than these short-run marginal costs The permit trading program also allows firms to bank unused emissions permits for future use for example when emissions limits become more stringent in phase II. By banking utilities can lower costs by timing their reductions according to their projections of emissions control costs and permit prices. If firms expect permit prices or control costs to go up or if they want to take advantage of newly available control technology they can adopt measures to reduce emissions sooner than they otherwise might Chart Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Permit Prices The sulfur dioxide permit price has fluctuated and fallen over time Dollars per ton Note : Trades reported by the Emissions Exchange Source : Environmental Protection Agency Trading programs may not always bring cost savings as large as those achieved by the SO2 program nor will they always lead to the discovery of much cheaper control strategies. Programs that involve multiple pollutants or international cooperation will necessarily be more complex. However the SO2 experience does demonstrate how such programs offer market incentives to find cheaper ways of reducing emissions and the flexibility to take advantage of them. Had regulators simply required all utilities to install scrubbers utilities would not have been able to take advantage of the new availability of cheap low-sulfur coal and the costs of pollution abatement would have been much higher Another important lesson from the SO2 program is that efforts to minimize transaction costs help ensure the successful operation of markets for pollution permits. But even so it takes time to develop the institutions needed to facilitate trading and instill confidence in the value of credits so that markets run smoothly. The volume of trade in the market for SO2 permits a measure of the potential gains from such trade started out quite small but has grown rapidly as utilities gained experience with the program. In addition increased trading volume and the annual public permit auctions tightened the range of market prices for permits. In the program 's fifth year about million allowances were traded up from allowances in the second year ( Chart ) We now turn to three other areas where the Administration is seeking to improve the environment in a cost-effective manner : Chart Volume of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Permit Trades Permit trading increased considerably after the first few years of the acid rain program Million tons traded Note : Data show the volume of trades among firms Source : Environmental Protection Agency attainment of the new air quality standards policies to address global climate change and programs to reduce water pollution from agriculture AIR QUALITY STANDARDS Air pollution has been linked to a variety of health problems ranging from decreased lung function to increased mortality risk. These adverse health effects are a classic externality : the emitter does not bear the full cost of its actions. Under the Clean Air Act the EPA must periodically review and may revise as appropriate national air quality standards for pollutants. State agencies are largely responsible for developing programs ( subject to EPA approval ) to meet these standards. In July the EPA issued a more stringent standard for ground-level ozone and a new standard for fine airborne particulate matter. Under the act these standards must be set so as to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety. Courts have confirmed the EPA 's interpretation of this to mean that consideration of costs or feasibility is excluded in setting the standard. However under the President 's policy the EPA is to implement these healthbased standards cost-effectively Efforts to meet air quality standards have traditionally focused on controlling emissions within " nonattainment areas " mostly urban areas where concentrations of pollutants exceed the standard Although some States California for example have set up trading programs or used other market mechanisms to reduce the costs of compliance with air quality standards most rely on traditional prescriptive approaches to controlling pollution. The Administration 's plan for achieving the new air quality standards departs from these traditional approaches by designing regional strategies to complement local efforts and by encouraging the development of nitrogen oxides ( NOX ) trading programs among sources in different States Regional Strategies and Market-Based Approaches Studies of air quality have found that high ground-level ozone concentrations are not just a local problem : under certain weather conditions ozone and NOX can travel hundreds of miles and contribute to nonattainment of standards in downwind areas. Under traditional regulatory approaches nonattainment areas would have to make costly emissions reductions within their borders even if upwind reductions that would have similar environmental impact were available at lower cost. To address this problem the plan for implementing the new standards will expand the geographic scope of the program Under the Clean Air Act the EPA has the authority to require emissions reductions in any State that significantly contributes to nonattainment outside its borders. In November the EPA proposed a regional strategy that would require Eastern States and the District of Columbia to reduce NOX emissions by an average of percent during May through September ( when ozone levels are highest ) by Reductions in NOX emissions apart from reducing ground-level ozone may also reduce excess nutrients in waterways and the formation of airborne particles linked to adverse health effects. The design of a cost-effective regional strategy that contributes to attaining and maintaining the new standards will require careful attention to the effects of emissions on air quality. Later this year the EPA will also propose a rule to facilitate trading of NOX emissions reductions among the States covered by the regional program Designing a Trading Program for Nitrogen Oxides In designing a trading program for NOX the EPA faces a number of challenges. These include ensuring adequate scope for the trading program ensuring that trading does not adversely affect the environment and providing for necessary accountability and compliance As discussed above the scope of trading programs like the NOX program is an important determinant of their cost-effectiveness. As more emissions sources are included in the program the increased opportunity to trade emissions permits tends to lower the cost of achieving a given level of emissions reduction. Utilities currently account for only about percent of NOX emissions compared with about percent of SO2 emissions ( Chart ) Transportation accounts for percent and nonutility combustion for percent of NOX emissions Chart Sources of Nitrogen Oxides Emissions in Vehicles are the principal source of nitrogen oxides emissions Electric utilities % Other % Industrial processes % Transportation _ ^ ^ _ ^ ^ ^ ^ M_HH ^ > % Nonutility combustion % Note : Nonutility combustion includes residential and commercial heating Source : Environmental Protection Agency Thus extending NOX trading to nonutility sources could reduce costs However the scope of the program may be limited by the need to ensure accountability. For example some smaller sources have considerably lower control costs than electric utilities but their claimed emissions reductions may be more costly to monitor Including more sources from different sectors in the trading program may also have desirable distributional effects. Utilities are likely to pass the cost of compliance on to consumers in the form of higher electricity prices and low-income households spend a higher share of their income on electricity bills than do households near the median income. Moreover broader scope can decrease the average cost of pollution abatement reducing the burden on all parties including the poor Another challenge in designing a trading program for NOX within the context of the regional ozone reduction strategy is to maintain broad geographic scope while ensuring that trading does not result in significant adverse environmental effects. The goal of this strategy is to improve air quality in nonattainment areas cost-effectively. In its simplest form the problem of pollution transport can be thought of in terms of a single downwind nonattainment area that is affected by a number of upwind pollution sources located at varying distances from it along a line indicating wind direction. In this case sources that are farther upwind will have less impact on the air quality of the area than sources that are closer all other things being equal and such differences may be as large as to It might then appear that emis sions trading could undercut the effectiveness of pollution controls if it resulted in shifting emission reductions farther upwind. Trading ratios that weight the reductions made at different sources according to their distance from the downwind nonattainment area might be considered to address this problem. In reality however there are a large number of nonattainment areas spread out over the region and several different weather patterns and wind conditions characterize the ozone pollution episodes that the program is trying to remedy Sources affect multiple nonattainment areas in a variety of directions from them and it affects any single nonattainment area differently under different weather conditions. The polycentric nature of this problem complicates the identification of a unique and stable set of trading ratios that would work for all relevant cases. Thus striking the proper balance between achieving the cost savings from larger geographic scope and limiting the potentially significant adverse environmental effects of trading is an ongoing challenge Like most air pollution control programs NOX trading programs would require an estimate of emissions from each regulated source in order to ensure compliance. The estimation method can have significant implications for cost-effectiveness both directly through the cost of performing the estimate and indirectly. One indirect implication is that more costly requirements may limit the number of sources that could meet the estimation requirements and participate in trading and thereby raise costs. On the other hand a more reliable estimation method may offer regulators and sources greater confidence in the permits and thereby increase the willingness of sources to buy them or offer them for sale. For example the SO2 program requires continuous emissions monitoring to provide precise information on emissions. Such monitoring is expensive and impractical for many smaller sources and thus may effectively exclude such sources from participating. But such precise monitoring may not always be necessary. Methods for estimating emissions that provide unbiased although less precise estimates of emissions may be accurate enough to ensure accountability CLIMATE CHANGE Climate change is a global environmental externality : warming of the earth 's surface results from the accumulation of greenhouse gases from myriad sources worldwide none of which presently pay the cost to others of warming 's ill effects. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change jointly established by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme concluded in that " the balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate. " Current concentrations of carbon dioxide ( SO2 ) methane nitrous oxide ( N2O ) and other so-called greenhouse gases have reached levels well above those of preindustrial times. Of these CO2 is the most important : net cumulative CO2 emissions resulting from the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation account for about two-thirds of potential warming from changes in greenhouse gas concentrations related to human activity If growth in global emissions continues unabated the atmospheric concentration of CO2 will likely double relative to its preindustrial level midway through the next century The accumulation of greenhouse gases poses significant risks to the world 's climate and to human well-being. Potential impacts include a rise in sea levels greater frequency of severe weather events shifts in agricultural growing conditions from changing weather patterns threats to human health from increased range and incidence of diseases changes in availability of freshwater supplies and damage to ecosystems and biodiversity Climate change is a complex long-term problem requiring global cooperation and a long-term solution. No single country has an incentive to reduce emissions sufficiently to protect the global environment against climate change. Even if the United States sharply reduced its emissions unilaterally greenhouse gas emissions from all other countries would continue to grow and the risks posed by climate change would not be significantly abated. Since many of these gases remain in the atmosphere for a century or more the climatic effects of actions taken today will primarily benefit future generations. But delaying action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions until the disruptive effects of climate change become widespread will considerably reduce the options for remedial or preventive measures The Framework Convention on Climate Change The threat of disruptive climate change has led to coordinated international efforts to reduce the risks of global warming by reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. The first international agreement to address global warming was the Framework Convention on Climate Change signed during the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in This convention established a long-term objective of limiting greenhouse gas concentrations and encouraged the established industrial countries to return their emissions to levels by Since then it has become clear that the United States and many other participating countries will not meet this goal To address the lack of progress among many industrial countries toward meeting this first target the United States and approximately other nations in negotiations held in Kyoto Japan last December agreed to take substantial steps to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. The Kyoto agreement which requires the advice and consent of the Senate would place binding limits on industrial countries ' emissions of the six principal categories of greenhouse gases : CO2 methane N2O sulfur hexafluoride perfluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons. Each industrial country 's " baseline " is actually based on its emissions of CO2 methane and N2O and its choice of or levels of the other three categories of gases. The United States agreed to a target of percent below levels over To meet that target net U.S. emissions of greenhouse gases all emissions minus removals of CO2 by certain forest activities such as planting trees must average no more than million metric tons of carbon equivalent per year during that period ( Chart ) The targets for the European Union and Japan are percent and percent below levels respectively. Australia New Zealand Norway Russia and Ukraine all have less stringent limits In sum over the period from to the industrial countries are Chart U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Actual and Projected The U.S. emissions target under the Kyoto agreement is about percent below current projections in Billion tons of carbon equivalent Projected emissions without Kyoto agreement All greenhouse gases Carbon dioxide Kyoto emissions target for the U.S. is an annual average of billion tons during nil i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i I Notes : All greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. Carbon equivalence is calculated assuming a global warming potential over a 100-year time horizon. Targets can be met through forest activities that remove carbon from the atmosphere and international permit purchases and credits in addition to domestic emissions reductions Sources : Department of Energy United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and U.S. Climate Action Report expected to reduce their average emissions of greenhouse gases to about percent below their levels The Kyoto agreement provides opportunities for the industrial countries to trade rights to emit greenhouse gases with each other. They may also invest in " clean development " projects in the developing world and use these projects ' certified emissions reductions toward meeting their targets. Both of these mechanisms allow for emissions reductions to occur where they are least expensive. Many of the details of these provisions will be worked out in subsequent negotiations Emissions Permit Trading for Greenhouse Gases One component of the Administration 's climate change proposal announced last October by the President is a domestic emissions permit trading program for greenhouse gases starting in As in the similar program for SO2 permit trading would allow emissions targets to be met at a lower cost than under a traditional regulatory approach that sets fixed limits on individual firms ' emissions As previously discussed one consideration in designing an emissions permit trading program for greenhouse gases is how initially to distribute permits. The method of initial allocation would not generally affect the efficiency with which emissions reductions are achieved but would have significant distributional implications Another issue is where in the marketing chain of products responsible for greenhouse gas emissions permits would be required. One approach called the permit-to-market approach would impose the emissions limits at the point of first sale of the commodities responsible for greenhouse gases. In the case of SO2 emissions permits would be required for the sale of fossil fuels and specified in terms of the amount of SO2 released in their combustion. The requirement would be imposed at the wellhead or the refinery ( in the case of oil or natural gas ) at the mine ( in the case of coal ) or at the port of entry ( in the case of imported fossil fuels ) Alternatively a permit-to-emit approach would issue permits to consume these fuels or to sell products such as automobiles that do so. A hybrid of the two approaches may also be possible The design of an effective greenhouse gas permit system needs to take several other issues into account. First a sufficient number of participants must be included in the domestic permit market to ensure that the market is competitive and efficient Second the system should include a monitoring mechanism that assesses compliance in the most cost-effective manner possible. In the case of a permit-to-market system since the amount of SO2 emitted per barrel of oil or ton of coal consumed is relatively fixed the task of measuring SO2 emissions is straightforward. Moreover for accounting purposes firms already collect information and keep records about their fuel transactions. Under the permit-to-emit approach monitoring would likely involve a more complex combination of emissions calculation and measurement for all regulated greenhouse gas emitters Third a permit system that would allow trades across all sectors of the economy would minimize total cost. If for example the incremental cost of reducing emissions is much lower in electric power generation than in transportation one could reduce the cost of meeting the reduction target by allowing permit trading between the two sectors. The permit-to-market approach would generally allow trades across sectors. The permit-to-emit approach could also yield the same result depending on how it is implemented Timing Flexibility in Meeting Emissions Reductions Flexibility about when emissions reductions take place can further lower the cost of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. A system that allows participants to borrow emissions permits from the future or to save unused permits for future use would take advantage of differences in cost abatement opportunities across time Three features of the Kyoto agreement contribute to timing flexibility. First the target for emissions reductions is based on a 5-year commitment period. For example the target set for the United States of a 7-percent reduction in emissions below levels is specified as an annual average over By averaging over years instead of requiring the United States to meet the 7-percent target each year the agreement provides flexibility in the timing of reductions that can lower costs especially given an uncertain future. Averaging can smooth out the effects of short-term events such as fluctuations in the business cycle and energy demand. It can also lessen the impact of a year with a hard winter when energy demand and thus emissions would increase. Further if firms anticipate that a new technology will soon be available that lowers the cost of reducing emissions they could emit more greenhouse gases in the early years of the period and less after the technology becomes available. Another advantage of this approach is that it may avoid forcing a costly rapid turnover of capital stock for electricity generation The Kyoto agreement allows countries to bank unused emissions rights from one commitment period for use in the next. Should investments in research and development yield some pleasant surprises in the form of cleaner and more efficient technologies banking will encourage the early adoption of these technologies in order to save unused emissions permits for future periods when the costs of emissions abatement may be higher In addition to banking across commitment periods countries may bank certified emissions reductions obtained through the " clean development mechanism " discussed below. Countries may use emissions reductions achieved through this mechanism over the period to assist in complying with their targets in the first commitment period. This provides an incentive for firms in industrial countries to begin investing in energy-efficient technologies in developing countries before International Trading in Greenhouse Gas Emissions Building on the benefits of the domestic trading program just described the Administration proposed in Kyoto an international trading program for greenhouse gas emissions permits. The Kyoto agreement established the right of countries assigned emissions targets to meet their commitments by trading among themselves. This establishment of the right to trade provides the foundation for a trad ing regime among industrial countries but leaves the details to be agreed upon later. Since it is easier to reduce emissions in some countries than others and given that greenhouse gas emissions have equivalent climate effects regardless of their location allowing global trading would achieve climate change objectives at lower cost. Such a global approach would ideally allow trading among all sources of greenhouse gases in participating countries and could incorporate opportunities to remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere for example by issuing emissions credits ( which could then be sold to other firms ) for reforestation projects International trading could take place among firms that have been allocated permits through domestic trading programs. For countries that have no domestically tradable permits because they have opted for a command-and-control or a tax approach to controlling emissions it may still be possible instead to arrange exchanges on a government-to-firm or government-to-government basis The setting of binding targets among all countries together with international trade in permits could in principle result in a global market price for permits for greenhouse gas emissions. For example the permit price could be expressed in terms of dollars per ton of carbon equivalent emitted. Firms in all countries would reduce their emissions until the cost of further reductions exceeded this price at which point they would buy additional permits. Large differences in both the patterns of energy use and the efficiency of energy technologies among countries imply that the cost savings from international permit trading would be large compared with a system without international trading. Put differently even in comparison with a system with full domestic trading of emissions permits international trading could substantially lower costs. Some models predict that the incremental cost of reducing CO2 emissions may be as little as one-seventh of the cost of reductions from domestic trading alone. The gains from international trade in permits would be particularly large if developing countries were to participate The Importance of Developing-Country Participation Negotiations leading up to the Kyoto agreement sought binding limits on greenhouse gas emissions among industrial nations Developing countries have resisted committing themselves to binding limits on their emissions because of concern that to do so would severely constrain their economic growth and because by far the greater part of accumulated greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is the result of past economic activity in the industrial countries ( Chart ) However current forecasts project that greenhouse gas emissions from developing countries will surpass those from industrial countries around and even sooner if industrial countries are successful in limiting their emissions ( Chart ) Thus eventual curbs on emissions from developing countries are essential in order to Chart Cumulative World Emissions of Carbon Dioxide Industrial countries are responsible for the vast majority of accumulated carbon dioxide in the atmosphere Other OECD countries % United States % Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union % Other developing countries % Note : Other OECD countries include the countries of the European Union Australia Canada Iceland Japan New Zealand Norway Switzerland Source : Department of Energy Chart Projected World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Without Kyoto Agreement Around annual carbon dioxide emissions from developing countries are expected to surpass industrial countries ' emissions Billion tons of carbon equivalent per year Developing countries Industrial countries Note : These projections are consistent with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IS92A global projection through Source : Unpublished calculations by A. Manne Stanford University and R. Richels Electric Power Research Institute stabilize the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere Moreover some of the least cost opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions are in developing countries because those countries now use energy relatively inefficiently. Moreover those that are industrializing rapidly have greater scope to build their industry around cleaner and more efficient energy technologies and fuels than do mature economies whose capital stock is already in place Failure to involve developing countries in an international agreement limiting greenhouse gas emissions could lead to a more rapid rate of increase in emissions in those countries than would occur without any agreement at all. This " leakage " effect of emissions reductions could come about in any of several ways. As industrial countries reduce their use of fossil fuels in response to emissions controls future world oil and coal prices are likely to be lower than they would be otherwise. This is likely to increase energy consumption in countries not bound to limit their emissions. U.S. industries are also concerned about their international competitiveness if some countries remain outside an international agreement since factories in those countries will face lower costs for producing goods that take relatively large amounts of energy to manufacture. Some may be concerned that energy-intensive industries might choose to relocate to countries not subject to emissions constraints although there is little evidence to suggest that this would pose a significant problem in most industries. For example energy costs for manufacturing industries average just percent of total costs Given the projected growth of developing countries ' emissions the Administration 's position is to seek meaningful participation by key developing countries in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as a condition for the United States taking on binding emissions reductions. The President has indicated he will not submit the Kyoto agreement for Senate ratification until there is meaningful participation by key developing countries Joint Implementation and the Clean Development Mechanism To encourage participation by developing countries in the climate change initiative even before they formally sign on for binding emissions limits the President has proposed a program known as joint implementation. This program would provide incentives to developing countries to reduce their emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases. The Kyoto agreement embraces the President 's proposal in its designation of a " clean development mechanism " ( CDM ) : U.S. companies that undertake projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries could count those reductions to meet their commitments. Institutionalizing key elements of joint implementation through this mechanism would encourage firms in the United States to transfer a larger volume of cleaner and more energy-efficient technology to developing countries especially in the electric power generating industry while providing substantial cost savings to U.S firms. It would also provide incentives to expand forests which absorb CO2. In addition to the CDM the agreement allows industrial countries to undertake joint implementation projects with each other A key issue is how to ensure that credits are awarded for actual additional emissions reductions and not simply for projects that would have been carried out anyway. The Kyoto agreement requires that emissions reductions occurring through the CDM be certified to provide real measurable and long-term benefits related to the mitigation of climate change and that the emissions reductions achieved are additional to any that would occur in the absence of these projects. Future negotiations will focus on developing the rules for certifying and enforcing projects undertaken through the CDM Promoting Clean and Efficient Energy Technology The President 's plan to reduce greenhouse gases commits new resources to energy research and programs to promote the wider use of cleaner and more energy-efficient technologies in the U.S economy The emissions permit trading system for greenhouse gases is also likely to encourage more private research and innovation as companies seek to lower the cost of meeting environmental targets Government support for science and technology in general addresses an important market failure. Promising new technologies often fail to attract sufficient private sector interest if their technical risk is high and if they create economic and social benefits beyond what the investing firms can capture for themselves. Economic studies have shown that private firms despite intellectual property protection are able to appropriate only about half of the total economic benefits from their own research. This gap between social and private returns may be particularly large for research on cleaner and more efficient energy technology when the environmental externalities associated with energy use have not been fully addressed by environmental and other regulatory policies The appropriability problem is not limited to basic research but frequently extends to precommercial research as well. Precommercial research is research that is close to yielding new products or processes but still far enough away from commercialization that further development poses a substantial financial risk. New renewable energy industries ( wind power solar energy and biomass energy for example ) may face particularly formidable constraints to commercialization. First-of-a-kind products often have high unit costs High-volume production provides economies of scale generates experience in manufacturing and operation and opens new opportunities for incremental technological improvements all of which may lead to lower costs The President 's commitment to increase Federal support for new energy technology seeks to reverse a trend of declining national investment in energy research ( Chart ) One reason investment in energy research has declined since the late 1970s is falling or stagnant energy prices which reduced the economic incentive to develop new sources of energy and improve efficiency. In the 1990s it is primarily private sector energy research that has declined. Increasing government investment in energy research is likely to be complemented by more private research : public research on longer term basic scientific studies can open up new profitable opportunities for applied research and commercial development by the private sector An increase in support for research that raises the rate of progress in developing cleaner and more efficient technologies would lower the costs of reducing greenhouse gas emissions Chart Energy Prices and Private Energy Research Energy prices and private investment in energy research have followed similar trends since the 1970s Index = Billions of dollars Private research spending ( right scale ) Relative price of energy ( left scale ) Note : The relative price of energy is the ratio of the PPI for processed fuels to the PPI for all intermediate materials Sources : Department of Energy and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) The President 's proposal also includes programs and tax incentives to encourage the wider adoption of existing technologies that can decrease greenhouse gas emissions. Of particular importance are technologies that reduce consumption of fossil fuels. In addition to encouraging clean and renewable energy sources these programs will provide economic incentives and other forms of assistance ( such as better information ) for improving energy efficiency in industry transportation and homes. The President 's plan to use Federal procurement policy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is another way to increase market penetration of these technologies Until an emissions cap and trading system are in place however the economic incentive to use these technologies may be low because at present the price of energy does not reflect the environmental cost of CO2 emissions. This environmental externality results in a market failure to make the most efficient use of new technologies that lower emissions. Many of these technologies are expected to be more profitable once a CO2 emissions cap is in place and the environmental costs associated with energy use are more fully reflected in energy prices There is also evidence that many households and businesses fail to invest in some home and building improvements that appear profitable even at today 's energy prices. More efficient home refrigerators and air conditioners fluorescent lighting and " low-E " glass for windows for example are available on the market and by some accounts offer potentially large energy and cost savings. By spending money now on these more efficient technologies proponents argue many consumers could quickly recoup their investments in the form of lower energy bills. But if such investments are in consumers ' own economic interest why do n't they invest in them on their own ? Insufficient knowledge and information may be a key factor : consumers may not be aware of new technologies that could reduce CO2 emissions and save them money on energy bills or may not be convinced of the economic benefits that could be realized from adopting them. Lack of up-to-date information on recent technological developments may also lead people to overestimate technical risks they may doubt whether a new technology is as reliable as current methods particularly if the new technology is not yet widely used On the other hand even if a new technology is beneficial for many users it may not be so for everyone. People differ in their willingness and ability to make investments today in order to realize savings in the future especially if the initial expense is relatively large. In addition some consumers may value a product for attributes other than its energy efficiency for example its convenience size or design And not all consumers may achieve all of the promised energy savings depending on the climate of the region where they live. These considerations reflect the great diversity of needs and preferences among businesses and households and help explain why new technologies may diffuse slowly over time Better information about the potential cost savings from improving energy efficiency may increase the use of technologies that already meet the market test that is that meet consumer standards for quality and dependability and offer real economic benefits. The Federal Government is working with the private sector to promote wider use of such technologies. For example through the Green Lights program the EPA provides technical information to private companies on the economic and environmental benefits of switching to new fluorescent lighting systems. Energy Star is another EPA program in which innovative products that use significantly less energy than older generation products are allowed to bear a special readily identifiable label. More rapid diffusion of new emissions-saving technologies would make an important contribution toward meeting the goals of the Kyoto agreement NON-POINT SOURCE WATER POLLUTION Protecting the quality of the Nation 's water resources has been a major component of U.S. environmental policy since passage of the Clean Water Act in The act regulates water pollution from point sources discrete concentrated sources such as the discharge from factories and municipal sewage treatment plants but not from nonpoint sources. Non-point source water pollution is the entry of pollutants into a body of water from a broad area such as a cultivated field or the streets and lawns of a city. In recent years attention has increasingly turned to pollution from these non-point sources especially runoff from agricultural operations. Since environmental regulation has already led to extensive control of point sources of water pollution further improvements in water quality are likely to be less expensive if they address non-point sources. Recently the Administration has given renewed emphasis to non-point source water pollution ( Box ) Agriculture is one of the principal sources of non-point source pollution. The environmental problems caused by agriculture stem mainly from the runoff of soil agricultural chemicals and livestock waste into lakes rivers and estuaries. These pollutants may cause undesirable algal blooms impair recreation and fishing and adversely affect wildlife. Pesticides and nutrients can also leach into groundwater threatening drinking water supplies. Soil erosion from U.S. farmland raises the cost of municipal and industrial water use shortens the life span of dams and hydroelectric projects damages aquatic habitat and can contribute to flooding. These off-farm damages from soil erosion have been estimated at $ billion to $ billion per year. In the EPA estimated that at least percent of all U.S river miles and percent of lake surface areas were water-quality impaired ( that is unsuitable for their designated uses ) The same study identified agriculture as a major contributor to impairment in about percent of those river miles and percent of those lakes and reservoirs Since these environmental effects are largely imposed on other users of the water resources and not on the farms that caused them agricultural non-point source water pollution is another example of an environmental externality that market forces alone are unlikely to solve. In a world of perfect and costless information the efficient policy response would be to monitor the erosion and runoff from each farm and reduce it to the point at which the incremental cost of further reduction equals the incremental benefit to the environment This textbook approach however is often unworkable because the cost of assessing the pollution caused by each farm can be prohibitive Instead public policies to address non-point source pollution from agriculture tend to focus on farmers ' choice of farming practices which is much more easily observed Non-point source pollution from agriculture like many other environmental problems raises the policy question of whether and how to encourage the adoption of environmentally friendly technologies Examples of such practices include conservation tillage integrated pest and nutrient management precision farming and buffer zones along waterways. These practices may actually be profitable for some farmers to adopt. As discussed above in the context of energy technology direct subsidies for the adoption of existing technology improve ecomonic efficiency when the benefits to society at least equal the costs including the social cost of subsidies. This section examines three policy approaches that have been used to encourage the adoption of farming practices that reduce non-point source pollution : incentive programs regulations and emissions trading programs Incentive Programs The U.S. Government has implemented several programs that provide incentives to farmers and ranchers to limit their impacts on the environment. These include support for State programs through Section of the Clean Water Act and several important components of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform ( FAIR ) Act Three programs account for the bulk of Federal spending on environmental incentive programs for agriculture : the Conservation Reserve Program ( CRP ) begun in ; the Wetland Reserve Program ( WRP ) initiated in ; and the Environmental Quality Incentives Program ( EQIP ) established by the FAIR act. The CRP and the WRP ( both of which were reauthorized by the FAIR act ) establish voluntary contracts with producers in which they agree to adopt certain practices on their land including establishing long-term conservation easements and taking it out of production for a period of years. In return the government provides incentive payments subsidies for the cost of the practices and technical assistance as needed. EQIP provides assistance for environmental and conservation improvements on the farm. The FAIR act requires new acres enrolled in the CRP to meet higher environmental and conservation criteria than land enrolled under earlier versions of the program and funds for EQIP are intended to maximize the environmental benefits per dollar expended and help farmers and ranchers meet national State and local environmental standards. Other program provisions such as Conservation Compliance require farmers who cultivate highly erodible land to adopt conservation practices or else forgo benefits from other agricultural programs. All these programs differ significantly from traditional regulation in that they are voluntary : no requirements apply to producers who do not wish to participate Efforts to remove environmentally sensitive land from agricultural production and encourage the adoption of resource-conserving farming practices have met with much success in reducing soil erosion from cropland. Between and erosion from cropland is estimated to have declined by about one-third Regulatory Control of Agricultural Pollution The Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments ( CZARA ) authorized the first federally mandated program requiring specific measures to address agricultural runoff as well as four other major non-point sources of water pollution. The EPA and the Department of Commerce 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) issued Federal guidelines for implementing CZARA in The guidelines set out certain requirements that State coastal nonpoint source pollution control programs must meet but they allow States to tailor their programs to their own environmental concerns geographic conditions site characteristics and farmer preferences These programs currently in the approval process identify the set of management measures that may be required of individual farms in the State. This process is designed to provide enough flexibility to allow farmers and technical assistance providers to select the practices appropriate for a given farming operation and to help keep farm compliance costs low. Existing sources of pollution such as most agricultural sources will have to years to comply from the time their State program is approved adding further flexibility and cost-saving opportunities in the timing of implementation Trading Water Pollution Credits To achieve water quality standards cost-effectively several State and local governments have experimented with programs that are similar in principle to the air pollution trading programs discussed earlier but do not involve marketed permits as such. Much like the joint implementation projects discussed in the context of climate change above these programs allow point sources of pollution to meet environmental standards by paying non-point sources ( such as farms ) to adopt practices to reduce pollution. As already noted it may be considerably less expensive to attain the same environmental outcome by reducing pollution from non-point sources than from point sources But because verifying pollution reduction from farms is prohibitively expensive the agencies administering these programs rely on verifying that farmers have adopted land management practices that are linked with pollution reduction assessing credits based on the estimated amount of pollution reduced and certifying the " trades. " Most of these programs focus on fertilizer and animal waste pollution including nitrogen and phosphorus compounds Cost savings from such exchanges if fully implemented could reach several billion dollars annually. But few trades have occurred to date. For example the Dillon Reservoir program in Colorado provides opportunities for trading between point and non-point sources. Early estimates expected significant cost savings from trading for the four municipal sewage treatment facilities but few trades between a point source and a non-point source have occurred since The Tar-Pamlico Basin program implemented in North Carolina in is not strictly a trading program. Rather it allows an association of point sources to average all of the members ' nutrient discharges under one cap. Then if total discharges exceed the cap the association must contribute to a State program that subsidizes management practices on farmland to reduce non-point source pollution To date the association has not exceeded its cap so no contributions to the non-point program have been required Trading has been limited both because the scope of trading opportunities has been constrained and because transaction costs have been high. To ensure that all sections of water bodies meet environmental standards trading is often restricted to a local watershed or certain stretches of a river. Other policy constraints on trades may further limit the potential gains from discharge credit trading. For example point sources are often required to adopt specific pollution control technologies before they may consider trading. This may limit the discharge reductions that they buy from other sources and reduce the potential gains from trading. In the Tar-Pamlico program point sources receive only one unit of pollution credit for every two units of pollution reduction they buy from non-point sources. By explicitly requiring nonequivalent emissions to be traded the program increases the cost of participation. Moreover these point sources must pay a 10-percent administrative surcharge for every pollution credit they purchase. Finally programs have often failed to provide assurances that the credits will continue to be honored in the future. This reduces the economic value of the credits and is another impediment to trading Although economic theory indicates that the costs of complying with environmental regulation can be significantly reduced through a trading system the limited experience with water pollution credit trading has not yet provided substantial cost savings. So far the small size of the markets for trades both geographically and in the number of potential traders and the regulatory constraints on trades have generated extra costs that make trading less attractive IMPROVING HEALTH CARE AND HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETS Without regulation health insurance markets do not function well A variety of policies have been implemented or proposed to address these shortcomings. This section discusses policy initiatives that this Administration has promoted to help improve the functioning of these markets. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPAA ) of helps workers maintain continuous insurance coverage by limiting exclusions of preexisting conditions whereby insurers do not cover previously diagnosed conditions for some period and by expanding guaranteed issue and renewability requirements which prohibit insurers from denying coverage or renewal on the basis of health status or claims experience. The President 's budget includes policies that improve access to affordable health insurance for people aged and for small businesses. In addition the Administration and the Congress are considering legislation to help ensure that consumers have enough information about health insurance plans and prescription drugs to make informed decisions Finally new initiatives to discourage teenage use of tobacco products are aimed at protecting those who may lack the maturity to make decisions about risky behaviors like smoking IMPROVING ACCESS AND PORTABILITY Adverse Selection in Health Insurance Markets A variety of concerns about health insurance markets relate to the problem of adverse selection the danger that only those persons most likely to need insurance will purchase it. Adverse selection in insurance markets can arise because of asymmetric information : would-be customers typically know more about their likelihood of incurring high medical costs than do insurers. If insurance is priced to reflect the average risk of a particular population ( a practice called community rating ) some healthier people may choose to go without. The average risk ( or expected medical costs ) of the insured pool will then be higher than that for the whole population and the insurer will lose money. Insurers will therefore seek ways to ensure that they do not attract a group that is particularly unhealthy. For example they may avoid offering comprehensive coverage ( by limiting access to specialists or not covering chronic conditions for example ) They may also engage in targeted marketing or change their health plans to appeal to healthier persons and discourage sicker ones from enrolling by adding benefits such as health club discounts or coverage for wellbaby care that are more attractive to persons in good health. In addition in an unregulated market insurers may explicitly exclude higher risk individuals through exclusions of preexisting conditions or by simply denying coverage. Thus adverse selection in health insurance markets can result in underinsurance among both younger healthier individuals and the very sick Adverse selection is reduced when insurers can insure large groups of people whose purpose in associating is unrelated to their preferences for health insurance. Insurers can be reasonably sure that the members of such groups are not exceptionally unhealthy on average and healthy people are not likely to leave the insured pool Employee groups particularly those of larger organizations are a natural pool for spreading risk and this in part explains why employer-based insurance is widespread. The lower premiums offered to such groups the tax-preferred treatment of employer-provided insurance employer subsidies and the difficulty of obtaining coverage on the individual market all encourage healthy workers to purchase insurance through their employers making adverse selection a much less serious problem Small firms might like to pool together to offer insurers larger risk pools and reduce administrative costs but these pools may fall apart as firms with healthier employees are likely to want to leave the pool to seek lower premiums on their own. The prevalence of employer-based insurance may also discourage self-employment or employment in smaller firms where obtaining affordable insurance is more difficult Even if one could correct the problem of asymmetric information directly by giving insurers the same information that their customers have this may not lead to a better outcome for two reasons. First there may be a " missing market " for longer term contracts for health insurance. Most health insurance contracts are for year but purchasers might prefer to buy long-term insurance to avoid the possibility of high premiums or cancellation should they become sick In addition the government cares not only about efficiency and market failures in health insurance markets but also about improving access to care. If insurers had more information they could choose not to cover some individuals or could charge higher premiums which is likely to reduce insurance coverage and access to care Employer-Based Insurance and " Job Lock " Health insurance coverage in the United States is closely tied to employment : about percent of the privately insured have employment-related coverage. Thus changing jobs often means changing health plans. Before HIPAA workers starting a new job often had to wait to qualify for coverage of preexisting conditions. In some cases new hires faced waiting periods for any health insurance. However one important drawback of employer-based insurance is reduced mobility between jobs or " job lock. " Waiting periods or preexisting condition exclusions make it difficult to ensure continuity of insurance coverage when changing jobs. This can be a barrier to job mobility particularly for those with chronic conditions. Evidence on the extent of job lock is mixed : some studies find little or no effect but one study estimates that employer-based health insurance can decrease job turnover rates by up to percent. When a person obtains coverage through a new employer he or she may be subject to preexisting conditions exclusions or waiting periods under the new plan. In addition to creating costs for individuals who may stay with a particular employer in order to keep health insurance job lock may also impose costs on the economy by preventing workers from moving to those jobs where they are most productive. Policies like HIPAA and the proposed Medicare buy-in may help improve mobility between jobs The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act HIPAA contains a number of reforms designed to improve the operation of individual and group health insurance markets. It helps ease the transition between jobs and into self-employment and improves access to insurance for those who lack access to employment-based insurance and for small firms Guaranteed issue and renewability. HIPAA prohibits insurers from declining to cover individuals who were previously covered by a group plan and who have elected and exhausted their eligibility for extended coverage under COBRA ( the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of ) which allows workers to buy into their former employer 's plan for up to months. HIPAA also prohibits insurers from refusing to renew coverage on the basis of health status claims experience genetic information or other related factors These provisions can help improve access to health insurance for small firms and individuals. However HIPAA imposes no restrictions on the premiums that insurers may charge so some individuals or firms may still be effectively excluded by prohibitively high premiums. In addition insurers may try to find other ways to avoid selling insurance policies to high-cost individuals through more targeted marketing or plan design as described above for example. Newspaper accounts report that some insurers may even be instructing their agents in how to avoid enrolling higher risk applicants Limiting preexisting condition exclusions. HIPAA generally limits exclusion periods for preexisting conditions to months. Some exclusions for preexisting conditions are appropriate because otherwise people would have little incentive to purchase insurance when they are healthy knowing that they could simply sign up after they get sick. Thus it is important to design policies that increase accessibility without exacerbating this free-rider problem. HIPAA addresses this problem by requiring that individuals have continuous coverage in order to take full advantage of the limits on preexisting conditions exclusions. If a person was covered for a particular condition at one job and then changes jobs or elects to purchase individual insurance he or she can " credit " the time covered under the previous plan against the preexisting condition period in the new plan. For example someone who had months of coverage could be required to wait no more than months for coverage at a new job ( assuming the employer offers insurance ) In addition those seeking insurance on the individual market must have months of creditable coverage and must have exhausted coverage under COBRA ( if eligible ) Insurers offering coverage to these persons may not impose preexisting condition exclusions Proposals to Improve Access to Health Insurance for to 64-Year-Olds Americans aged are one of the more difficult-to-insure populations : they have less access to and great risk of losing employer-based health insurance and they are twice as likely as younger people to have health problems. Many lose their coverage when they lose their jobs as a result of company downsizing or plant closings. Still others lose insurance when their retiree health coverage is dropped unexpectedly To address these problems the Administration has proposed three policies as part of its proposed budget. First persons aged who lack access to employer-provided insurance would be allowed to buy into Medicare. The premiums which would be paid in two parts one contemporaneously the second after turning would cover the full cost of participation making the policy self-financing in the long run. Second displaced workers aged and older who have lost their employer-based insurance as a result of job loss could also buy into Medicare. Third retirees aged and older whose employer drops their retiree health coverage would be eligible to buy into their former employer 's health insurance through COBRA. Retirees would pay a higher premium than do other COBRA participants to reflect their higher costs. Each of these options provides a competitive alternative to individual insurance for people in this age group Voluntary Purchasing Cooperatives for Small Businesses As described earlier small businesses are at a disadvantage in purchasing health insurance. To address this problem the Administration has proposed giving States grants to establish voluntary purchasing cooperatives for small businesses. Small firms could then pool together to negotiate insurance rates that are more affordable than those offered to them individually. This policy could help the large numbers of individuals working for small firms who are presently uninsured CONSUMER PROTECTION AND QUALITY IN THE HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY Health insurance plans are of two general types : fee-for-service plans pay providers for each service they perform whereas managed care plans ( such as health maintenance organizations ) usually shift some financial risk to providers. Between and the share of workers enrolled in fee-for-service plans fell from percent to percent primarily in response to rising health insurance costs. The expansion of managed care has helped slow the rate of growth in health insurance premiums by giving providers a greater incentive to control costs. But perceptions that the quality of care has suffered in managed care plans have made managed care the subject of criticism from consumer groups the press and the public. The last few years have seen a flurry of activity by the Congress and State legislatures regulatory agencies health plans consumer advocates and others to define a new set of consumer rights protections and responsibilities in response to consumers ' concerns about the changing health care system. Although managed care has focused new attention on these issues many of the concerns raised by these groups and the actions they propose to address them are equally important for traditional insurance plans The President 's Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry was established to advise the President on changes occurring in the health care system and where appropriate to make recommendations on how best to promote and ensure consumer protection and the quality of health care. The commission submitted a report including a Consumer Bill of Rights and Responsibilities to the President in November In addition the Health Care Financing Administration ( HCFA ) has promulgated rules designed to protect Medicare and Medicaid managed care participants How Managed Care Works Managed care organizations typically contract with a group of hospitals and doctors to care for their enrollees. Enrollees generally must seek care from providers in the plan 's network although point-of-service plans which allow enrollees to see providers outside the network with higher cost sharing are growing in popularity. ( " Cost sharing " refers to out-of-pocket payments such as deductibles and copay ments required of insured individuals who receive care. ) Whereas traditional fee-for-service plans control utilization mainly through cost sharing managed care organizations rely on a number of " supply-side " utilization controls. For example they may require enrollees to see a primary care physician or " gatekeeper " before they can go to a specialist or may limit the types of treatments that providers can offer. Another important feature of managed care plans is that providers often bear some of the financial risk. For example managed care plans may pay providers a fixed ( " capitated " ) payment for each member or use other mechanisms that give providers financial incentives to limit care Promises and Pitfalls in Consumer Protection Legislation Managed care highlights a new challenge to policymakers namely how to protect consumers and promote their informed choice among health plans without undermining managed care 's ability to control costs. More employers now offer their employees a choice of health plans including managed care plans and many of these ask employees to pay more for more expensive coverage. This can encourage plans to operate more efficiently control costs and provide higher quality care but consumers need sufficient information to make good decisions about what features they want in a health plan and how much they are willing to pay for them. Many of the activities of the President 's commission have focused on addressing the need for more user-friendly information about health plan features and quality and for strengthening consumer confidence in the health care system. In addition government attempts to micromanage the practice of medicine whether in the name of cost containment or in the name of consumer protection are an unwise use of regulatory authority and would either waste valuable resources or run counter to the goal of a quality-focused system The commission includes consumers health care providers health insurers health care purchasers representatives of State and local governments and experts in health care quality financing and administration. In drafting its Consumer Bill of Rights and Responsibilities the commission was guided by four principles : All consumers are created equal. The rights and responsibilities outlined by the commission should apply to all participants in the health care system including beneficiaries of public programs government employees persons with individual policies and those with employer-based coverage including self-funded coverage. In addition to the extent possible these rights should be accorded to those who have no health insurance but make use of the health care system Box Quality Data Collection for Medicare Managed Care Hie Health Care Financing Adis&nigteation has promulgated roles that will enable the agency to collect data on quality of oate in and beneficiary satisfaction with Medicare managed care plam The National Committee for Quality Assurance in coiyimction with HCFA industry representethres other purchaser ^ and beneficiary advocate ^ has developed quality measures related to the Medicare imputation. These measures build on the Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set ( HEDIS ) developed by the National Committee for Quality Assurance for the nncler ~ population. HCFA will piablisfa summary date to help beneficiaries choose among plans. Quality indicators will also allow HCFA to ensure that Medicare beneficiaries receive appropriate care from managed care providers and will help identify areas for quality improvement Currently managed care plans contracting with Medicare may have no more than percent of their enmllment from Medicare This prwMon was designed to help ensuiB that plans contracting with Medicare offer service of similar qtialitf to that provided in the private sector The Balanced Budget Aet of eliminated tMs requirement and new rules will allow HCFA to use actual quality data * rather than the ~ pereent role in deciding which managed care organisations are eligible to contract with Medicare * This effort wfll improY HCFA * s ability to ensure high-quality care and help beneficiaries make informed health plan decisions * In addition mom information about these plans could improve confidence in Medicare managed care en * -u ? aging more to enroll in these plans Quality first. In considering each proposal the commission asked whether it would improve the quality of care and of the system that delivers that care Preserve what works. Some elements of managed care and of feefor-service plans must be changed to protect the rights of consumers. But each delivery system can also point to elements that have improved quality and expanded access Costs matter. The need for stronger consumer rights must be balanced against the need to keep coverage affordable. Ultimately costs are borne by consumers and their families through higher health insurance premiums higher prices lower wages fewer benefits or less coverage Some reforms proposed by States and consumer groups would make managed care plans look more like traditional plans for example by requiring health maintenance organizations to accept all providers or limiting the use of financial incentives that may encourage physicians to limit treatment. To the extent that these regulations would prohibit practices that have helped managed care plans control utilization and spending they could undermine the ability of health plans to control costs and could ultimately reduce accessibility and affordability However to the extent that such policies improve the delivery of highquality efficacious care they could improve health outcomes and may help offset cost increases Among the rights laid out by the commission is the right of consumers to " fully participate in decisions related to their medical care. " In order for consumers to participate in decisions affecting their health care both when choosing a health plan and when considering treatment they need information. The commission recommended that plans should disclose all factors for example the method of provider compensation and the plan 's ownership of or financial interest in health care facilities that could influence providers ' advice or treatment decisions. In addition " gag clauses " and penalties on health care professionals who advocate on behalf of their patients should be eliminated so that providers can freely discuss all treatment options with their patients and so that patients can make decisions based on informed consent New Rules for Plans Serving Medicare and Medicaid In HCFA adopted regulations limiting the use of some financial arrangements for health plans serving the Medicare and Medicaid populations. These rules prohibited plans from making payments to providers to limit necessary care required plans to institute " stop-loss " provisions which protect providers from very large financial losses if the compensation method used places physicians or groups of physicians at substantial financial risk and required disclosure of information about arrangements that transfer substantial financial risk to the health care provider. HCFA also banned the use of " gag clauses " for Medicare plans beginning in and Medicaid plans beginning in In addition HCFA has sought new ways to ensure that Medicare managed care plans provide high-quality care by collecting data on quality and satisfaction in those plans ( Box ) FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION REFORM The Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of is designed to ensure the timely availability of safe and effective new products that will benefit the public health. The act which codifies a number of initiatives taken by the Administration as part of its reinventing government effort includes important provisions that will establish a clearly defined balanced mission statement for the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) improve access to certain experimental drugs prior to their final approval establish a fast-track approval process for drugs to treat life-threatening or serious diseases and reauthorize the Prescription Drug Users Fee Act ( PDUFA ) of increasing the resources available for the drug approval process Why Drug Regulation Is Needed Even without regulation drug manufacturers would have some incentive to distribute honest and accurate information about their products. If a manufacturer repeatedly releases drugs that turn out to be ineffective or unsafe its reputation will suffer and it may have more difficulty selling new products in the future. The threat of litigation or a public relations crisis can further discourage drug companies from marketing unsafe products. However drug companies are not likely to produce enough information about their products ' safety and efficacy without regulation. The legal system may not provide adequate consumer protection and regulation through litigation may come with high transaction costs. For example companies could set up corporate subsidiaries to issue new drugs and shield the parent company from loss of reputation. Government regulation is then needed to remedy this underprovision of information by evaluating and approving drugs before they may be marketed Setting the Standard of Proof Setting the standard of proof for new drug approvals entails balancing two risks. On the one hand approval of unsafe drugs may cause injury or death and approval of ineffective drugs may crowd out alternative treatments or increase wasteful medical spending. On the other hand denials or delays in approval may prevent sick people from getting more effective treatment The FDA has historically focused primarily on minimizing the first type of risk ( Box ) In the late 1980s however the focus began to shift with respect to drugs for life-threatening illnesses particularly AIDS. The FDA instituted a fast-track approval process for these drugs and more patients were offered early access to these drugs before final approval. These policies recognize that the risk that a drug will prove unsafe or ineffective must be weighed against the risks of the disease itself. The FDA Modernization Act codifies and expands upon these reforms and establishes a mission for the FDA that explicitly emphasizes not only protecting the public health by ensuring that products approved by the FDA meet high standards for safety and efficacy but also designing a review process that does not unduly limit innovation or product availability * * History of Pood and Drug Administration Regulation of In an elbdr of stilfamlamid ^ an antibiotic killed ? people most of them eMldrenu This tragedy hastened the enaetmeM the following year of food and drug legislation already pending : the Federal Pood Bmg ? and Cosmetic Act gave the PDA authority to regulate cosmetics preseription druga and therapexrtte devices 'The act required that products be shown to be safe before they are marketed During the 1940s and 1950s the Congress subjected a number of other products ^ including food additives and pesticides to PDA approval and enacted other requirements In the sleeping pill thalidomide was linked to serious birth defects in Europe Although concerns with thaJidomide related to safety not efficacy * and the drug had not been approved to the United States the scare generated support for extending the FDA 's mandate to determining the efficacy of new drugs. These events culnnnated in the passage of the Drug Amendments which required drag manufacturers to show that drugs were not only safe but also effective. The effectiveness requirement was associated with a rapid increase in total drug development time ( Chart ) Chart Ciinica ! Trial and Drug Application Approval Times for New Drugs New drug development time has trended upward since the 1960s although drug application approval time is at an all-time low Years Total development time Drug application approval time JL Note : Data are 3-year moving averages Source : Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development Tufts University Box * * The Prescription I>rttg Users Pee Act erf Between and the Congress enacted laws that placed additional demands on the FDA Yet the agenc/s budget resources have not always kept pace with growth in the number of products it reviews. The Prescription Drug Users Fee Act ( PDBFA ) of helped address this problem by allowing the PDA to assess fees on manufacturers seeking approval for drugs PDUFA also set ambitious performance goals for reducing approval time for new drug applications and required that the feea not offset current funding Although faster NDA approval is important it represents only a fraction of the total time necessary to develop and approve new drugs. Nor do shorter NDA approval times necessarily translate month for month into shorter total drug development times. The standard of proof for approval determines how many trials and how much analysis must be completed and is an important determinant of the time it takes a drug to travel from the laboratory to the medicine cabinet. In addition ? total drug development time may rise or fall in response to a variety of other factors from the efficiency of laboratory analysis to the chemical complexity of the drug Growth in total development time appears to have slowed nev ~ ertheless ^ and PDUFA is widely viewed as a success. The FDA has hired more than new reviewers ^ and NDA approval times have fallen to record lows. As a result PDUPA and its recent ^ authorization have garnered broad industry support In fiscal the FDA reported that percent of the application backlog had been eliminated * In addition the agency has met and exceeded PDUFA % performance goals for action on NBAs Improving Efficiency in the Drug Approval Process Whatever the standard of proof for approval rapid processing of new drug applications ( NBAs ) reduces the health costs associated with delay. Over the last several years the FDA has endeavored to streamline the NDA approval process and reduce unnecessary delays and NDA approval times have declined significantly especially for " priority " medications expected to have important therapeutic value For example seven drugs for AIDS and other life-threatening illnesses were approved in under months in After rising since the early 1960s the growth in total drug development time seems to have stabilized in the 1990s ( Chart ) The FDA Modernization Act builds on the success of these initiatives to further streamline the approval process and reduce costly delays in drug application reviews. The act reauthorizes the Prescription Drug Users Fee Act of ensuring that the FDA has the resources to review drug applications quickly and efficiently ( Box ) REDUCING TEENAGE SMOKING The mere fact that people engage in hazardous behavior is not by itself evidence of market failure. But an externality exists if their behavior imposes costs on others and an information market failure exists if they are not aware of the full costs to themselves of the activity. Smoking especially by teenagers arguably illustrates both types of market failure. In addition because the cigarette manufacturing industry is highly concentrated with just four firms accounting for the bulk of sales market power is also a concern although the higher prices that might result discourage smoking and ameliorate the other possible market failures. This section reviews important tobacco policy developments in and assesses them with respect to the rationale for government action based on market failure Last year marked a historic turning point in the long-running battle between tobacco companies and public health advocates over the harmful effects of cigarettes. First a landmark rule by the FDA to protect children from the damage of tobacco products was upheld by a Federal judge in North Carolina. Next the Balanced Budget Act took a first step toward reducing teen smoking by increasing the Federal excise tax on cigarettes. Revenue from this tax increase will help fund the State Children 's Health Insurance Program. In addition a proposed national tobacco settlement was reached last June between the major tobacco companies and a group of state attorneys general. Following an Administration review of the proposed settlement the President challenged the Congress to pass sweeping tobacco legislation to reduce teen smoking. Full congressional consideration of such legislation was postponed until this year A major objective of both the FDA rule and the proposed settlement is to reduce access to and use of tobacco products by minors. The FDA rule prohibits the sale of nicotine-containing cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to persons under age and imposes a number of restrictions on manufacturers distributors and retailers to limit easy access to cigarettes and other tobacco products and to decrease the amount of positive advertising imagery that makes these products appealing to children and teenagers. The proposed settlement goes beyond these prohibitions : it would increase the price of cigarettes and impose penalties on the industry if specific targets for reducing youth smoking are not met. Teens are more sensitive to the price of cigarettes than adult smokers. Estimates suggest that for every 10-percent increase in the price of cigarettes the number of teenage smokers falls by percent versus about percent for adults. The President 's call for legislative action sought a comprehensive plan to reduce teen smoking including even tougher penalties than under the proposed settlement if targets are not met The Rationale for Regulating Smoking Tobacco use is one of the most important preventable causes of illness and premature death in the United States. Tobacco use is responsible for over deaths each year about percent of all deaths. The average smoking-related death costs its victim up to years of life. These facts alone might justify an active antismoking effort on public health grounds. But to make an economic case for discouraging smoking based on market failure requires evidence that people are unaware of the risks of smoking or that their smoking imposes costs on others. This case is less obvious than the public health case. It is hard to argue for example that people do not know that smoking is hazardous to their health. Indeed at least one study suggests that people generally perceive the risks from smoking to be even greater than is consistent with scientific evidence. Another study finds that light and moderate smokers ' assessments of the impact of their smoking on life expectancy are realistic whereas heavy smokers significantly underestimate the risks. Similarly it is widely recognized that smoking is habit-forming and most likely addictive. Yet mature adults are generally given the freedom to make choices that involve trading off the best possible health for other pleasures ( like playing dangerous sports overeating overdrinking or sitting on a couch watching too much TV ) The economic case for discouraging smoking based on incomplete information focuses therefore on the decision by teenagers to start smoking. To the extent that young people have short time horizons and are influenced by industry advertising they may discount too heavily the risks of smoking and the difficulty of quitting. The studies cited above of people 's perceptions of the risks associated with smoking did not include teenagers. The finding that heavy smokers underestimate the risks included only to 62-year-olds ; it is likely that teenagers ' assessments are even more unrealistic. Society may legitimately wish to limit to adults the right to make such a risky decision as whether or not to smoke Tobacco use also imposes externalities. To the extent that the costs of treating smoking-related illnesses are not reflected in the insurance premiums paid by smokers or in their tax and premium contributions to programs such as Medicare and Medicaid smokers impose uncompensated costs on the rest of society. One influential study suggests that these costs are offset to some extent by the social savings in reduced pension and Social Security payments due to the premature death of smokers ; it also suggests that existing excise taxes cover the net external costs of smoking. However this study does not include the costs of all diseases in which smoking has been implicated nor does it consider such additional potentially large external effects as illness and death from second-hand smoke Thus reasonable economic grounds exist for policies aimed at regulating and discouraging smoking. Until last year the tobacco industry was able to mount a largely successful effort to limit such efforts. It did however face the prospect of numerous lawsuits including several State-initiated class action suits aimed at recovering damages for smoking-related State Medicaid expenditures. Although the industry had a good record of winning such lawsuits the ongoing litigation costs and the huge potential costs of an adverse verdict apparently made it worthwhile to the tobacco companies to seek a settlement Economics of the Proposed Settlement The proposed tobacco settlement reached last June illustrates some of the issues that will have to be addressed in any tobacco legislation The settlement would impose a one-time $ billion charge on tobacco firms plus an annual payment which would be adjusted for inflation and for the quantity of tobacco sold in the United States. In effect the annual payment would function like an excise tax Although the figure of $ billion is often cited as the industry 's total payment this number is misleading in several respects. First $ billion is the simple sum of the $ billion initial payment and the base value of the first years of annual payments ( in constant dollars ) A more economically meaningful approach would calculate the discounted present value of the stream of payments expected from the settlement recognizing that a dollar paid years from now is worth far less than a dollar paid today. For example using a conservative discount rate of percent the present value of the first years of payments described in the proposed settlement would be about $ billion at current sales volumes. Second the base payment does not represent the amount that would actually be paid Because the annual payment functions like an excise tax the quantity of cigarettes sold will decline to the extent that the payment is passed on to consumers through higher cigarette prices. The payment collected will fall accordingly. ( On the other hand other features of the proposed settlement such as the surcharge for not meeting youth smoking targets and an " excess profits " provision could increase the payment. ) Third because it is anticipated that the settlement payment will be fully reflected in the price of cigarettes the incidence of the annual payment will fall primarily on continuing smokers not on the tobacco companies A Federal Trade Commission analysis of the proposed settlement raises additional concerns about its antitrust implications. The tobacco industry is highly concentrated as noted above. Gross profit margins are also high. But even in highly concentrated industries where prices may be higher than would prevail under perfect compe- tition rivalry among firms and the illegality of explicit collusion tend to keep prices below the level that would maximize industry profits Numerous economic studies have found an elasticity of demand for cigarettes in the range of about to in the short run meaning that each 10-percent increase in the price of cigarettes leads to a to 5-percent decline in the number of packs sold. This implies that a price increase would raise industry profits : not only would the increase in price be more than enough to offset the decline in the quantity sold but total costs would also fall with the reduction in quantity. Since demand is inelastic if firms were free to collude they would have an incentive to raise prices substantially. The Federal Trade Commission 's analysis points to certain aspects of the settlement most notably its broad antitrust exemption that could reduce rivalry and increase collusion. In general the antitrust laws forbid collusion to fix prices because higher prices increase industry profits at the expense of consumer welfare and economic efficiency. In the case of cigarettes however higher prices could further the social policy goal of reducing smoking. Nevertheless granting a broad antitrust exemption is neither the most direct nor the most socially desirable way of achieving higher cigarette prices This Administration believes that tobacco legislation must include stiff penalties that give the tobacco industry the strongest possible incentive to stop targeting young smokers. The proposed settlement includes targets to cut teen smoking by percent in years percent in years and percent in years. Legislation should further impose financial penalties that hold tobacco companies accountable to meet those targets. The Administration supports penalties that are non-tax-deductible uncapped and escalating so that the penalties get stiffer and the price increases greater the more the companies miss their targets. Recognizing that one of the surest ways to reduce youth smoking is to increase the price of cigarettes the President has called for a combination of industry payments and penalties that could add up to $ per pack to the price of cigarettes over the next decade. The Administration also supports a number of nonprice strategies for reducing youth smoking through tobacco settlement legislation including public education counteradvertising stronger and more visible warning labels and expanded efforts to prevent youth access to tobacco products CHAPTER Recent Initiatives in Antitrust Enforcement DURING THIS ADMINISTRATION the Federal antitrust enforcement agencies have been aggressive in enforcing the Nation 's antitrust laws. The Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice has imposed record fines over $ million in fiscal and the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) have both pursued many important cases and investigations involving such firms as Microsoft Archer Daniels Midland Toys " R " Us and Staples and Office Depot as well as traders on the NASDAQ overthe-counter stock market. This more aggressive stance does not however return Federal antitrust philosophy to an earlier era in which big was viewed as inherently bad. Recent cases and investigations suggest that the Justice Department and the FTC have taken a balanced approach to antitrust enforcement bringing an action only when thorough investigation and analysis reveal a substantial threat to competition. In doing so these agencies are guided by their mission to protect the competitive process recognizing that free markets are likely to provide the best outcomes for society This chapter reviews how these agencies have analyzed market competition in a number of recent cases. In so doing it attempts to explain some apparent paradoxes in antitrust enforcement why for example in the FTC stopped Staples and Office Depot from merging even though the vast majority of office products are sold by neither company but allowed a merger between the two leading U.S manufacturers of large commercial aircraft in an already highly concentrated industry. The chapter begins with a broad overview of the origins and principles of antitrust efforts in the United States and then proceeds to survey several recent developments. The most striking of these has been the growth in corporate merger filings to record levels. The chapter explores the efforts of the antitrust enforcement agencies to allow those mergers that reduce costs without allowing firms to gain the power to raise prices. Next the chapter discusses the potential impact of electronic commerce on competition. Although electronic commerce will in many cases make competition work more smoothly it may also make it easier to establish price-fixing agreements. The chapter also surveys the efforts of antitrust enforcers to ensure the continued growth and competitiveness of high-technology industries. Finally the chapter discusses international antitrust enforcement an aspect of antitrust policy that has become increasingly important as global trade has expanded ORIGINS AND PRINCIPLES OF ANTITRUST As the American economy shifted from agriculture toward industry during the 19th century large corporations and trusts began to emerge eventually dominating or threatening to dominate a number of industries. Public opposition to these monopolies mounted and in alone States passed antitrust or antimonopoly statutes. The Congress followed swiftly. In it passed the Sherman Act by an overwhelming margin : to in the Senate and to in the House of Representatives. The broad contours of American antitrust law were completed in with the passage of the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Act The Sherman Act contains broad bans with both criminal and civil penalties on monopolization price-fixing agreements and other unreasonable restraints on trade. The Clayton Act contains more specific prohibitions of mergers and of certain forms of price discrimination exclusive dealing agreements and tie-in sales ( sales conditioned on the purchase of another product ) when the effect may be to substantially lessen competition or to tend to create a monopoly The Justice Department and the FTC have overlapping but distinct authorities : the Justice Department may bring actions under the Sherman Act and the FTC under the Federal Trade Commission Act but either may bring actions under the Clayton Act. In addition the major regulatory agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the Surface Transportation Board all review mergers under their own statutory authority The antitrust laws ' primary objection to monopolies cartels and other restrictive practices and restraints of trade is that they injure consumers by increasing prices. Another concern which has been a particular focus of economists is that these high prices inappropriately curtail consumption of the monopolized good. Inefficiencies arise when sellers charge monopoly prices because consumers lose more from the price increase than sellers gain Another objection to monopoly was expressed by Judge Learned Hand who argued that " Unchallenged economic power deadens initiative discourages thrift and depresses energy " and that " immunity from competition is a narcotic and rivalry is a stimulant to industrial progress. " In a similar vein the British economist John Hicks wrote that " the best of all monopoly profits is a quiet life. " This complacency on the part of monopolists can impede economic progress The concern that firms with market power the power to raise prices above their production costs can limit innovation has become an important part of antitrust enforcement during this Administration The choice between competition and monopoly is easy Unfortunately however that is not usually the choice that antitrust enforcers face. The industries in which antitrust issues tend to arise can seldom be appropriately classified as either perfectly competitive or monopolized. Usually they lie somewhere in between. Firms typically have some market power but they also have competitors Mergers and restrictive practices may create or enhance market power but they may also promote efficiencies and hence can benefit consumers. Identifying corporate conduct whose primary effect is to lessen competition is the task of antitrust enforcers a task that often presents a formidable analytical challenge MERGERS Another challenge for the antitrust enforcement agencies during this Administration has been the dramatic increase in merger activity. As Chart shows after a lull in the early 1990s the merger market has come roaring back to life. Both the and fiscal years set new records for the number of merger filings Chart Mergers Filed with the Antitrust Agencies Large mergers must be filed with the U.S. antitrust enforcement agencies. Fiscal was the second consecutive year of record filings Number of mergers Fiscal years Sources : Department of Justice ( Antitrust Division ) and Federal Trade Comission Box * Consolidation m tfcta Defense Industry The recent merger wave m the U.S. defense Industry highlights the difficult tradeoffs involved in antitrust policy and the balanced approach that the antitrust enforcement agencies have taken during this Administration. The end of the Cold War and the ensiling 65-percent real reduction in the Pentagon 's procurement budget created intense pressure toward consolidation * A large share of the defense business is now concentrated in the hands of a few large firms notably Lockheed Martin Northrop Grumman Boeing Raytheon and General Dynamics that have acquired numerous other major defense contractors a $ they exited the industry The challenge for the antitrust authorities has been to balance the perceived need for consolidation to reduce overhead costs against the potential for a reduction in competition. On the one hand if the mergers allow defense contractors to eliminate duplicative overhead costs the Pentagon will be able to purchase weapons systems more cheaply On the other hand if the number of effective bidders falls prices may rise forcing either higher defense budgets or reduced defense purchases In a number of cases where anticompetitive effects have been a concern instead of trying to block the merger and forgoing the potential cost savings the antitrust agencies have tried to adopt narrowly focused remedies. For example they have invalidated exclusivity arrangements insisted on the divestiture of key assets and required the creation of provisional information In evaluating these mergers and deciding which ones to challenge the enforcement agencies must strike a fine balance. A merger may yield significant cost savings but it may also threaten to increase industry concentration ( that is reduce the number of firms in the industry ) and stifle competition allowing the remaining firms to increase prices and reduce output. The impact on concentration and competition is particularly difficult to evaluate in the many industries now experiencing rapid structural and technological change such as the defense industry considered in Box The enforcement agencies must consider who will be the merged firm 's competitors in the future not just today A merger does not have to create a monopoly in order to result in higher prices and lower output. By increasing concentration a merger may increase the likelihood of successful collusion either overt or tacit among the remaining firms. Greater concentration may make it easier for each firm to communicate its intentions to the others and Box $ * continued merging companies An example of tite first remedy is provided by the merger of Lockheed Corp. with Martin Marietta Corp. This merger raised antitrust concerns tha companies had entered into exclusive teaming with Hughes and Northrop Grumman Corp. respectively * In the wake of a merger these agreements would raise the prospect that there might be only one bidder on spacebaaed infrared aarly warning satellite systems since Hughes and Northrop Grumman were the leading providers of eleetrooptieal sensors for these satellites. T0 promote competition in tM market the FTC 's consent order forbade Lockheed Martin enforcing the exclusivity provisions Baytheon Co/s $ * billion acquisition of Hughes Aircraft Co might have substantially lessened competition in both infrared sensors and electro-optical systems had the Justice Department not forced Raytheon to make a large divestiture Raytheon agreed to seE off the infrared sensor business it had acquired from Texaa Instruments Ine ^ as well as electro-optical system ^ businesses that it would otherwise have acquired with the purchase of Hughes. Raytheon also agreed to a firm price on an jMrFdree missile to compensate for the lost competition from Hughes * Finally, Raytheon agreed to maintain an information firewall to preserve the independence of Raythaon and Hughei for a new Army antitank missile * the interests of the firms may be less likely to diverge. The smaller number of firms may also reduce the benefits and increase the cost of cheating on the collusive agreement. For example mergers make price cutting less profitable because the merger eliminates one firm from which customers might be attracted away by the price cut. It may also become easier for colluding firms to detect and punish those firms that deviate from the agreement Mergers may result in price increases even when firms do not collude in any sense. For example a firm with market power by virtue of control over a large portion of industry capacity will enhance that power and may therefore raise prices if it acquires still more capacity by merging with a competitor. Another important example of such a " unilateral competitive effect " arises when formerly standardized products become differentiated giving rise to market power as consumers develop brand preferences. Such power is limited by the availability of competing brands ; hence a merger between firms sell ing competing brands relaxes the constraint that competition places on prices. The merged firm recognizes that some of the sales lost through a price increase on one brand will be recaptured by the other brand and therefore be retained by the firm. This encourages the merged firm to raise the price of both brands. When the brands are particularly close substitutes the firm may want to raise both prices substantially Enforcement agencies must balance these concerns about market power against the efficiencies in production that mergers can make possible. There are several ways in which mergers can reduce the average cost of production in an industry. A merger may allow one firm to take advantage of another 's superior technology. Where production processes are composed of multiple distinct activities a merger can allow each of the merging firms to specialize in those activities that it does best. Mergers may also increase efficiency in industries subject to economies of scale that is those in which average production cost declines as output increases. In these industries a merger may reduce costs by eliminating duplicative fixed costs or allowing longer production runs Consumers benefit from the merger as well if merging firms pass these savings along in the form of lower prices. The challenge for antitrust enforcement then is to prevent those mergers that would harm consumers by enhancing market power but to allow those that create substantial benefits. To evaluate the market power and the efficiency effects of mergers the FTC and the Justice Department use the framework that they jointly established in the Horizontal Merger Guidelines which were partially revised in According to the guidelines the steps to be taken in a merger review for a merger among competitors are as follows : define the relevant market and calculate its concentration before and after the merger assess whether the merger raises concerns about adverse competitive effects determine whether entry by other firms into the market would counteract those effects and consider any expected efficiency gains This chapter discusses each step in turn below MARKET DEFINITION The first step is to determine the relevant market and whether the merger will increase concentration significantly in that market. The Merger Guidelines state that the relevant market is generally the smallest group of products and geographical area such that a hypothetical monopolist in that market would raise the price significantly taking into account the reduction in demand caused by consumers curtailing their purchases. Having defined the relevant market the agencies determine the market shares of all firms identified as market participants and use these market shares to calculate an index of market concentration. Mergers that would increase concentration significantly tend to attract more scrutiny from the enforcement agencies because these mergers are more apt to lead to large price hikes. Typically therefore the narrower the relevant market the more likely it is that a merger will be investigated In the FTC challenged the merger of Staples Inc. and Office Depot Inc. because it believed that the relevant product market was " the sale of consumable office supplies through office superstores " and these firms were the two largest in that market. Staples countered that the relevant market was all sales of office products including sales by discount stores drugstores and wholesale clubs. The combined firm would have accounted for less than percent of this broader market which suggested that the firm could not have raised prices significantly after the merger if this market definition were indeed correct. The FTC maintained however that even though most individual items could themselves be bought from many retailers the size selection and inventory offered by office superstores distinguish them from other office supply retailers. The FTC 's statistical analysis showed that when the presence of other potential competitors was controlled for Staples ' prices were over percent higher in cities where it did not face competition from other office supply superstores. The FTC took this as evidence that nonsuperstore sellers of office supplies do not constrain superstores ' prices effectively. This pricing evidence led the court to accept the FTC 's market definition and conclude that the merger would significantly increase concentration in the office superstore market and so be anticompetitive The key issue in defining the relevant market in a recent merger between two gypsum drywall producers was not the type of seller but rather the sellers ' geographic location. In Georgia-Pacific Corp. which had drywall plants nationwide including one each in New York and Delaware proposed to acquire nine drywall plants from a Canadian-based competitor Domtar Inc. Two of the nine plants were located in New Hampshire and New Jersey. The Justice Department determined that if the relevant geographic market was national the acquisition would likely not have raised competitive concerns However the merger would have increased concentration significantly in the Northeastern States so that if the relevant market were localized to that region the merger likely would have led to price increases there To determine the relevant geographic market the Justice Department examined whether a small but significant local price increase by Northeastern producers would be profitable taking into account the extent to which customers could switch to producers out side the region. The agency considered such factors as current shipping patterns constraints on production capacity outside the region and transportation costs. Gypsum drywall is heavy bulky expensive to ship and likely to break during transport if handled excessively The Justice Department found that drywall plants in the Northeastern States accounted for the majority of sales to consumers in those states ; sales from plants outside the region were comparatively small. Furthermore drywall plants outside the Northeast had relatively little excess capacity. From this evidence the Justice Department determined that customers in the Northeast could not have switched to out-of-region producers in sufficient quantities to make a local price increase unprofitable. The agency therefore decided that the relevant geographic market was regional and Georgia-Pacific to satisfy the Justice Department 's concerns agreed that it would divest its New York and Delaware plants COMPETITIVE EFFECTS Defining the market and assessing its concentration are only the beginning of the merger review process. The next step is to determine whether the merger would have adverse competitive effects. The Merger Guidelines recognize that mergers may lessen competition through either collusion or unilateral effects. Indeed unilateral effects received new prominence in the Merger Guidelines and have been the dominant concern in several recent mergers One recent example where the analysis of unilateral effects suggested significant harm to competition is the acquisition of Continental Baking Co. by Interstate Bakeries Corp. Continental 's Wonder Bread brand competed against various Interstate brands in several regions. Although these two firms were by no means the only producers of white bread in these regions the Justice Department concluded that white bread is a highly differentiated product with various brands commanding significant customer loyalty and that after the merger Interstate would likely have raised prices on its brands even if other bakers kept their prices constant. Interstate would no longer be discouraged from raising prices on its own brands by the risk of customers switching to Wonder Bread since after the merger Interstate would own Wonder Bread. Likewise whereas Continental was discouraged from raising the price of Wonder Bread by the prospect of customers switching to Interstate 's brands after Interstate bought Wonder Bread this would no longer be a worry Simulations based on estimated demand elasticities helped convince the Justice Department that significant price increases would likely follow the merger even in the absence of coordination among the remaining firms. To avoid these price increases the Justice Department entered into a consent decree requiring the merged firm to divest a brand of bread in each of five geographic regions Sometimes the antitrust authorities can limit a merged firm 's power to raise prices without requiring a divestiture as illustrated in the merger of Time Warner Inc. with Turner Broadcasting System Inc. In Time Warner proposed to acquire Turner in a deal valued at over $ billion. Both companies were important providers of programming to local cable system operators. Time Warner owned Home Box Office ( HBO ) the leading cable movie channel and Turner owned Cable News Network ( CNN ) Both these channels are " marquee " channels that cable operators have a strong desire to carry in order to attract and retain subscribers. The FTC was concerned that if Time Warner controlled both these marquee channels it would increase the prices it charged to cable operators. To limit the anticompetitive effects of the merger the FTC 's consent order prohibited Time Warner from " bundling " HBO with Turner channels and CNN with Time Warner channels. The bundling restriction required that the Time Warner and Turner channels be offered separately at prices that do not depend on whether the other is purchased It may not be immediately apparent why restrictions on bundling can sometimes be an appropriate remedy ; after all once the merged firm controls the price of both channels it could simply implement an across-the-board price increase. However a hypothetical example demonstrates that when a merged firm sells goods that are substitutes for each other prohibiting bundling can limit price increases Consider a cable operator in a city with potential subscribers and assume that the cable operator earns a dollar in profits from each subscriber. Suppose that of the potential subscribers like movies : they will subscribe only if the cable system offers a movie channel. Another like news and will subscribe only if a news channel is offered. The remaining like both movies and news and will subscribe if either is offered. In this city the cable operator would be willing to pay up to $ for either movies or news since in each case people will subscribe. However as soon as the cable operator buys a movie channel and gets all the subscribers who like movies it will be willing to pay only $ for a news channel since the only additional subscribers it will attract are the people who like news but not movies. Similarly a cable operator that already offers news would be willing to pay only $ for movies Since some people subscribe if either a movie channel or a news channel is offered the two channels are substitutes from the point of view of the cable operator. If movies and news can be sold as a bundle they can be sold for $ because a total of people will subscribe. On the other hand if bundling is forbidden and each channel must be for sale individually the merged firm will not be able to charge that much Suppose for instance that the merged firm tried to sell each channel for $ The cable station would respond by buying only one of the channels ; since the channels are substitutes once the cable sta tion purchases one channel its willingness to pay for the other channel diminishes to $ If the channels are sold separately the most the merged firm could sell them for is $ ( $ each ) For this reason restrictions on bundling such as those in the FTC 's consent order can sometimes limit the exploitation of market power even when the firm can charge whatever it likes for its products individually ENTRY The analysis of a merger does not end with defining the market and determining whether the increase in concentration would allow the merged firm to raise prices. Entry can in principle constrain the merged firm 's ability to raise prices : a merger that leads to increased prices may also create opportunities for new firms to enter the market charge a lower price to gain market share and still earn profits. Loss of sales to new entrants could cause the anticompetitive price increase to be unprofitable. As a result entry or the threat of entry can in some cases prevent any appreciable price increase after a merger One difficulty with entry analysis is that it can be highly speculative. It is easy to be overly optimistic and assume that entrants will materialize and eradicate the anticompetitive effects of a merger. Accordingly the antitrust enforcement agencies have taken seriously the Merger Guidelines ' caution that entry must be timely likely and sufficient to counter the merger 's adverse competitive effects One merger where entry seemed unlikely to offset the effects of increased concentration was the proposed acquisition of Intuit Inc. by Microsoft Corp. Each of the two software firms produced a popular personal finance program : Microsoft 's Money and Intuit 's Quicken together accounted for more than percent of the personal finance software market. Here the question faced by the Justice Department was whether other firms were likely to enter this market in sufficient force to constrain Microsoft 's market power once it owned both programs. Two important features of software markets limited the likelihood of entry : the importance of reputation and the " lock-in effect. " Purchasers of personal finance software generally prefer a product that is widely accepted as reliable and successful and that has a reputation for performance and customer support. It can take many years and a significant investment for an entrant to develop such a reputation. Even Microsoft had considerable difficulty overcoming the initial success of Intuit. After years of effort the market share of Microsoft 's Money remained far less than that of Quicken and Microsoft had yet to achieve a positive return on its investment The fact that consumers have to put considerable time and effort into learning to use a given program gives rise to the lock-in effect. Users of existing software may be reluctant to incur the switching costs of learning another program. Future purchasers may likewise hesitate to invest time and effort in learning to use an entrant 's new and untested product because of the risk that the product may not succeed in the marketplace requiring the customer to eventually switch to the established product To make the deal acceptable to the antitrust authorities Microsoft planned to transfer part of its assets in Money to another software developer. Even so the Justice Department felt that the importance of reputation and the lock-in effect among other factors meant that entry could not be relied upon to offset the high concentration that a merger of Microsoft and Intuit would have caused The merger was challenged and Microsoft decided not to pursue it EFFICIENCIES The final major step in the merger review process is to consider the efficiencies promised by the merger. Economists have long recognized the potential benefits of such efficiencies and in recent years the antitrust agencies have been increasingly willing to consider these benefits when reviewing mergers. Most recently in April the Justice Department and the FTC issued revisions to the section of the Merger Guidelines devoted to efficiencies. These revisions reflect the balanced approach of current antitrust enforcement. Under the revised guidelines the agencies consider the creation of efficiencies but only verifiable merger-specific efficiencies. Many studies have suggested that mergers may not produce the synergies and cost savings claimed by managers. Since the agencies understand that it is easier for firms to claim efficiencies than to realize them they subject efficiency claims to careful scrutiny. If the agencies determine that the claimed efficiencies are likely to be realized and are of sufficient magnitude that the merger is not likely to be anticompetitive they will not challenge the merger The proposed merger between Staples and Office Depot illustrates the increased consideration and scrutiny of efficiencies in antitrust enforcement. The two firms claimed that by merging they would be able to take advantage of large cost reductions and efficiencies in purchasing distribution operations and marketing and that these savings would be passed on to customers in the form of lower prices Consistent with the revised Merger Guidelines the court deciding the case considered whether these efficiencies would offset the presumed anticompetitive effects of the merger. The court refused to accept cost savings that were not merger-specific and dismissed those that could not be verified. Also at issue was the degree to which Staples and Office Depot would pass any cost savings through to consumers. The companies projected that for every dollar of cost savings their prices would go down by about cents. However the FTC presented evidence that historically Staples had passed through only to percent of its achieved cost savings. Accordingly the court found that the merger 's efficiencies would not offset its anticompetitive effects. It granted the FTC 's request for an injunction leading Staples and Office Depot to terminate their merger agreement ELECTRONIC COMMERCE The potential impact of electronic commerce on competition is dramatic as described in a recent White House report titled A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce. Electronic commerce is already common in several industries. Travelers for example buy airline tickets from travel agents who use computer reservation systems. Over-the-counter stocks are traded on a computerized system And consumers can buy everything from books to automobiles over the Internet The potential for electronic commerce to make the economy function better is clear. Computer networks can inform buyers about products available in other States or just as easily in foreign countries. Cheap information about wide-ranging markets means that buyers can buy products that they would not otherwise have known about and can pay lower prices as well. A seller who is the only supplier in a given area may have little power to raise prices if buyers can easily compare prices around the country or around the world. Music stores in Philadelphia will find it pointless to conspire to sell compact discs at high prices if buyers can easily locate competing dealers around the country. Putting cheap information in the hands of consumers thus seems likely to make markets more competitive. One might well wonder if electronic commerce could lessen the need for antitrust enforcement in many markets However two cases that the Justice Department recently filed and settled one against a group of U.S. airlines and the other against so-called market makers who execute over-the-counter stock trades highlight a straightforward problem with electronic commerce Computers do increase the information available in the marketplace but not just to consumers ; they also make more information available to producers and other sellers. Sellers may be able to use this wealth of information to form or maintain cartels For a cartel to raise prices successfully the members must somehow come to an agreement about what prices to charge and must figure out a way to maintain that agreement. The airline and stock trading cases illustrate how computer networks can sometimes help a cartel solve both these problems. They suggest that rather than lessening the need for antitrust authorities the growth of electronic commerce may in some cases increase it In the Justice Department reached a final settlement in a price-fixing case involving eight major airlines and the Airline Tariff Publishing Company ( ATP ) According to the Justice Department the airlines had used ATP 's computerized fare dissemination services to negotiate increases in fares and to trade fare changes in certain markets for changes in other markets The alleged collusive arrangement worked as follows. Each airline submitted its fare changes or planned future changes to ATP. In turn ATP reported the changes to all the other airlines. The resulting data base was enormous as each airline offered numerous fares under various terms and conditions on each of thousands of city pairs Moreover these fares changed frequently. In such a complex system it would seem difficult for the airlines to negotiate or maintain any price-fixing agreement much less a covert one. With so many interrelated fares and fare changes one might ask how one airline would distinguish for example whether another 's price change was an attempt to cheat on a collusive agreement an attempt to punish a third airline for deviating from an agreement in another market or simply a normal response to increased costs. The Justice Department alleged that such confusion was avoided by linking fare changes with alphanumeric footnote designators and by the judicious use of first ticket dates. Since the ATP data were computerized this mass of information could be analyzed by sophisticated computer programs each day. Aided by these computer analyses airlines could engage in intricate but camouflaged negotiations and could monitor cheating on agreements. The settlement that the Justice Department entered into with the airlines barred them from using footnote designators first ticket dates and other devices to communicate with each other According to one study price leadership in the airline industry cost air travelers $ million per year during the 1980s. Others have estimated that the cost of such behavior in the airline industry had it been left unchecked could have reached several billion dollars per year. These figures suggest that the Justice Department 's attempts to eliminate anticompetitive practices in the airline industry could yield large dividends for consumers The stock trading case which resulted in a consent decree involved transactions in over-the-counter stocks over the automated quotation system operated by the National Association of Securities Dealers ( the NASDAQ system ) This case also revealed how computerized information networks can sometimes make it easier for firms to maintain agreements to sell at high prices. When an investor places a buy or sell order for shares of a company traded on NASDAQ special traders called " market makers " typically execute the trade These intermediaries make their profits from the bid-ask spread the difference between the price at which they buy a stock and the price at which they sell it In the NASDAQ case the Justice Department alleged that NASDAQ market makers had agreed to a strategy or convention for quoting stocks that essentially limited their incentives to narrow spreads. Also working to support the agreement was the fact that the NASDAQ computer network provided sellers with ready ( essentially instantaneous ) information about the strategies other sellers were using to quote prices. Market makers that were observed to deviate from the convention were harassed by other market makers and threatened with economic harm Traditional economic theory predicts that the price-fixing agreement alleged by the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) could not have been maintained on NASDAQ because entry barriers were low and any of over firms could enter the market for any security. If a price-fixing agreement kept the bid-ask spread high some market maker would have been tempted to offer the security at a price below the best asking price or to buy it at a price above the best bid in an effort to increase market share. But the rules and common practices that governed the way in which NASDAQ securities were traded could have combined to deter market makers from undermining the agreement in this way with the computer network used for trades playing a key role NASDAQ market makers may decline to trade a security at the price quoted by other market makers. But if a market maker does execute a trade the NASD 's best-execution rule requires it to make the trade at the best price quoted on the NASDAQ network. A key feature of trading on NASDAQ is the widespread practice of preferencing. A preferencing arrangement between a broker and a market maker commits the market maker to execute trades submitted by the broker. In combination with the NASD 's best-execution rule this practice could have sharply limited the benefits that any market maker could have anticipated from cheating on any anticompetitive agreement and so significantly enhanced the ability of a cartel to maintain collusion. A market maker that attempted to cheat on an agreement would not expect to significantly increase its market share because other firms would in effect match its prices instantaneously and retain their preferenced order flow. Thus a practice that initially seemed to offer a great deal to investors a guarantee of the best price available regardless of which market maker executes the order in fact may have tended to support an anticompetitive agreement In the Justice Department entered into an agreement with NASDAQ market makers. The market makers agreed not to fix prices in the future and to commit resources to an ongoing monitoring effort to ensure that they adhere to the antitrust laws The lesson of the airline and NASDAQ cases is that computer networks can sometimes make it easier for sellers to form and maintain price-fixing agreements by providing sellers with information about the prices that other sellers charge. Agreements negotiated by posting prices on computer networks may prove difficult for the antitrust authorities to ferret out. In the airline case there was sufficient ancillary information in particular the use of annotations linking one fare proposal to another to convince the Justice Department that a nego tiation was taking place. In contrast when one firm tries to take advantage of the fact that prices can be quickly and easily changed on computer systems and raises price for a few instants ( at a small cost ) in the hope that others will follow most antitrust experts believe that there is no violation of antitrust laws even if other firms do follow Simple price leadership is not banned by the Sherman Act in part because there is no adequate way to frame a remedy. Firms in collusion and firms in competition may both move prices in concert Antitrust authorities can only try to prevent sellers from negotiating and offering each other mutual assurances in order to form pricefixing agreements It has always been difficult to tell whether firms are being forced by competition to charge the same prices or whether they have agreed to fix prices. The task could become steadily more troublesome as the electronic age progresses. Antitrust authorities in the electronic age need to maintain vigilance in seeking out and enjoining illegal agreements. Electronic commerce may make antitrust enforcement more challenging and more important HIGH-TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES INNOVATION AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY Many of the fastest growing and fastest changing U.S. industries are to be found in such high-technology fields as aerospace computer hardware and software and telecommunications. These industries present several additional challenges for antitrust enforcers. One is that antitrust enforcers must promote both competition and innovation in these fields through a balanced treatment of intellectual property. Another is to account for the tendency for network externalities common in many high-technology fields to create a strong potential for market dominance. A third challenge is to anticipate future developments in these fast-paced industries and conduct antitrust policy accordingly INNOVATION AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY The key assets in high-technology industries are often not factories or machines but intangibles such as scientific ideas or the algorithms contained in computer programs. These assets unlike physical assets can be used by any number of people at once. Without intellectual property protection firms and individuals would have insufficient incentive to produce these assets because they are costly to produce but cheap to copy or imitate. In recognition of this problem the U.S. Constitution empowers the Congress to " promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries. " Patent and copyright laws do just that An important initiative of this Administration has been its use of antitrust enforcement to further encourage innovation and to clarify the role of intellectual property in antitrust law. The Administration recognizes that the licensing of intellectual property for use by persons other than its creator can benefit society both directly by allowing the more widespread use of intellectual properties and indirectly by increasing the return to such assets and thereby encouraging innovation. Such licenses however sometimes contain restrictions that limit competition and actually discourage innovation. These restrictions may violate the antitrust laws The recent case involving the British firm Pilkington pic the world 's largest float glass producer provides one example of the Justice Department 's attempts to use antitrust enforcement to encourage innovation. Beginning in after acquiring hundreds of patents worldwide on glass production processes Pilkington entered into licensing agreements with all of its principal competitors. These agreements generally included territorial restrictions so that each licensee could construct and operate float glass plants in only one country or group of countries. These restrictions allegedly limited the incentives of Pilkington 's competitors to innovate in glass processing by geographically restricting their opportunities to exploit such innovations. Their incentive to innovate was allegedly further limited by requirements to report any improvements in float glass technology and to cede the rights to such improvements back to Pilkington. In the Justice Department entered into a consent decree with Pilkington which among other prohibitions enjoined Pilkington from enforcing its licensing restrictions against U.S. licensees. The Justice Department 's case was strengthened by the fact that Pilkington 's principal patents had expired long before the complaint was filed. The Department does not however in general limit its attention to restrictions that outlive the life of patents The Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual Property explain the balanced approach taken by the antitrust agencies. The guidelines recognize that intellectual property licensing can create efficiencies by allowing firms to combine complementary factors of production. However licensing arrangements such as those used by Pilkington may contain restrictive terms that reduce competition among alternative technologies and the antitrust agencies have sought to eliminate such anticompetitive arrangements. In evaluating the licensing of intellectual property the agencies balance the procompetitive and anticompetitive effects NETWORK EXTERNALITIES Many high-technology industries such as computers and communications exhibit network externalities : that is consumers derive more value from the products of these industries the more people use them For example a computer program often becomes more valuable as its network of users grows because users like to trade data files and exchange ideas about how to use the program effectively. Network externalities can sometimes therefore make entry difficult because small firms may be unable to compete effectively against large ones whose products enjoy additional value from widespread usage The challenge for antitrust policy is to preserve the benefits of network externalities for consumers while preventing firms from exploiting the market power to which these externalities can give rise. When sellers agree to standards consumers benefit because the products of different sellers are then compatible. Unfortunately however firms can sometimes manipulate the standards-setting process to their own advantage as the FTC claimed happened in a action against Dell Computer Corp Dell was a member of the Video Electronics Standards Association ( VESA ) a standards-setting organization in the computer industry In VESA set a new standard for the design of computer bus hardware ( the hardware that transmits information between a computer 's components ) According to the FTC before the standard was approved Dell certified that it did not violate any of its intellectual property rights but after the standard was implemented the company announced that the standard did violate one of its patents. Since by then over a million computers using the standard had already been sold other computer manufacturers could not switch to an alternative design without creating a compatibility problem. This would have put Dell in a good position to collect substantial royalties on its patent were it not for a settlement with the FTC in which Dell agreed not to enforce its patent rights against computer manufacturers using the standard FAST-PACED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE The fast pace of change in high-technology industries makes it hard for antitrust enforcers to anticipate the impact of future developments when deciding the proper course of action. For example a merger that seems innocuous today may eliminate future competition. Alternatively a merger may increase concentration significantly today but may not pose anticompetitive problems either because of entry as discussed earlier or because of exit as revealed by the merger between Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp Although the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas merger reduced the number of sellers of large commercial aircraft worldwide from three to two thereby sharply increasing concentration the FTC decided that McDonnell Douglas 's 5-percent market share overstated the company 's likely future competitive significance because this market share reflected only the filling of old orders. Extensive interviews by the FTC revealed that advances in aviation design had left McDonnell Douglas behind : since the firm had not invested as much as its competitors in improving the technology of its aircraft the vast majority of airlines no longer considered purchasing its aircraft. As a result the merger did not eliminate viable future competition in the commercial aircraft market. Moreover after consulting with the Department of Defense the FTC concluded that there were no prospects for Boeing and McDonnell Douglas to bid on the same defense projects. Having concluded that the merger raised antitrust concerns in neither commercial nor defense markets the FTC did not challenge the merger Future competition was a critical issue in the investigation of Bell Atlantic Corp. 's acquisition of NYNEX Corp. The merger did not increase current concentration in any local telephone market because neither Bell Atlantic nor NYNEX competed in each other 's markets at the time of the merger. However the Justice Department and the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) needed to assess the likelihood that in the absence of the merger each company would someday enter the other 's geographic market and the likely extent of other firms ' entry. One focus of the Justice Department 's investigation was the effect of the merger on future competition in local service in New York City and nearby portions of NYNEX 's service area. NYNEX was the dominant supplier in that area whereas Bell Atlantic was one of many potential entrants After carefully studying the plans of other potential entrants such as AT&T Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. the Justice Department concluded that the prospect for entry by a number of experienced capable and well-financed competitors was significant Therefore it was by no means clear how much the loss of Bell Atlantic as an independent competitive force would adversely affect consumers particularly given the evidence concerning efficiencies. The Justice Department concluded that it could not meet its burden of proving that the loss of Bell Atlantic as an independent entrant was likely to have so significant a market impact as " substantially to lessen competition " the test of a violation under Section of the Clayton Act The FCC on the other hand which also had authority to review the Bell Atlantic-NYNEX merger operates under a different statute with a different substantive standard. Under the FCC 's interpretations of the Communications Act of the merging parties had the burden of proving that the merger would on balance enhance competition and be in the public interest. The FCC concluded that the merger would not enhance competition and it exercised its power to place conditions on its approval of the merger. To remedy the merger 's possibly anticompetitive effects and to advance the goal set forth in the Telecommunications Act of of opening local telephone markets to competition Bell Atlantic offered to make several market-opening commitments which the FCC accepted before approving the merger THE GLOBAL MARKETPLACE AND INTERNATIONAL ANTITRUST EFFORTS The emergence of a global marketplace for many goods and services has important implications for U.S. antitrust policy. On the one hand as transportation costs and trade barriers fall many problems in antitrust become easier. Mergers that would have led to significant concentration in the absence of international trade may not do so once one accounts for foreign competitors. Also domestic price-fixing agreements will be undermined if foreign competitors are willing to sell in the U.S. market at a lower price. On the other hand international price-fixing agreements are more difficult than domestic ones for U.S. antitrust enforcement agencies to police ; success often requires cooperation with foreign governments or international organizations Unlike in the 1980s when most antitrust fines were imposed in domestic bid-rigging cases the vast bulk of the over $ million imposed by the Justice Department 's Antitrust Division during fiscal was collected in judgments against large international price-fixing conspiracies. This suggests that even though international trade may make price fixing more difficult it will probably remain a serious concern for some time to come Criminal prosecution in international price-fixing conspiracies is generally much more difficult and complex than prosecuting domestic conspiracies. First the antitrust authorities must demonstrate that U.S. antitrust law applies. In the Justice Department made significant headway on this point when the First Circuit Court of Appeals held that Section of the Sherman Act applies to " wholly foreign conduct which has an intended and substantial effect in the United States " regardless of whether the case is civil or criminal Even when U.S. antitrust laws do apply crucial evidence or culpable individuals or firms may be located outside the United States and be beyond the jurisdiction of U.S. courts These jurisdictional problems make it imperative that U.S antitrust enforcement authorities coordinate their activities and cooperate with authorities abroad. In several recent investigations the United States made good use of its mutual legal assistance treaties with a number of foreign countries : the Justice Department sought and received assistance in cartel investigations from several countries including Japan and Canada In the Congress passed the International Antitrust Enforcement Assistance Act ( IAEAA ) which empowered the U.S antitrust enforcement agencies to negotiate reciprocal agreements with foreign antitrust enforcers. Under these agreements each government will assist the other in obtaining evidence located in the country of the former while ensuring confidentiality. Unfortunately foreign antitrust authorities have been slow in following the U.S. lead in negotiating these agreements in many cases because they lack similar legislative authorization from their own governments. In April the United States nonetheless managed to negotiate its first proposed agreement under the IAEAA with Australia. The United States has also been pursuing discussions with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development toward a formal recommendation by that body that would encourage its member countries to enter into mutual assistance agreements that would permit more sharing of evidence with foreign antitrust authorities At the same time the United States has also worked to improve international antitrust enforcement through the so-called positive comity approach. This approach is used in cases where markets outside U.S. jurisdiction are affected by anticompetitive behavior that harms U.S. interests. Under a positive comity agreement if one country believes that its firms are being excluded from another 's markets by the anticompetitive behavior of firms there it will conduct a preliminary analysis and then refer the matter to the foreign antitrust authority for further investigation and if appropriate prosecution. In April the Justice Department announced its first formal request to the European Union under a positive comity agreement. The Justice Department asked the Directorate General IV ( DG IV ) the European Union 's antitrust arm to investigate possible anticompetitive conduct by European airlines that may be preventing U.S.-based computer reservation systems from competing effectively in Europe DG IV has announced that it is actively pursuing the matter Another notable ongoing effort in this domain is the competition advocacy program undertaken jointly by the Justice Department and the FTC. The two agencies are working together in programs funded by the U.S. Agency for International Development to educate and otherwise assist governments of developing countries in setting up antitrust enforcement programs. This assistance has included helping countries to draft competition laws setting up implementation procedures training their staffs and in some countries placing longterm U.S. advisers in the antitrust office. Several countries in Eastern Europe have benefited from this extensive interaction with the U.S. agencies and the program has now expanded into countries of the former Soviet Union and Latin America Although significant progress has been made in international antitrust enforcement the growing importance of international trade makes it imperative that the antitrust enforcement agencies continue their efforts in this area. To this end the Justice Department has established the first-ever International Competition Policy Advisory Committee comprised of distinguished business labor academic economic and legal experts to advise it on these cutting-edge issues Investing in expanded enforcement and globalization of antitrust principles will lead to better protection of competition worldwide and will yield substantial benefits that can be shared by many CHAPTER The Benefits of Market Opening THE UNITED STATES HAS LONG RECOGNIZED that open domestic markets and an open global trading system are superior to trade protection and isolationism at promoting broad-based growth and prosperity. For decades our open economy and successful U.S leadership in liberalizing global trade and investment have generated important benefits for the American people in the form of stronger growth and improved employment opportunities. The opportunity to acquire goods and services from abroad both encourages us as producers to stay competitive and allows us as consumers to raise our standard of living. In the 1990s openness to trade and investment combined with U.S.-led liberalization of world markets has been essential to our economy 's sustained expansion This contemporary picture of a prosperous America in an increasingly open world economy contrasts powerfully with the economic climate and international trade policies that prevailed at home and abroad some six and a half decades ago. In the early 1930s widespread isolationism had reduced world trade to a level only one-third that of Fortunately the Nation 's leaders of that era saw that the path of economic isolation and tit-for-tat protectionism had no exit During the 1930s and after the Administration and the Congress worked together through such measures as the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of the precursor of later fast-track legislation to revive international trade just as the programs of the New Deal worked to restart the domestic economy. World War II disrupted these early efforts but after the war the U.S.-led campaign to open markets worldwide enjoyed a series of outstanding successes. Those countries that joined us in welcoming market opening in particular through participation in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade have grown and developed at impressive rates. True these countries might have experienced growth even without open markets but the history of this century has made it increasingly clear that strong growth is more likely in open than in closed economies Bearing this history in mind this Administration 's strategy for economic growth includes a campaign to foster the continued liberalization of markets worldwide. Although much has been accomplished in the postwar period much remains to be done. As the United States currently enjoys the benefits of relatively open markets at home this campaign reflects an export-driven agenda aimed at opening markets abroad reducing current asymmetries in countries ' openness. This chapter surveys the primary elements of this campaign. It also reviews the impact that international trade has had on national economies including our own and on the distribution of the benefits of trade within economies ( especially among workers ) This discussion underscores the need for a strong commitment to trade liberalization not only by the United States but by all of our trading partners. The chapter concludes with a presentation of recent developments in a second important dimension of open international markets namely foreign direct investment and discusses the implications of the growth of U.S. direct investment abroad and of foreign investment in the United States. The chapter begins however with a review of recent trends in U.S. trade TRENDS IN U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRADE The role of international trade in the U.S. economy today is unprecedented. Until U.S. exports and imports combined rarely amounted to more than one-tenth of gross domestic product ( GDP ; Chart ) Since the real volume of trade has grown at more than twice the rate of output so that by exports alone were percent of GDP and imports were equivalent to percent Yet trade remains a much smaller component of the U.S. economy than in most countries : in only four countries had smaller ratios of Chart Exports and Imports as a Percent of GDP Trade is an increasingly important component of the U.S. economy although close to nine-tenths of U.S. expenditure is still on domestic goods and services Percent of GDP " Imports of goods and services Exports of goods and services Q \ I I I Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) trade to GDP than the United States. This does not reflect high U.S trade barriers but rather such factors as the size of our economy and the diversity of our endowments which favor self-sufficiency and our geographic location relatively distant from most trading partners Estimates that adjust for such factors have often found that the United States is more open to imports than are most other major countries. But the point remains that the United States feels the effects of trade and pressures for globalization much less than do most other countries The rising importance of trade in the U.S. economy is part of a worldwide phenomenon. Technological advances in transportation and communications have contributed to a rapid expansion of the global exchange of goods and services. There is also strong evidence that policy reforms in many countries in particular the removal of trade barriers and other protectionist measures have played a significant role in this explosion of trade. The history of the United States during the interwar period points to the importance of policy in stimulating or inhibiting trade. In the years between and technological progress continued but policy moved in a different direction : average U.S. tariff rates more than doubled. The fact that the volume of trade in those years fell by half rather than rose reveals the important role that government policies can play THE SECTORAL COMPOSITION OF U.S. TRADE The composition of U.S. trade both exports and imports has also changed markedly. Exports of services have enjoyed particularly strong growth in recent years rising from $ billion ( percent of total exports ) in to $ billion ( percent ) in Over the same period exports of agricultural merchandise have risen only from $ billion ( percent of the total ) to $ billion ( percent ) In part these trends reflect Engel 's law ( as the incomes of households rise the share devoted to food falls ) and the evolution of U.S. comparative advantage in more skill-intensive goods and services. But the impact of market opening may be discerned in these trends as well Innovations in global communications infrastructure and the liberalization of services trade in many countries have promoted greater trade in services. Large tariff reductions on manufactured products negotiated in a series of rounds within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) have lowered export costs in that sector However agriculture remains relatively protected in most countries Exports of both consumer and capital goods have enjoyed rapid sustained growth since the 1980s ( Chart ) These two sectors also represent the fastest-growing components of U.S. imports. But whereas growth in exports of these goods has tended to occur relatively evenly across industries growth of imports has been more concentrated with especially dramatic increases in such categories as computer goods Chart U.S. Exports and Imports by Category in and Both exports and imports most notably in services and in consumer and capital goods have grown rapidly due in part to market opening U Exports Billions of dollars Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers The fact that growth is occurring in both imports and exports of consumer and capital goods may seem contrary to the conventional logic of international trade theory which is based on specialization according to countries ' comparative advantage. In fact this trend reflects the changing nature of trade. Imports and exports today often grow in tandem even within very narrowly defined product categories : that is an increasing share of trade is intraindustry rather than interindustry. In for example percent of U.S. trade occurred within rather than between four-digit SITC commodity groupings ( the SITC is a standard classification of goods in international trade ; four-digit categories in this system represent highly disaggregated product groups ) and this share has risen from percent in Whereas interindustry trade ( for example the exchange of Chinese sweaters for U.S. computers ) is associated with traditional notions of comparative advantage intraindustry trade ( for example in automobiles and auto parts ) is thought to arise principally from fixed costs in production and consumer tastes for variety THE GEOGRAPHIC COMPOSITION OF U.S. TRADE Canada and Japan remain the United States ' leading trade partners together accounting for one-third of both our exports and our imports. In recent years Mexico and China have risen quickly to the third and fourth positions ; together they represent about percent of total U.S. merchandise trade. When trade is broken down by world region Europe represents one-fifth of both U.S. exports and imports ( Chart ) The Asia-Pacific region has experienced an explosion in growth of both trade and output over the past two decades and now accounts for more than one-third of total U.S. trade. This trade is principally with other industrial countries although trade with developing economies in the region is also among the fastest growing anywhere. Trade with Latin America and the Caribbean is also growing but remains less than percent of the total Chart U.S. Goods Exports and Imports by World Region in and Imports from developing Asia have risen rapidly but are less important than growing exports and imports with industrialized partners North America Industrialized Pacific Europe U Developing Asia Latin America and Caribbean Exports Africa and other Billions of dollars Note : Industrialized Pacific includes Australia Japan Hong Kong Korea Singapore and Taiwan Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economc Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers U.S. TRADE BY DOMESTIC REGION In a country as large as the United States the regional distribution of the gains from trade is a relevant concern. The North Central and Pacific States remain the largest sources of exports and both regions continue to enjoy strong export growth ( Chart ) However the highest rates of export growth have recently been recorded in regions and States in the center of the country. This is a positive sign suggesting that the benefits of trade are being realized throughout the country not just in the coastal and border States. The impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) on regional trends in production and exporting has no doubt been significant and may be partly responsible for the rapid growth in exports from the Mountain Southern and North Central regions. These statistics suggest that the export opportunities presented by market-opening agreements can benefit the Nation as a whole Chart Exports of Goods by U.S. Region Although exports are a larger share of Gross State Product on the East and West Coasts the fastest growth in exports has come from the central regions of the country Export share of Gross State Product Q to % H to % H to % % and above North Central ( $ 145bn ; % ) New England ( $ bn ; % ) South Atlantic ( $ bn ; % ) Note : The first number in parentheses is goods exports in billions of dollars ; the second is average annual growth in exports in the region over Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Council of Economic Advisers INITIATIVES IN MARKET OPENING This Administration 's primary focus in its conduct of international economic relations is on the continued opening of markets worldwide to trade. However experience has shown that there is no universal solvent for trade barriers : no single strategy works in all situations to open foreign markets. Accordingly the Administration has pursued an active trade liberalization agenda on several fronts. While recognizing the importance of an internationally coordinated effort to reduce trade barriers on a broad multilateral and reciprocal basis the Administration is supplementing these negotiations with liberalization efforts at the regional level. In addition since market access impediments may be peculiar to a single country and may not be of the type traditionally dealt with in a multilateral forum the United States sometimes needs to pursue bilateral negotiations to remove these obstacles to trade As this brief survey shows the Administration is pursuing greater market access for both U.S. and other countries ' exports in a number of arenas. The importance of this undertaking is highlighted by the extent to which large portions of the world economy have previously been exempt from formal negotiations. Although the trade-liberalizing initiatives described above are generally reciprocal in nature they tend to lower foreign barriers more than they do our own. This is the result of the relatively open position taken by the United States throughout most of the postwar period which has resulted in U.S barriers that are already lower on average than those of our major trading partners. What is more the United States has led the way toward the deregulation of domestic industries. In many cases this earlier deregulation in the United States has produced highly competitive U.S. industries well poised to benefit from deregulation abroad TRADE-NEGOTIATING AUTHORITY The U.S. Constitution places ultimate authority to regulate international trade with the legislative branch. However for the better part of this century the Congress has provided the executive branch considerable authority to negotiate trade agreements with foreign nations. Most recently between and the Congress repeatedly passed legislation giving the President so-called fast-track negotiating authority. This legislation allows the President to negotiate sensitive and complex trade agreements with other countries and commits the Congress to either accept or reject the entire agreement without amendment. In this way the Congress retains its constitutionally mandated final authority to regulate international trade while turning over the task of negotiating agreements to the executive branch which is organizationally better suited for that role Fast-track authority lends credibility to U.S. commitments in trade negotiations. Foreign parties to a trade agreement with the United States know that the agreed-upon package can not later be reopened for renegotiation of individual provisions which in effect would reopen the entire package undermining commitments made by executive branch negotiators. In the absence of fast-track authority this possibility is real and can have the effect of preventing other countries from engaging in negotiations with the United States The history of executive branch trade-negotiating authority has its roots in the 1930s a time when international trade flows were heavily restricted by high tariffs throughout much of the world. The Congress granted President Franklin D. Roosevelt power to negotiate tariff reductions. This shift in authority came in the form of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act ( RTAA ) of which allowed the President to reduce U.S. tariffs on a bilateral basis by up to percent in exchange for reductions in barriers faced by U.S. exports. The RTAA was used often in the 1930s and was repeatedly renewed. The resulting agreements generated large reductions in tariff barriers and embodied some of the same principles that formed the basis for GATT after World War II and more recently the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) Under the RTAA and later under GATT tariffs of participating countries were reduced from more than percent in the 1930s to less than percent by the late 1980s. By the 1960s negotiations had expanded to cover nontariff barriers ( NTBs ) to trade as well. These include price controls quantitative restrictions ( such as import quotas ) and quality control measures. But because the RTAA provided no authority to reduce these barriers complications arose in congressional ratification of the Kennedy Round GATT agreement in the late 1960s. The Congress 's refusal to implement the entire agreement as negotiated undermined the credibility of the President 's negotiating efforts. The Nixon Administration confronted this problem by pursuing expanded negotiating authority prior to undertaking a round of negotiations in which nontariff barriers figured prominently For this reason in the Congress passed the first fast-track legislation. The primary difference between this new authority and that granted under the RTAA was that fast-track extended presidential authority to agreements covering NTBs as well as tariff barriers Fast-track bills have also generally called for extensive consultations between the executive branch and both houses of the Congress and with private sector advisory committees during the negotiations. The Congress must also be notified in advance of the intention to conclude an agreement. In return the Congress promises to introduce the implementing bill in both houses with language unchanged and to vote on the unamended bill within days. Through these provisions the Congress has historically exerted influence over the negotiations and hence over the resulting agreements prior to submission of the implementing legislation. Fast-track has thus proved successful at facilitating negotiations while keeping the Congress involved in the process and preserving its ultimate authority to regulate trade Since the inception of fast-track two extremely successful rounds of GATT negotiations have taken place : the Tokyo Round signed by WTO members in December and the Uruguay Round concluded in and signed in April Agreements resulting from other negotiations have also been approved by the Congress under fasttrack procedures including the free trade agreement with Israel in the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement in and the North American Free Trade Agreement in MULTILATERAL INITIATIVES By the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations participants recognized that pursuing multilateral liberalization exclusively in the context of negotiating " rounds " was insufficient. Thus the final Uruguay Round agreement included a " built-in agenda " for future more focused talks within the WTO. This agenda provides a mandate and an opportunity to continue the liberalization process within the new organization 's regular work program. In some cases the built-in agenda calls for the review and updating of the rules of the multilateral system including its dispute settlement mechanism ( Box ) ; in other areas the goal is the further opening of markets and the reform or elimination of practices that distort or restrict trade. In the few years since the Uruguay Round agreement was concluded negotiations toward further liberalization have occurred or are occurring in several sectors. Some of these negotiations were launched as a result of commitments contained within existing WTO agreements. Others are the result of forward-looking initiatives given impetus by the United States and its trading partners within the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) forum and other international organizations Box * The WTO Dispute Settlement Process and U.S The WTO Hspute Settlement Understanding ( DSU ) part of the Uruguay Round package of agreements improves on GATT dispute settlement proceedingsfeyexpediting dedstornnakmg and institutimplementation of dispute panel ruling ^ one of which is the acceptance of cross-sector retaliation for countries that choose not to abide by the ruling. In the years since its institution many countries have made efficient use of the reformed dispute settlement mechanism largely to the satisfaction of all involved The introduction of a atrengthened multilateral dispute settlement system in the WTO * together with new WT0 agreements cohering the protection of intellectual property rights and trade in services has brought about a shift in UJ8> tactics for resolving trade disputes. During the 1980s the United States frequently resorted to the bilateral negotiations and unilateral sanctions authorised in Section of U.S * trade law to resolve differences with other countries This approach was used in particular in the areas of agriculture intellectual property protection and services which ( MTT covered barely or not at all. Beginning in * however the DSU and new WTO rules have permitted the United States to use multilateral dispute settlement procedures to address the overwhelming majority of issues that have been the subject of Section investigations. The results of complaints filed by the United States suggest that the DSU process has proved veiy effective with the United States prevailing in out of rulings to date. The United States has also reached a bilateral settlement prior to a formal ruling in eight eases. Seventeen petitions are still pending Section investigations can now more often make use of multilateral dispute settlement at least for disputes with WTO member in areas subject to WTO commitments All nine of the Section investigations initiated during and three of the sk investigations initiated in have involved resort to the WTO dispute settlement procedures ; a fourth was terminated before WTO consultations were initiated * As Chart shows the DSU process has been used against a variety of comtries the majority of whieh are our major trading partners The Success of Single-Sector Initiatives The success of multilateral negotiations in the years since the Uruguay Round ended has in some ways been remarkable. The traditional practice of conducting negotiations in comprehensive multisector rounds had been based on the belief that only an agreement covering many sectors simultaneously could gain enough political support to be viable. Usually when two or more countries seek reciprocal trade liberalization the easiest approach is to find one sector that is heavily protected in one country and another sector that is heavily protected in the other. By agreeing to liberalize both sectors simultaneously each country can please at least one group of domestic producers Chart U.S.-lnitiated WTO Dispute Settlement Cases by Target Country Since their inception in the WTO dispute settlement procedures have been broadly used by the United States Japan x " \ ^ EU and affiliates Korea Australia Canada ^ III ^ IIB Others India Source : Office of the U.S. Trade Representative However recent WTO agreements in financial services telecommunications and information technology represent significant departures from this traditional negotiating format in that each sector was negotiated separately from the others. Because the United States is believed to be highly competitive in all three of these sectors one would have thought that U.S. concessions in some other sector would be necessary to reach an agreement. But a common element in all three sectors is that they are key inputs into production in other sectors and are necessary for economic development and profitable participation in an advanced information-driven global economy. Industrialists in emerging-market countries for example understand that a modern telecommunications infrastructure is essential to economic development. Hence liberalization of these sectors enjoys weighty domestic support in most countries so that cross-sector tradeoffs proved unnecessary. As transportation services are also important inputs to trade and production in the modern global economy it is hoped that the future resumption of single-sector negotiations in this area will bear fruit. Other sectors slated for individual negotiation under the built-in agenda are agriculture and government procurement Services Two of the new WTO agreements those in financial services and telecommunications deal with trade in service industries. For most of its history GATT did not cover trade in most types of services Thus the conclusion of a new General Agreement on Trade in Services ( GATS ) was an important contribution of the Uruguay Round. The new agreement made it possible for the first time to undertake the negotiations that led to the recent financial services and telecommunications agreements and should eventually lead to the liberalization of other services GATS provides for the first time a solid framework of trading rules and obligations for services and the continued expansion and refinement of those rules in multilateral negotiations. However the pledges from WTO member countries within GATS itself to liberalize their services sectors are fairly narrow in scope. Out of some individual service activities identified most countries have committed themselves to liberalize fewer than Moreover most of these commitments are in services where countries have either little domestic production or little domestic protection. Although it is typical in trade negotiations for countries to liberalize first where the domestic impact is smallest in this case it means that GATS as written falls well short of comprehensive liberalization. This was acknowledged by the signatories at the time. They therefore included in the agreement specific deadlines for future negotiations in key areas. Some success has been achieved in financial services and telecommunications ; the maritime negotiations on the other hand have been suspended until more comprehensive services negotiations take place in Financial services. Multilateral negotiations on a broad range of financial services resumed in April ( An earlier attempt had ended in with only an interim solution as the United States had found some other countries ' offers inadequate. ) In continuing these negotiations the United States emphasized the need for agreement on four principles. Foreign-based firms should be assured of retaining any rights they had acquired prior to the agreement of the right to establish new operations of the right of full majority ownership and of substantially full national treatment ( that is legal and regulatory treatment equivalent to that received by domestic firms ) These talks were successfully concluded on December and produced agreement among WTO member countries on broad liberalization of their banking securities insurance and financial data services sectors. The commitments apply to about $ trillion in global securities assets $ trillion in global bank lending and about $ trillion in worldwide insurance premiums Telecommunications. On February the United States and other WTO members successfully concluded negotiations on basic telecommunications services such as telephone service. The agreement commits countries to provide market access and national treatment to service suppliers from other WTO members. Sixty-five countries also agreed to a set of specific procompetitive regulatory principles. The agreement eliminates certain restrictive practices in countries that account for percent of world telecommunications revenues estimated at about $ billion in Before the agreement activities representing only percent of telecommunications revenues in the top markets were open to U.S companies. The opening of these markets to foreign providers offers enormous opportunities for U.S. telecommunications firms. Whereas telecommunications markets in many countries continue to be served by inefficient government monopolies markets in the United States have been largely deregulated. Deregulation along with a large internal market has resulted in a position of competitive advantage and technological leadership in this area for U.S. suppliers Information Technology Information technology products are often " enablers " for the efficient production of goods in other sectors. Liberalization of this sector therefore takes on added importance as a source of growth worldwide. Concluded in Singapore in December the Information Technology Agreement ( ITA ) will liberalize trade in this half-trillion-dollar market. The agreement covers global information technology products such as semiconductors telecommunications equipment computers and computer equipment and software Signatories include countries accounting for over percent of trade in this sector. The agreement also covers office machines and unrecorded electronic media ( such as computer diskettes and CDROMs ) Each of the participating countries has agreed to eliminate tariffs on these products by although some countries were granted an extended phaseout of tariffs for a limited number of products. The agreement will benefit all the countries participating but it is especially important for the United States as a major exporter of information technology products. The ITA also calls for further negotiations to extend country and product coverage and eliminate NTBs under an expanded agreement dubbed ITA-II These negotiations are scheduled to conclude by the summer of Agriculture Some agricultural tariffs were reduced in various GATT negotiations over the decades but as in the case of services comprehensive agricultural trade barriers only recently became a central focus of GATT talks. The result was the historic Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture the first comprehensive agreement to reduce barriers to trade in agriculture. Among other commitments the agreement specifies cuts in agricultural export subsidies reduces aggregate support to farmers converts NTBs to tariffs binds all tariffs at levels that imply reductions in previously existing tariffs and provides for minimum access quotas for products whose trade had been largely eliminated by past protection. Reflecting a general interest in further liberalization agricultural negotiations are a part of the WTO 's built-in agenda with talks scheduled to resume by January Government Procurement Government procurement and contracting account for up to percent of economic activity in some countries yet are often subject to policies that discriminate against foreign suppliers. Many countries maintain explicit preferences for goods and services provided by domestic firms over those from foreign competitors. Bias toward domestic producers can manifest itself in many other subtle ways for instance in limited advertising for bids and a reluctance to spell out selection criteria in advance. Governments may also specify contracts in terms of a certain process or method rather than in terms of the final product. Different firms often develop products that serve the same purpose but by different processes. If only domestic firms use a particular process and foreign firms another governments can in effect exclude foreign suppliers by specifying that process Government procurement has historically been excluded from international trade rules ; the nondiscrimination principles contained in the original GATT of do not apply. To address this situation a group of countries consisting principally of members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( the OECD which is composed mainly of high-income industrial countries ) negotiated the GATT Agreement on Government Procurement during the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations. That agreement was renegotiated and expanded during the Uruguay Round and the resulting WTO Agreement on Government Procurement ( GPA ) went into effect on January The GPA requires signatories to accord nondiscriminatory treatment to the goods and services including construction services of other signatories and to follow transparent government procurement procedures The agreement presently applies to government purchases estimated to be worth over $ billion annually Although the GPA was a significant achievement only countries participate in it most of them OECD countries ; many of the world 's emerging markets in Asia Latin America and elsewhere are not signatories. Given the size of the worldwide market ( with an estimated value over $ trillion ) and its importance for U.S. exporters the United States has long sought to extend rules on government procurement to all participants in the multilateral system. Largely at the United States ' urging WTO members agreed in to establish the WTO Working Group on Transparency in Government Procurement. Formal negotiations are scheduled to begin by January REGIONAL INITIATIVES During the 1980s the United States turned an eye toward bilateral and regional liberalization initiatives not with the purpose of supplanting the multilateral talks but rather to supplement and spur progress on that front. Regional agreements can be beneficial but they raise some valid concerns : although such agreements can generate new trade by lowering barriers between participating countries they may also inefficiently divert trade from nonparticipants that would otherwise supply goods and services more cheaply. From the participants ' perspective whether the benefits of trade creation outweigh the costs of trade diversion depends on how the agreement is structured. There are reasons to believe trade creation will predominate when the agreement encompasses countries that geography has made natural trading partners : when costs of transportation are included countries in close proximity are more likely to be each other 's low-cost suppliers minimizing the scope for trade diversion. But for countries on the outside regional agreements are more likely to impose costs than provide direct benefits Sometimes regional agreements can exert a positive influence on the multilateral process ( Box ) or support the participants ' foreign policy positions. For example the benefits for the United States of the free trade agreement with Israel negotiated in were more symbolic than economic. The agreement reinforced political ties between the two countries and Israel did reap important economic benefits from it as well. Similarly although economic motivations were significant in the formation of what is now the European Union a contributing factor was the desire to engender a sense of community that might prevent another intra-European war. The promotion of democracy and political stability as well as economic stability and development is also a factor in the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative discussed below In the last years the United States has initiated and signed a number of important regional initiatives. The agenda for the remainder of this century and beyond includes laying the foundation for open trade in the Americas as well as moving toward expanded trade throughout the Pacific Rim Box * Regional Trade AgJFaem ^ iits : Building Blocks or Stumbling Blocks for the Multilateral Process ? Does regionalism accelerate or slow the momentum of multilateral liberalization ? Some compelling arguments suggest that the formation of regional blocs can serve as a building block or act as a stumbling block to the multilateral process Perhaps the most compelling theoretical argument for protectionism and the primary mechanism by which regionalism might act as a stumbling block is the optimal tariff argument Imposing tariffs may enable a country to exploit some monopsony power in its import markets and so achieve more favorable terms of trade with the rest of the world. Moreover a group of countries setting this optimal tariff in concert may have more success because of their combined market power than if each acted alone. Fortunately Article XXIV of GATT which governs regional trading arrangements among members prohibits increases in tariffs against nonparticipants * ( GATS now extends the same principle to services ) A regional trading arrangement may also undermine the multilateral process if special Interests ean manipulate the airangement 's more technical aspects ( such as exemptions phaseotits and rules of origin ) to their advantage or if regional initiatives divert political capital and energy from multilateral initiatives On the other hand * regional arrangements can serve as build * ing blocks for multOateralism in several ways * They can lock in countries ' unilateral reforms simplify negotiations by reducing the number of countries involved and Bet in motion a process of competitive liberalization in which reluctant countries are prodded into liberalizing by the threat of exclusion from a regional agreement The history of NAFTA provides an example of how regionalism can lock in reforms. By entering into NAFTA the then-President of Mexico hoped to prevent Ms successors from undoing the unilateral liberalizations his government had undertaken since the mid-1980s Mexico 's reaction to the peso crisis of showed that this lock-in strategy worked Unlike in the debt crisis when Mexico raised trade barriers against all its trading partners in the crisis Mexico continued to reduce tariffs for its NAFTA partners ( while raising tariffs against some other countries ) Negotiating with other countries over dozens of sector ^ as WTO negotiators must do can be inefficient and difficult. The process can be made more efficient if countries can join into customs unions and thus negotiate as a larger unit. Also within Bent 7i&r-Continued a group it may be easier to test out mnoYative agreements in curtate ' areas such as serviees in ^ estment ^ dispute settlement and eompetitlon policy before introducing their provisions into the mtiltilateral negotiations The events rf demonstrate the power of competitive liberalization. Ttie Administration is said to ha ^ e made a ^ triple play that year with the passage of NAFTA the pathbreaMng APEC summit * and the a ) nctoaion of the Uruguay Hound * These not only were landmark achievements in themselves hut interacted with each other in advantageous ways. By pushing NAFTA through the Congreaa despite strong opposition the President revealed the political will to make free trade commitments stick * Combined with the upgrading of APEC negotiations to a Mgh-profile leaders * meeting in Seattle the passage of NAFTA sent a strong signal to the Europeans that the United States had serious regional alternatives should the Uruguay Bound of GATT negotiations fall apart. German polieymakerg have reportedly stated that this was part of their motivation for piwMling on their EU partners to make certain concessions that allowed the GATT negotiations to be success&Ily concluded in December These examples show that there are both positive and negative links between regionalism and the multilateral negotiations Every regional bloc will have its share of each. In the and ? however, the evidence suggests that the recent growth of regionalism has served more to foster than hinder progress toward Kberalfeation. Those groups of countries that have participated in regional liberaM ^ ation have often tended to reduce their barriers against nonmembers at the same time that they do m internally The Free Trade Area of the Americas The idea of a free trade area encompassing all of the Americas took its first step toward realization in December when the President of the United States and leaders of other Western Hemisphere countries met in Miami for the first hemispheric summit since There they committed their governments to concluding the negotiation of a comprehensive free trade agreement no later than with concrete progress due by the end of the century. The Miami Summit led to three meetings of the countries ' trade ministers at which working groups were established to lay the foundation and begin preparations for actual negotiations toward a Free Trade Area of the Americas ( FTAA ) The United States has championed this regional initiative and remains actively engaged in it as a means of fostering closer political and economic ties with and further trade liberalization in our hemispheric neighbors. Building on unilateral liberalizations undertaken in the late 1980s many Latin American countries have already negotiated preferential trading arrangements with each other. Examples include MERCOSUR ( which includes Argentina Brazil Paraguay and Uruguay ) the revitalized Central American Common Market and the Andean Community. Their dismantling of trade barriers both unilaterally and in the context of regional agreements reflects a significant shift away from traditionally inward-oriented trade policies toward more liberalized regimes. Although generally reflective of progressive policy programs the preferential nature of these arrangements is of concern to the United States because it means that other countries are gaining favored access to some of our most natural trading partners. As these arrangements proliferate the potential benefits to the United States of participating in them and the costs of remaining outside are rising. Chile for example is now linked in preferential trading agreements with every major country in the hemisphere except the United States. For this reason U.S. exports to Chile remain subject to tariffs averaging percent while exports from other Western Hemisphere countries increasingly enjoy dutyfree access. Although Chile is only one country it is a salient example of a growing trend An FTAA will bring substantial benefits to all countries in the region which had a combined GDP of over $ trillion and a market of million people in These benefits include not only a significant reduction of import barriers but also deeper geopolitical ties. The general lowering of trade barriers will be particularly beneficial to the United States since our market already is much more open than most. Although this benefit could in principle be achieved through the multilateral process regional action probably offers more immediate and complete liberalization Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Created in the APEC forum began to take on deeper significance in November when the President hosted the first-ever summit of the leaders of the member countries in Seattle. This meeting elevated the importance of the organization and set the stage for a second summit in Bogor Indonesia in There the leaders announced the goal of achieving " free and open trade and investment in the region " by for the developed-country members and by for the developing countries in the group ( Box ) In Osaka Japan the following year an agenda was laid out for achieving that goal and in in discussions at Subic Bay in the Philippines implementation of the agenda got under way. The most immediate result of the Subic Bay meeting was a call by the APEC leaders for the elimination of all tariff barriers among member countries to trade in the information technology sector. This declaration laid the foundation for the Information Technology Agreement described above Box APEC Tariff Reductions and Other Initiatives Mthough APEC members have not yet engaged in formal negotiations owr tariff reductions many haw already implemented dramatic reductions in their tariff lewis Betwete and the average applied tariff among AP1C members fell by more than a third from * percent to * per * cent ( Table * ) ; Hie progressive lowering of tariff barriers k otdy 0&e aspect of the APEC Aetion Agenda 13iis agenda details steps that AFBC members have agreed to take to promote greater economic interaction throughout the region. Other agenda items include reducing barriers to competition m the fast-growing air transport market and a variety of measures designed to reduce the cost of doing business in the region. These include the development $ f an infraatmeture opportunity data base the promotion of uniform customa dasmfieatioms and procedure ^ and advances in the hurmoni ^ atfoii of standards TABLE Tariff Rates of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Members [ Percent simple average ] Economy Australia Brunei Canada Chile China Chinese Taipei ( Taiwan ) Hong Kong Indonesia.. Japan Malaysia Mexico New Zealand Papua New Guinea ( ' ) Philippines Singapore South Korea Thailand United States Average 'Not available Sources : Institute for International Economics ( ' ) Fundamental to relations within APEC is the pledge of " open regionalism. " APEC seeks to serve as a building block to the multilateral system of liberalization and not a stumbling block. As a start toward implementing this vision in November APEC served as a catalyst for the ITA. APEC members are engaged in a process that builds upon the success achieved in the ITA. At the most recent summit in November in Vancouver Canada the APEC leaders agreed to expand APEC 's role as a catalyst for global market opening by endorsing liberalization initiatives in sectors. Among these are environmental services and technology medical equipment and instruments and chemicals sectors in which the United States is a major exporter. APEC will thus capitalize upon the fact that its collective size and importance in world trade will help in leveraging multilateral agreements that will cut trade barriers globally. The leaders ' decision recognizes the importance of taking APEC sectoral initiatives into the WTO where appropriate and including binding global agreements as was done with the ITA With its member countries now accounting for approximately half of world output and trade the APEC region has grown in significance for the United States. Already the share of U.S. exports going to APEC members has increased from percent in to percent in APEC is also demonstrating its importance in other ways : in November APEC leaders embraced a strategy for dealing with the ongoing currency crisis in East Asia BILATERAL INITIATIVES As successful as these multilateral and regional initiatives have been significant barriers to U.S. exports remain in some countries more than others. The reduction of formal barriers to trade worldwide often exposes cross-country differences in institutions and norms that also serve to limit trade. To the extent these practices are countryspecific it is sometimes easier to address them on a bilateral rather than a multilateral or regional basis. This Administration has a record of actively pursuing remedies to trade barriers abroad. These efforts are designed not only to liberalize markets for American products but to provide broad market access for all would-be exporters China China is the world 's lOth-largest trading nation and the United States ' fourth-largest trading partner. U.S. exports to China have nearly quadrupled in the last decade. However China 's wide array of barriers to trade together with the relocation of the source of many of our imports to China has resulted in a U.S. trade deficit with China of over $ billion in an increase of more than $ billion from Trade data from show that when both goods and services are included our recorded deficit with China exceeds our deficit with Japan. U.S. exports to China grew a slight percent in ( through November ) compared with 21-percent growth in U.S imports from China. Further opening the Chinese market to our exports is an important goal of U.S. bilateral and multilateral negotiations with China Negotiating the terms of China 's accession to the WTO is a major part of the Administration 's effort to address this trade imbalance The focus of the WTO access negotiations rests on opening China 's market to foreign goods and services and bringing China 's trade regime into conformity with international trade rules. The United States is also pursuing an active bilateral agenda with China to resolve outstanding issues ranging from market access for U.S. agricultural exports ( including citrus wheat and meat ) to protection for intellectual property rights European Union The trading relationship between the United States and the European Union is important and strong but it has had its frictions The U.S.-EU Agreement on Mutual Recognition of Product Testing or Approval Requirements concluded in June is evidence of this strength. When fully implemented the agreement will require each government to recognize the results of product testing and certification requirements set by the other thus eliminating the need for duplicative testing inspection and certification requirements for products in trans-Atlantic trade. The agreement reduces trade barriers in six areas telecommunications medical devices electromagnetic compatibility electrical safety recreational craft and Pharmaceuticals covering approximately $ billion in two-way trade. The agreement will allow products and processes to be assessed in the United States for conformity to European standards and vice versa saving U.S. exporters more than a billion dollars annually In recent years however longstanding divides between the United States and the European countries have reemerged along with new areas of disagreement. In alone the United States has had to deal with disputes resulting from decisions made and deadlines set by the European Commission. The first involved a European ban on products made with so-called specified risk materials ; these are foodstuffs that the European Union considers potentially contaminated with the agent that causes bovine spongiform encephalopathy or mad cow disease. The other disputes involved restrictions on the imports of furs obtained through the use of leghold traps the biogenetic alteration of corn and the process by which wine for export to Europe is made. The fur dispute was resolved by an agreement to phase out the use of certain traps in the United States ; the other issues remain outstanding Japan Japan is our second-largest trading partner. Our two countries share a long history of negotiated access to the Japanese market for U.S. goods. A series of agreements have sought to address a range of structural features of the Japanese economy that act as market access barriers ; these include closed distribution systems overregulation lack of transparency in procurement practices and exclusionary business practices. In addition the two countries have negotiated sectoral agreements on semiconductors wood products cellular phones construction and other goods and services Since the beginning of this Administration the United States and Japan have negotiated trade agreements. Under the U.S.-Japan Framework for a New Economic Partnership Agreement reached in the two countries have negotiated sectoral agreements covering such sectors as automobiles and auto parts insurance financial services telecommunications medical technology and flat glass. These are generally sectors in which the United States is competitive but in which our share of the Japanese market often lags behind our shares in the same sectors in other industrial countries ' markets. These agreements included objective criteria to guide the two countries in evaluating their success. Under the Framework Agreement bilateral agreements on structural issues including deregulation investment and intellectual property rights also were reached Although noteworthy progress has been made under many of these agreements progress has fallen short in some areas. The United States places priority on full implementation of its bilateral agreements with Japan and believes that more vigorous enforcement is necessary to ensure that their goals are achieved. In addition the United States continues to seek new market access agreements with Japan to address barriers in specific sectors. Market opening is consistent with a larger deregulation program currently under way within Japan. Under the Enhanced Initiative on Deregulation and Competition Policy to which the President and the Japanese Prime Minister agreed in June four sectors financial services telecommunications housing and medical devices and Pharmaceuticals were identified as the focus of efforts in this area The United States also sees the WTO dispute settlement process as useful in addressing specific Japanese market access barriers. In December the United States reached a settlement with Japan regarding Japan 's compliance with a WTO decision against its discriminatory taxation of distilled spirits. The United States is also pursuing a case against Japan 's varietal testing requirements for fruit. On another front the United States challenged an array of measures that Japan has put in place over the past years to restrict imports of photographic film and paper but the WTO panel did not rule favorably Negotiations in both regional and multilateral fora have also generated real market opening in Japan. The WTO agreements on information technology basic telecommunications and financial services will increase U.S. market access to many WTO members including Japan THE EFFECTS OF MARKET OPENING This Administration 's efforts to open markets worldwide reviewed in the previous section are part of a long U.S. tradition of leadership in market liberalization. These efforts have been remarkably successful : barriers to international transactions on average are at a mere fraction of their 1930s levels. But it is not enough to measure the extent to which markets have been opened. The bottom line for the United States is the net benefits this opening brings not just for the U.S. economy as a whole but for typical American workers and consumers. This section discusses the sources of benefit from international trade and some estimates of the impact of trade on U.S. GDP This is followed by a discussion of international trade 's impact on U.S workers THE BENEFITS OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION The benefits to an economy from international trade are of two types : static gains provide a one-time increase in income whereas dynamic gains result in a more or less permanent increase in the economy 's rate of growth. The former can be significant but it is the accumulation over time of the latter that can generate much larger improvements in living standards The primary source of the static gains from trade is specialization which allows resources to be used more efficiently. When one country produces and exports those goods that it can produce relatively cheaply ( for instance wheat in the United States ) and imports those that are relatively cheap to produce abroad ( for example coffee from Brazil ) this trade can boost living standards on both sides of the transaction. Such trade can be beneficial even in cases where one country could produce both goods more efficiently. This notion commonly referred to as comparative advantage is straightforward when applied to individuals each of us sometimes purchases from others some goods or services that we could make or perform even better ourselves because we realize that our time is most profitably spent doing those things we do best. But the principle applies equally well to countries. When each country specializes in what it produces relatively more efficiently the resources of both are put to use where they generate the greatest economic value. Free trade thus is a positivesum not a negative- or a zero-sum game The benefits of more efficient resource allocation are augmented when economies of scale are present. For some goods such as automobiles the average cost of production falls as more of the good is produced. Again opening markets to trade allows production of such goods to be concentrated in those countries that produce them relatively well. They can then produce more of those goods exploiting these economies of scale. This helps explain why the United States trades more with similar countries ( Canada and Europe for example ) than dissimilar ones : such countries presumably have similar resource endowments and this limits the potential gains from more efficient allocation but they can still gain from exploiting scale economies. Such trade often offers yet another benefit : besides making goods cheaper it increases the variety of goods available to both consumers and producers By encouraging continuous productivity improvements international trade can increase an economy 's growth rate ; this is the source of the dynamic gains from trade. Trade stimulates productivity improvements most directly through its procompetitive effects. By subjecting domestic firms to foreign competition trade gives them an incentive not only to lower prices but also to strive to enhance productivity which further reduces prices by lowering average cost These gains from increased competition differ from the other gains from trade in that they are recurring : although competition is only introduced once it leads to a cycle of productivity improvements and quality enhancements that continue to benefit the economy indefinitely. Trade ( and international investment discussed below ) can also lead to increases in the growth rate by facilitating the transfer of technology between countries. Although the protection of intellectual property rights in the short term is important for maintaining the incentive to conduct research and development over the longer term the free flow of technological advances across borders will encourage ever more efficient utilization of the world 's scarce resources MEASURING THE GAINS FROM TRADE How are the benefits from liberal trade policies to be gauged in practice ? The difficulty in measuring the effects of international trade agreements is that they are but one event among many. In an economy the size of the United States GDP both rises and falls in response to many factors most of which have nothing to do with trade agreements NAFTA provides a prime example of the problems involved. NAFTA entered into force in January The following December Mexico experienced a deep economic and financial crisis for reasons unrelated to the agreement. The result in was a steep fall in output in Mexico an increase in unemployment and a drop in real wages there. A natural side effect of the crisis was a dramatic decline in Mexico 's imports brought on by greatly reduced domestic income and demand higher import prices due to devaluation of the peso and to a limited extent higher tariff barriers against non-NAFTA trading partners. Despite this crisis-induced decline in trade with Mexico it is possible to discuss gains for the U.S. economy derived from NAFTA. Because of the agreement Mexico did not raise tariff barriers against the United States or Canada but only against other countries. As a consequence not only did U.S. exports to Mexico not decline by as much as they might have but some believe the agreement sped the general recovery of the Mexican economy and of imports from the United States. Seeking to take the extraneous effects of the crisis into account the Administration commissioned a report which estimated that NAFTA increased U.S. income by $ billion in Despite the difficulty of disentangling the many causes of national income growth a large number of studies have assessed the benefits of trade liberalizations real and hypothetical. Some have examined the potential benefits from removing existing restrictive measures. A recent study of the costs of protection in the United States for example suggests potential consumer gains of approximately $ billion in ( percent of GDP ) from removing existing barriers. A drawback of these studies is their inability to incorporate all the benefits of international trade enumerated above. Although they do capture the static costs of inefficient resource allocation these studies are incapable of quantifying the value of forgone varieties quality improvements or productivity enhancements that would take place in the absence of trade barriers. Thus studies of this type understate the benefits from trade Another approach to understanding the benefits of trade is to examine the statistical correspondence between openness and growth rates across a large sample of countries. Such cross-country studies hold constant other well-known determinants of growth such as investment and education. The common empirical finding is that increased trade is associated with higher income. For example one recent study using data from countries estimated that every percentage-point increase in openness ( measured as the sum of imports and exports expressed as a percentage of GDP ) was associated with a 0.34-percent increase in real income per capita between and Since U.S. openness by this measure has increased by percent of GDP ; this estimate would imply that the increase in trade was responsible for approximately a 4.3-percent increase in U.S. income per capita by TRADE AND THE AMERICAN WORKER The public debate over trade liberalization tends not to focus on whether trade brings benefits for the economy as a whole. It is widely conceded that it does. Instead recent concerns have focused on the distributional impact of increased trade. This issue arises from the tendency of increased trade to favor some domestic industries while putting others at a disadvantage. As export-oriented industries expand they draw resources away from the rest of the economy resulting in a relative decline in other industries. This reallocation of resources will in all likelihood benefit some groups and injure others. Of particular concern are the impacts on workers including average wages the wages received by low-skilled relative to more highly skilled workers the availability of jobs in the economy and the extent to which workers suffer from job dislocation due to trade. This section discusses first the effects of trade on wages and then the effects on employment. In each case we begin by discussing effects in the aggregate ( on average wages and total employment ) and then turn to distributional and individual effects that can be masked by the aggregates TRADE AND AVERAGE WAGES Throughout the first half of the postwar era real average hourly wages for U.S. production and nonsupervisory workers increased at an average rate of about percent per year. Between and however this measure of real wages fell by roughly percent retreating to levels. The early 1970s also saw a dramatic acceleration in the growth of world trade to rates that ( since ) have consistently outpaced that of world income growth. This trend was especially striking in the United States where growth in trade exceeded growth in output by approximately percentage points per year following The coincidence of increasing trade and falling real average hourly earnings suggested to many that international forces were the source of this decline This inference is probably wrong however. To begin with it is more appropriate to focus on the level of total compensation ( wages of all workers plus nonwage compensation ) than on wages of production and nonsupervisory workers alone. Wages of production workers have recently grown less rapidly than overall wages. Nonwage compensation which includes health care benefits pension costs and other fringe benefits has grown relative to wages in recent decades so much so that total real compensation has increased by almost percent since despite the decline in real wages. Although this represents slower growth of total compensation than in the years before this slowdown is more appropriately explained by factors other than international trade in particular by a slowdown in productivity growth The compensation of labor is generally believed to be determined by worker productivity. Between and nonfarm business productivity ( output per worker hour in the nonfarm business sector ) grew at a rate of percent per year. Productivity growth slowed however between and to approximately percent per year. Given the productivity slowdown one would expect a slower rate of increase in real compensation during this period. Adjusting compensation by the consumer price index will not necessarily reveal this relationship : to producers the ones making the hiring decisions the real output of their workers must be judged only in terms of the prices received for their goods not the prices of all goods and services that consumers buy. This implies that a more appropriate deflator is the nonfarm business implicit price deflator And indeed when this measure of prices is used a remarkable correlation is observed between productivity growth and growth in compensation over both periods ( Chart ) Policies aimed at increasing productivity growth rather than at reducing international competition are therefore more likely to increase the growth rate of real compensation Chart Real Wages and Labor Compensation and Productivity Using the implicit price deflator real compensation has kept pace with productivity growth. Using the consumer price index as a deflator real compensation has lagged Index = Nonfarm business ( NFB ) productivity Real compensation using NFB implicit price deflator * " * Real compensation using the consumer price index " ~ Real average hourly earnings using the consumer price index i i i i i i i i i i i Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Council of Economic Advisers Although total compensation is thus driven by overall productivity growth there is an additional effect related to the industry in which workers are employed. Standard theories of wage determination assume perfectly competitive labor markets in which workers of similar skill should earn comparable compensation even when employed in different industries. These assumptions however are not borne out in reality. There has long been a relationship between industry and compensation such that individuals with similar characteristics tend to earn more in some industries and less in others ( Box ) This raises the possibility that some workers could increase their pay simply by moving to another industry A recent study indicates that jobs associated with goods exports tend to pay wages approximately to percent higher than other jobs As exporters typically employ relatively skilled workers a part of this figure is due to differences in observable skills. But even after this factor is accounted for a significant wage differential remains : the adjusted wages of unskilled workers are approximately percent higher and those of skilled workers approximately percent higher in export-oriented industries than in the rest of the economy ; accounting for differences in nonmonetary compensation results in differentials that are larger still. Working in export industries thus has the potential to benefit workers and to benefit unskilled workers even more than skilled workers TRADE AND RELATIVE WAGES Some commentators have pointed to growing differences in the relative wages of skilled and unskilled workers as an indictment of free trade. During the 1980s a time when U.S. trade volumes were rising the wages of skilled workers rose between and percent relative to those of unskilled workers ( depending on how one defines " skilled " ) Given the rough coincidence of these changes it is tempting to single out international trade as responsible for this increasing wage disparity. Moreover a significant source of the expansion in world trade has been the entry into the world marketplace of many Asian economies well endowed with unskilled workers. Thus casual observation seems to support the claim that free trade is detrimental to unskilled U.S. workers : these workers now compete with a vast pool of unskilled workers abroad and the expected result of this competition is a decline in their wages Most careful analysis of the direct evidence does not strongly support the notion that international trade is the major source of increasing wage inequality. Skill-biased technological change for instance the use of computers and robotics has been a more important source. The nature of this technological change has reduced demand for unskilled workers and increased demand for skilled workers. This phenomenon can be expected to reduce the wages of unskilled workers relative to those of skilled workers and perhaps reduce them absolutely. Although the contribution of international trade to observed productivity changes has yet to be established recent research indicates that international trade is responsible for only perhaps to percent of the observed increase in wage inequality during the 1980s Furthermore U.S. trading patterns are inconsistent with the notion that trade liberalization is substantially depressing the wages of unskilled workers. Although the surge of imports from some low-wage Box Industry-Related Differences in Wages Basic economic theory tells us that equally productive workers might to receive equivalent compensation. But there has long been a fairly stable pattern of differences in wages for similar workers across U.S. industries * as Table illustrates * The table shows that a worker in the petroleum industry for example, can expect to receive about percent more in compensation than the average U.S. worker with similar characteristics ( such as education race and geographic location ) Similarly workers employed in private household services can expect compensation that is percent below the national average for similar workers * There is no single reason for these differences in compensation levels. However ^ a number of possible explanations do present themselves : * Compensating wage differentials. The work environment tends to differ from industry to industry. Work may be more pleasant or safe in some industries less so in others Workers in unhealthy or dangerous environments for instance * may receive compensation that exceeds that in otherwise similar jobs * Unobserved productivity differences Our ability to assess the productive characteristics of workers from survey data is limited. Workers may have skills not reflected in measures of education In addition, firms may provide their workers with training that makes them more productive on the job and their level of compensation may reflect this on-the-job training * Effwi&ncy wages * Providing increased compensation may raise worker productivity for example by increasing motivation and effort * and may reduce the probability that workers will quit To the extent that the benefit to employers of paying higher wages differ across industries compensation levels will differ * Monopoly rents. Competition is weaker and therefore profitability higher in some industries than in others. Workers may be able to extract some fraction of these higher profits in the form of higher compensation Differences in the profitability of firms and the bargaining power of workers can thus give rise to differences in compensation across industries In the ease of compensating wage differentials or exogenous skill differences ^ moving a worker from one job to another will not make that worker better off. In the first case the worker is merely being compensated for bearing an additional burden and in the second for some unobsarvabte productive eapadty * in the same way that we expect workers to be compensated for higher levels of education. But in cases where positive wage differentials are due ta skills acquired OB the jab efficiency wages or monopoly rente increasing the number of export jobs has the potential of raising the standard of living for workers TABLE Industry Compensation Premiums [ Percent ] Bottom industries Top industries Industry Premium Industry Premium Petroleum Tobacco Leather Repair services Communications Public utilities Entertainment Apparel Transportation equipment Mining Other retail trade Education services Primary metals Chemical Personal services Eating and drinking Paper Machinery except electrical Welfare services Private household services Two-digit Census Industrial Classification industries Note. The premium is calculated as the percentage by which compensation in the industry ( wages plus benefits ) exceeds the national average for all industries after accounting for worker characteristics Source : Katz Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers " Industry Rents : Evidence and Implications " Brookings Papers : Microeconomics countries has received tremendous attention the United States still buys the bulk of its imports from other advanced industrial countries whose workers have similar skills and wages. If we define low-wage countries as those whose average wage is half or less that in the United States trade with such countries in was roughly the same as it was in when Japan and much of Europe qualified as low-wage countries. Imports from low-wage countries were percent of GDP in and rose to only percent of GDP by In addition the trade-weighted average hourly manufacturing wage of U.S. trade partners was percent of that in the United States in ; this seems much too small a difference to have produced the observed changes in relative wages This raises a more subtle but no less valid point : in order for international trade to result in a decrease in the wages of low-skilled workers the price of low-skill-intensive imports must necessarily fall But prices of such imports actually rose during the 1980s and 1990s In short while trade may contribute a bit to the widening wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers the evidence does not suggest that it is the prime source of the gap nor that it hurts unskilled workers in an absolute sense TRADE AND AGGREGATE EMPLOYMENT Much of the debate over trade has been over jobs. Critics of more open trade have claimed that trade destroys jobs ; advocates often argue that trade creates them. According to basic economic theory however in general trade does neither. Today the United States is close to full employment. In such times market opening means that opportunities will decrease in some industries and increase in others. The effect of export growth in this circumstance is not to increase the number of jobs but rather to increase the number of " good " jobs There are circumstances however in which trade can lead to job gains : when unemployment rates are high the expansion in exporting industries can be accomplished by hiring unemployed workers. In January U.S. unemployment was still percent ( even though the recession had ended years earlier ) During the next years the number of American jobs supported by exports rose by helping reduce unemployment to its present level below percent. As the economy comes closer to full employment however trade 's positive effect on aggregate U.S. real incomes shows up less in the form of higher employment and more in the form of higher real compensation for workers TRADE AND JOB DISPLACEMENT As reported in the Economic Report of the President public opinion polls continue to reveal a low sense of job security among American workers. This is surprising in that historically periods of robust economic activity such as the present one have been characterized by much less anxiety over job loss. This anxiety is also evidenced by a relatively low propensity for workers to quit their jobs a low quit rate suggests uncertainty about the prospects of finding a new job. Rightly or wrongly workers may associate much of their concern about job security with the expansion of trade. These concerns must be addressed. This means going beyond aggregate measures of expanding employment that might mask individual hardship The evidence suggests that for a variety of reasons trade is not a primary contributor to total job displacements. Because the U.S economy is highly dynamic a great deal of job turnover occurs as new firms go into business or expand and others drop out or contract. Data from the 1980s reveal that trade contributed at most percent of the observed displacements from manufacturing in the worst year of that decade ; in most years it contributed significantly less. Most of the job loss resulted from other forces principally technological change Trade can lead to increased displacements because an increase in imports is likely to displace workers in import-competing domestic industries. However expanded export opportunities may reduce the incidence of displacements in other sectors. Some evidence suggests that expanded export opportunities have been sufficient to offset the effect of growing imports on total displacements. When the effects of increased imports and exports over the 1980s are combined there is evidence that changing trade patterns over this period left the total volume of displacements relatively unchanged. This is possible because over time the displacements resulting from imports were generally offset by expansion in export-oriented industries which served to reduce the number of displacements. The net effect was then only a reshuffling of displacements across industries and across time Although trade may not have increased the number of displaced workers in the 1980s in some cases it may have increased the hardship associated with displacement. By shifting production from one industry to another international trade brings about a shift in employment from one industry to another. This change in the distribution of employment although it generally increases the quality of jobs available can lead to greater transitional hardship than some other causes of displacement for instance the closure of an inefficient plant in an otherwise thriving industry because it is more likely to involve finding a job in a new industry In recognition of the relationship between imports and labor displacements U.S. trade laws have included provisions for trade adjustment assistance since This assistance offers cash benefits in the form of extended unemployment insurance benefits and retraining to workers who lose their jobs as a result of trade. It also pays for job search assistance and relocation expenses. Since the inception of these programs about million workers have been certified as eligible. A smaller number have actually received benefits as many found jobs in the meantime The Administration is conscious of the need to provide support for workers injured by international trade but also aware that not all workers deserving of such support are now getting it. Accordingly the President has made significant reform of the existing trade adjustment assistance programs a priority. One such reform is to extend adjustment assistance to all workers displaced from firms that have shifted production to another country. The NAFTA legislation already provides such assistance to workers displaced from companies that have shut down their plants and moved production to Mexico or Canada. Also in need of assistance are displaced secondary workers those employed as subcontractors or in businesses that provided services to plants that have moved abroad. The NAFTA legislation offered benefits for these workers as well but most have been unaware they were entitled to the same types of benefits as other dislocated workers. These extensions of assistance coupled with efforts to streamline the certification process should significantly improve the quantity and quality of assistance provided to workers displaced by trade and investment liberalization THE U.S. TRADE BALANCE A popular measure of the impact of trade policies is the trade balance or the difference between exports and imports of goods and services. But use of the trade balance as a measure of the success of market-opening endeavors is problematic. Changes in the trade balance are seldom related to specific market-opening efforts ; indeed the trade balance is generally determined by macroeconomic factors not microeconomic barriers to trade National income accounting identities demonstrate that the difference between exports and imports must equal the difference between national saving and domestic investment. In practice this relationship applies to the current account balance rather than to the trade balance. Trade in goods and services is by far the largest component of the current account but it also includes overseas investment income and transfers. Measurement issues can also intrude to obscure the accounting identity. In particular the existence in recent years of a large statistical discrepancy between the income- and the product-side measures of GDP has led to a situation in which the gap between official measures of saving and investment has narrowed as the current account has widened ( Chart ) The source of the statistical discrepancy is by definition unknown at present. But if for example the current account and investment are being measured relatively accurately the current official measure of saving is too high Measurement issues aside in periods when domestic investment exceeds national saving the current account balance will necessarily be in deficit whatever the state of trade policy. Whether the Nation is borrowing to finance a consumption binge or an investment boom the current account deficit that results will represent the inevitable consequence of these aggregate borrowing decisions not the failure of market-opening policies Until the 1980s the current account of the U.S. balance of payments was seldom far from balance. Since then however both the trade balance and the current account balance have been in substantial deficit as growth in imports has largely exceeded growth in exports. These deficits have not arisen because we in the United States have expanded access to our markets while our trading partners have not done the same. In fact over this period our major trading partners have Chart Saving Investment and the Current Account Balance The current account deficit grew in the mid-1980s as saving fell faster than investment In the 1990s however both investment and saving are increasing Percent of GDP Net national investment Net national saving plus statistical discrepancy Net national saving Current account balance Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) reduced their trade barriers more than has the United States.Rather the explanation is macroeconomic. As Chart shows changes in the trade deficit have often closely followed movements in the real exchange rate. The exchange rate in turn reflects global demand for U.S. dollars by those who want to buy U.S. goods and assets and the supply of dollars from those who want to use them to buy foreign goods and assets The trade deficit grew in the early 1980s as the Federal Government maintained a mix of tight monetary policy and expansionary fiscal policy. Growing Federal budget deficits were a drain on the pool of domestic saving requiring new investment to be financed increasingly through borrowing on international capital markets. In particular the saving shortfall and tight monetary policy raised U.S interest rates which in turn caused the real exchange rate of the dollar to strengthen. As the dollar appreciated imports became cheaper for Americans and U.S. exports more expensive for foreigners so that the U.S. trade balance went deep into deficit. The deficit was thus financed by borrowing abroad. This problem was often referred to as the " twin deficits " emphasizing the role of the Federal budget deficit ( that is negative Federal Government saving ) in the low overall national saving rate and the resulting trade deficit Since the Federal budget deficit has fallen steadily and national saving has increased yet the trade deficit has once again grown. This is because of the strong boom in investment. Moreover Chart Real Value of the Dollar and the Trade Deficit The trade deficit is a macroeconomic phenomenon : increases in the deficit typically follow an appreciation of the dollar Index = Percent of GDP Real value of the dollar ( left scale ) Trade deficit Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas the trade deficit tends to widen when the economy is growing rapidly. As Chart shows for the United States import growth is strongly correlated with growth in national income ( as measured by GDP ) as our incomes rise we demand more goods and services generally including more foreign goods and services. The faster our incomes are rising relative to foreign incomes the more our demand for imports can be expected to accelerate relative to that for our exports ( which are foreigners ' imports ) The result is a growing trade deficit here at home. Arguably a current account deficit is less worrisome when it is accompanied by rising saving and investment At the beginning of it seemed likely that the U.S. growth rate would fall behind that of our trading partners in Asia and elsewhere which would help reduce the U.S. trade deficit. Instead U.S. growth and import demand remained unusually strong while much of the rest of the world grew less rapidly than expected. However as discussed in Chapter the dollar appreciated keeping the nominal trade deficit from widening. The currency crisis and slower growth that hit East Asia in the second half of the year suggest that the U.S deficit is likely to grow in The current trade deficit reflects decisions by households and businesses policy choices and the strength of the U.S. economy particularly in the context of financial instability and slowing growth abroad. In theory a smaller deficit might be realized with a different mix of fiscal and monetary policy but it would bring problems of its own. In particular under current conditions of very low unemployment an increase in the trade balance would simply crowd out growth in other sectors. The additional demand for U.S. goods and services would put upward pressure on inflation and interest rates and other sectors would have to contract to make room for the rising net exports. In other words the trade deficit has acted as a safety valve for the current economic expansion. Imports of goods have kept inflation low while imports of capital have kept interest rates low helping to sustain rapid income growth. In the strongly expanding full-employment economy that the United States now enjoys it should be easier for Americans to see that trade deficits do not necessarily reduce output and employment Chart Growth in Real Imports and GDP Growth in demand for imports is strongly correlated with income growth Four-quarter percent change Four-quarter percent change ; \ I \ '/ \ // V Real GDP growth ( left scale ) \ Real import growth ( right scale ) Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT Although trade has been a primary focus of the Economic Report of the President since its inception capital flows have become increasingly predominant in international transactions. A significant share of these flows has taken the form of foreign direct investment ( FBI ) wherein the investor acquires or increases foreign assets in which it then has some lasting interest or influence. In recent years growth in recorded FBI has outpaced even the rapid growth of trade In the last decade nominal FBI outflows from the United States rose an average of percent per year to reach $ billion in ; growth in FBI inflows averaged percent per year to $ billion ( Chart ) Chart Foreign Direct Investment Flows The 1980s saw a surge in foreign direct investment into the United States. In the 1990s however outflows of FDI have once again surpassed inflows Billions of dollars U.S. direct investment abroad \ Foreign direct investment N in the United States / / / / / V Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Commentators tend to speak in universal terms about the motivations for FDI but in reality no single factor determines why a firm chooses to become a multinational enterprise and operate affiliates in foreign countries. It may be to take advantage of unique opportunities only available overseas ( for example to develop new oil fields ) to lower production costs by exploiting international comparative advantage or to gain or improve access to foreign markets by avoiding trade barriers and transportation costs. Although a firm always has alternatives to FDI such as exporting or licensing foreign firms to produce its goods sometimes it is more cost-effective to internalize operations within the firm 's command-and-control structure rather than conduct arm 's-length transactions. This is especially true as telecommunications technology has improved making the coordination of foreign operations easier FDI and trade are interlinked in a number of ways. Often FDI is a substitute for exporting : firms invest in operations abroad in response to tariffs or other barriers that hinder the export of goods to those markets. But FDI and trade are also complementary. In reported intrafirm trade the cross-border transactions between affiliated units of multinational companies accounted for one-third of U.S. exports and two-fifths of U.S. imports of goods. An understanding of the large and growing role of FDI in modern trade patterns may be useful in assessing the benefits of this important aspect of our integrating world economy As the importance of international direct investment has increased countries have moved to negotiate a set of rules for FBI along the lines of those for trade. Unfortunately many misunderstandings remain regarding FBI which threaten to hinder these efforts ( Box ) Before reporting on the progress of these efforts this section reviews recent trends in FBI flows and the ways in which both the home and the host country benefit from FBI Box Fears and Facts about Foreign Direct Investment In &a $ concerns arose in the United State that the rapid rise in inward FBI would have adverse effects on American workers Some feared that fomgn-cootelled affiliates that displaced firms might change the composition of employment> mmmg jobs to the home country and offering only % ad * jobs in the United States In feet foreign mtflttoationals in the United States pay higher than average wages suggetting that in fact they provide jobs When net fDI flows turned outward during the 199Cte the sera became that UJSL companies would begin outsoumng mueh of their production to other soimtries again at the esqpense of jobs and wages at home This seeming ^ >nferadktion ~ ~ tiiat inward and outward PDI would hare similar effects on UJSL woikers may reflect how little was actually known about the effects of FDL Unlike trade * wWch has been the subject of study for hundreds of years FBI has been subjected to little rigorous atudy until recently * As more has been learned about FWt many of these initial fears have subsided The following are some fears that have been recently eiqpressed about FBI and the facts that we now know Fear : Wo n't U,S industries leare for low-wage developing countries ? Fact : During the NAFTA debate * mm voiced concern that lowering barriers to investment to Ifetico would result in a large movement of UJ3 industry there m firms ei | ioited low Meodcati wagg& But aince the passage of NAFTA in Mexico 's sha ^ e of the U.3 outward FBI position has deceased The reason thei ? e has been no mam exodus of U $ > industry to Mexico or to other low * w ^ e countries is simple : there is no free luncfc for multinattonals as for the rest of us Keal wage& may vary significantly aarc ^ s countries but studies show that these differences are linked to ptMuotodty differences Just as economic theory would predict Low wages a # e not a sufficient reason to move production to a foreign mu&tiy if l<rw pro 'rafees the later tmt per wit of output to a dose to that of the United States * 5fi0 Yast mqfofi&r of UJS ; EDI conti&pas tabe with other Mgh ~ wage e0uxibi $ so dearly other motivations than fee potential for low-wage o&tsmircteg am heWnd Fear : Are U.S. firms that invest abroad e&partteg j $ te ? Pact : It may seem reasonable to suppose that a UJB * firm that hires workers fa an orerseas affiliate Is contributing to * tinemplojmeiit since the fitm emdd fea htetag U.S workers to do the same job hem Evide&ee shows however that generafly this is not the eaae ; inereaaes m employment in foreign affiliates of 0J5 firms ara oftep assodated wife mcreasea in emplo ^ ^ meBt at the pai ^ nt aa well What employment sijbstituMon there is seems to be oc ^ riimiig entirely offshore batweeii couatries competing for U.8L IT>I not between UA parents and tfaeir foreign affiliates Par from export- * S WDl abit>ad Fact : Witfi the snrge to outward PDI in recent yeaxa WDI outflows now amount to more than percent <tf grosB private 'nonresMential fixed iwe&tment Howe 0ry- whei-a-ttS firm inv ^ Bta abr $ act ? that do ^ s not nec ^ B0M | Iy/meai ^ it woiald hava toasted here instead if WDl had not bee-m aai option. It might then 'ham chosen not- to Invert at all. M&femrer * two-lMrds of recorded outflows in were acteally the reinwated earnings of foreign aifiliatas not capital orig&taJaiiEg im the United ' States Considering omly actual eapital outtlow % a recent stedy estimated that outward FDI .-a ^ ^ raged only CMJ percent of nonresMential feed inTestment between and and the share has been trending dowiiward. Capital outflows are also largely wmpensated by foreign investment inflows Evidence suggests- that a { ^ mpleme&tarity may e ^ i ^ t between ertment deeMow of domestic and -foreigii firms which imply ; tibat redprocal di et iHTesteient between the United States and other industrial countries increases total investment to all eotmtries that participate In short * ' opponents ^ of FDI ha ^ e incoirectly framed it as a ^ ero-smm ; centum,- where for one country to gain ? another must torn Both the theoretical arguments of the benefits of FBI and the eirfdenee now available suggest that PDI eati provide net gams for all parties ' CURRENT TRENDS IN FBI The United States remains both the largest source of and the largest host to FDI in the world. Throughout most of the postwar period the United States has been a net direct investor overseas with FDI outflows exceeding inflows ( Chart ) However in the balance of U.S. FDI flows turned inward for the first time led by a large expansion of investment in the United States by Japanese and U.K. firms. This direct investment by foreign firms in the United States grew rapidly throughout the 1980s peaked in and then dropped sharply in the early 1990s. Investment abroad by U.S. firms has increased tremendously in the 1990s so that since the balance of FDI flows has once again been outward. These trends continue : in the first three quarters of FDI outflows in the balance of payments accounts rose to $ billion $ billion more than inflows and already surpassing the level for all of ( $ billion ) By the cumulative direct investment position of foreign firms in the United States ( the inward FDI stock ) measured on a historical cost basis had reached $ billion an increase of percent since There are some accepted problems in measuring FDI precisely. U.S. balance of payments accounting rules define FDI as financial flows from a parent company to an overseas affiliate in which it has at least percent ownership. Thus investment in foreign affiliates not financed directly by the parent company is excluded. In addition historical cost positions are measured at the book value of purchases each year and therefore do not adjust for capital gains ( including those due to inflation ) Estimates that attempt to adjust for increases in the market value of assets are almost double the historical cost measure. However historical cost measurements do indicate the distributional changes of FDI across countries and sectors More than half of the reported FDI stock in the United States has come from three countries : the United Kingdom holds the largest share followed by Japan and the Netherlands. The United Kingdom is also the largest host to U.S. direct investment abroad followed by Canada. European countries are host to half of the stock of U.S investment abroad. In U.S. firms directly controlled overseas assets of $ billion again valued at historical cost ; member countries of the OECD were home to over percent of this investment Much of the rest was in Bermuda the Caribbean and some Asian newly industrializing economies such as Hong Kong ; this investment is concentrated in sectors such as wholesale trade finance real estate and services. China the second-largest host to worldwide FDI still represents only a negligible share of U.S. direct investment abroad. However between and the U.S. position in China increased at an average rate of percent per year. FDI in other Asian developing countries has been increasing as well ; however the majority of growth has come from investment in the higher income economies that are still host to percent of U.S. FBI in the region Among developing countries Brazil Mexico and Panama are the largest hosts to recorded U.S. FBI. Annual FBI flows to these countries represent about percent of the total but the stock of U.S. FDI in all of Latin America is still less than percent of the total U.S position abroad. Nevertheless the brightening economic prospects in Latin America have been accompanied by a pronounced expansion of the U.S. direct investment position in the region. The emerging markets there are poised to become increasingly important to U.S investors in the future especially if investment barriers are liberalized under the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas Although wages are lower in developing countries these do not always entail the cost advantages many people assume ( Box ) Rather the developing countries that receive the most FDI are usually those regarded as potentially large future markets. This suggests that companies investing in these countries hope to establish a market presence in the expectation of profitable future sales and are not simply outsourcing production for reexport to other markets Although the public image of FDI in the United States is often one of large manufacturing multinationals manufacturing accounts for only one-third of both the inward and the outward FDI stock. Much FDI in manufacturing occurs in motor vehicles electronic and electrical equipment office machines and computers and chemicals and allied products. In these sectors accounted for over half of both the U.S. FDI position abroad in manufacturing and almost half of the foreign position in the United States ( Table ) The industrial composition of U.S. FDI has evolved in tandem with that of the U.S. economy. Much of U.S. outward FDI in past decades was motivated by the opportunity to use U.S. technology to extract foreign raw material resources such as oil coal and natural gas : in the petroleum industry accounted for roughly percent of the outward U.S. FDI position. But this share has been falling steadily and in the figure was less than percent. Between and FDI became associated with the relocation of manufacturing activities abroad in part because of the rapid expansion of foreign firms in the U.S. manufacturing sector. More recently a growing share of FDI is in service industries primarily finance insurance and real estate but also wholesale and retail trade and banking mirroring the evolution of the U.S. economy from a manufacturing to a services economy. In service industries accounted for percent of the U.S. position abroad exceeding the share of the entire manufacturing sector. However these figures may overstate the role of services which include sectors such as finance where large holdings of " paper assets " are the norm TABLE Inward and Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Industry Selected Years [ Billions of dollars ] U.S. direct investment abroad Industry Foreign direct investment in the United States Petroleum Manufacturing Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Primary and fabricated metals Industrial machinery and equipment Office and computing machines Electronic and other electric equipment Motor vehicles and equipment Other manufacturing 1S.1 Services Other industries Communications and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Banking Finance ( excluding banking ) insurance and real estate Other services All industries % Note. Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Employment in foreign-owned U.S. affiliates rose from million in to almost million in This represents an average annual increase of more than percent over three times the rate of growth in nonfarm U.S. employment over the same period and led to an increase in the share of U.S. private industry employment in foreign-controlled firms from less than percent to percent of total employment. The share of private industry GDP accounted for by foreign-owned U.S. affiliates has increased from percent in to percent in However these increases largely represent growth during the 1980s and early 1990s ; in fact by both measures the foreign presence in U.S industry has been constant or decreasing in recent years THE BENEFITS OF FBI The benefits of FDI to the economy as a whole seem less clear than the benefits of trade. Yet in a world where trade results from differences in relative factor abundance capital mobility should act as a substitute for trade. This corresponds with the notion that FDI occurs in response to trade barriers and suggests that capital flows have welfare implications similar to those of trade. Capital mobility can also have macroeconomic benefits by relaxing the tradeoff between investment and consumption. However the benefits of FDI go beyond increased capital mobility : FDI has direct impacts on both the host and the home countries that have little in common with other types of international investment such as portfolio asset flows Benefits to the Host Country The nature of the benefits of FDI to the host country is likely to depend on whether the country is developed or developing and on the reasons why FDI is taking place. FDI in the higher income countries is often a response to market access concerns. By establishing operations closer to customers a firm may be able to increase the quality of support services and the ability to match products to local tastes. The presence of multinationals also entails all the traditional benefits of local investment creating jobs and fostering demand from local suppliers When FDI occurs in developing countries the gains from fostering demand from local industry may be even greater. " Big push " theories of industrialization emphasize that the profitability to a single firm of adopting new technological advances often depends on other firms ' decisions to do likewise. For example an automobile assembly plant requires dependable suppliers of parts and machinery but these are not likely to exist locally if no automobile plants exist. In this scenario the gap between developed and developing countries occurs because the former have managed to overcome this coordination problem. By internalizing such transactions often by using already established global supply networks multinationals can overcome the coordination problem and provide the first step toward industrialization in a developing country FDI may have additional advantages in developing countries particularly over portfolio investment. The ability to own a foreign firm directly rather than through passive stock holdings may increase the incentive to invest in countries that offer attractive opportunities but little domestic entrepreneurial experience. Furthermore since the commitments involved in direct ownership imply greater adjustment costs than under stock ownership when conditions turn unfavorable FDI can create a more stable investment atmosphere by discouraging capital flight like that which plagued developing economies in Southeast Asia in When investors are forced to weather financial storms a country 's market volatility and macroeconomic instability are reduced and this may help the storms pass more quickly Lastly through direct control of their affiliates multinationals provide crucial links in the international dissemination of technology and best practices. This promotes more efficient production and resource use in home countries and rising incomes throughout the world. The recent literature on economic growth emphasizes the importance of an expanding common pool of ideas in increasing growth rates in all countries. As new trade and investment agreements are negotiated to strengthen global intellectual property rights these transfers of knowledge can proceed without destroying the incentive to innovate or sacrificing the profitability of innovating firms. FBI is frequently shown to be an important vehicle for increasing productivity in host countries in some cases contributing relatively more to growth than does domestic investment. Although developing countries that now employ outdated technologies may have the most to gain from new ideas brought in by foreign multinationals they are not the only beneficiaries. The resurgent competitiveness of the U.S. automotive industry in the 1990s is often attributed in part to the adoption of just-in-time inventory practices used successfully by Japanese production facilities located in the United States Benefits to the Home Country It might seem natural that foreign investment helps foreigners but what is less apparent is that the activities of multinationals can promote growth in their home countries as well ( see Box ) By developing and expanding foreign markets multinationals provide an important benefit to the home country because growth in a country 's trade partners means growth in its export opportunities. And in many cases as firms expand their operations overseas they expand their management and support operations at home also increasing employment both at home and abroad Moreover multinationals create trade by moving goods and services between parents and their foreign affiliates. As already noted this intrafirm trade now plays a significant role in total U.S. trade Although the move from arm 's-length to intrafirm transactions need not represent " new " trade evidence suggests that FBI is likely to increase trade. This can be considered a benefit in itself by promoting the interchange of goods. FBI often plays an important role in promoting trade when barriers to traditional exports exist. A recent study shows that in percent of U.S. exports to Japan were intrafirm exports as were percent of exports to Switzerland and percent to Russia. By contrast only percent of U.S. exports to Taiwan our seventh-largest foreign market were intrafirm exports Arguably intrafirm trade might not be beneficial if it represents the foreign outsourcing of goods for production and reexport to the home country. If this were the case we might expect to see an intrafirm trade deficit equal to the amount of value added overseas But U.S. intrafirm trade is in surplus : U.S. multinationals export more to their overseas affiliates than they import from them. This suggests that on balance shipments to foreign affiliates represent goods to be sold in the overseas market ( perhaps after final assembly there ) rather than outsourcing for reexport. In a rapidly changing world environment firms hoping to enter foreign markets are increasingly coming to realize that establishing a direct presence in those markets may be the best way to compete CURRENT U.S. INITIATIVES IN INVESTMENT POLICY Evidence has shown that a stable policy environment is a good determinant of the amount of FDI a country attracts. Countries that are prone to nationalization corruption and political instability are less likely to receive foreign investment whereas those that protect foreign investors and intellectual property rights do better. This suggests that there are benefits to achieving multilateral standards for investment rules Under the auspices of the OECD the United States has joined other countries in negotiations toward a Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) that will set " high standards for the liberalization of investment regimes and investment protection...with effective dispute settlement procedures. " The goal is to eliminate discrimination in investment by achieving a uniform set of rules for all signatories thereby removing market distortions and facilitating the investment process The MAI is being negotiated principally among the OECD countries that account for the vast majority of worldwide FDI flows. But the MAI is being designed as a free-standing international treaty to which other nations may accede. Even though the negotiations are primarily among similar countries with similar objectives the negotiations have been difficult at times Meanwhile over bilateral investment treaties already exist primarily between developed and developing countries. The United States has signed such treaties to date ( Box ) With these treaties the United States has been able to establish deeper agreements more quickly with more countries than it could by negotiating a single agreement with a large number of countries Another recent initiative in which the United States has been active is the international effort to combat corruption. Corruption is a particularly thorny problem for multinationals in many developing countries and its presence may offset much of the benefit to multinationals of locating in those countries. One recent study estimated that the effects of corruption were equivalent to an increase in the marginal tax rate for foreign investors of as much as percentage points. Given the benefits of FDI to both home and host countries this strong disincentive to investment is likely to reduce the welfare of both. It has also had important legal ramifications for U.S investors abroad who are prohibited under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act from bribing foreign officials. This legislation has made it even more difficult for U.S. multinationals to establish and maintain businesses in countries with pervasive corruption Box Bilateral Investment TVeaties For much of the last decade the United States has been actively piimiing the negotiation of bilateral investment treaties with emerg ~ i&g-mark&t cmmtries aim&iil the world The UJ3 goyeiwuaiit plaa&s priority on negotiating sadk treaties with countries imdergofag eeo ~ noniie reform where It tellers the United States can haye a sipiifieant impact on the adoption of liberal polititoi on the treatment of FDI The stnidiitfe of these treaties has also laid the polky grotmdwork for broader urnMeonntry Mttative In the O1GD { tbe MAI ) and ev ^ otrat ly the WTO " Ehe stniftere of ow bilateral in ^ a ^ meiit treaties protidef treatment tiiat is as favorable as that received hj their eampetitors tiiis impfe the better of national or clear liniits OB fihe expropriation df fewsteieiits and fair compensation when expropriation does occur the right to transfer allfimdgrelated to an inv ^ tmeiit Into and out Iteite on the ability of the bc ^ t government to i ineffident the right to s&tait mi towstaMrtt dispute with the host government to international arf>iteatio0 the tight of UJS. inT ^ to ^ to eng ^ e the top managerial personnel In where national treatment is the MndKi ^ g standardj the are assured treatment no worse than investors Imm any thkd conntiy resewe % date ^ the UiriteJ States has snose ^ rfuffly nego> iMed Mtateral InTestmeat treaties wiftt some mnntries ( Ikble } and is actively engaged in pweiifag a mtdtttateral vemon of the troadgr under the auspices of ihe 0BCI ) TABLE Countries with Which the United States Has Bilateral Investment Treaties Country and date Albania Argentina Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Bulgaria Cameroon Congo ( Brazzaville ) Congo ( Kinshasa ) Country and date pending pending Croatia Czech Republic Ecuador Egypt Estonia pending Georgia Grenada Haiti Honduras Jamaica Country and date pending Jordan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Moldova Mongolia Morocco pending Nicaragua pending Panama Poland Note. Years are those when the treaty entered into force Source-. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative Country and date pending Romania Russia Senegal Slovakia Sri Lanka pending Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia pending Turkey Ukraine Uzbekistan pending In late the member countries of the OECD finalized a draft treaty to outlaw bribery of foreign public officials. Holding multinationals of all nationalities to similar standards will put pressure on foreign officials to abide by legal and transparent procedures in doing business with foreign companies rather than allow them to promote a " race to the ethical bottom " among companies seeking government contracts or licensing. It is hoped that together with the establishment of a common set of investment rules in the MAI the reduction of corruption abroad will act as an incentive to FBI bringing increased benefits to both home and host countries worldwide CONCLUSION Economies that are open to international trade and investment are more likely to experience a rising standard of living than are economies with significant barriers to cross-border economic activities Consumers in open economies benefit from a wider variety of goods at lower prices than do consumers in economies that resist competition from foreign suppliers. The economy as a whole benefits from an increased ability to devote its scarce resources to economic activities that it performs relatively efficiently. Over time through both international trade and international investment open economies benefit from higher rates of productivity growth and innovation that result from increased participation in international markets Many however fear that international transactions will disadvantage certain segments of the economy. As this chapter has shown it is difficult to associate cross-border interactions with declining real wages of workers or even of particular groups of workers. Indeed there is evidence that adjustments resulting from growth in international trade have the potential to make workers better off. In the United States jobs with exporting firms pay between percent and percent more than do jobs in other sectors of the economy. At the same time the Administration recognizes that the transition from one job to another is not always easy and that assistance must be provided to those most affected by displacement As the United States is already among the most open economies in the world the Administration 's activities have been directed toward opening foreign markets to imports not only from the United States but from other exporters as well. This goal has been actively and successfully pursued in multilateral regional and bilateral forums Partly reflecting these pursuits U.S. imports and exports have increased significantly since Although much has been accomplished the Administration maintains an active international policy agenda promoting free trade throughout the Americas across the Pacific and around the world Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Janet L. Yellen Chair Jeffrey A. Frankel Member Rebecca M. Blank Member-Nominee Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D.Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F Burns Neil H Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J Saulnier Joseph S Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M.Okun James S Duesenberry MertonJ Peck Warren L Smith PaulW McCracken HendrikS Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L Seevers William J Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G Malkiel Charles L Schultze William D Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L Mussa Michael J Boskin John B.Taylor Richard L Schmalensee David F Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D'Andrea Tyson Alan S Blinder Joseph E Stiglitz Martin N Baily Alicia H Munnell Janet L Yellen Jeffrey A Frankel Position Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Oath of office date August August November May August May June September March September ^ December April Decembers May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August February June Octobers Novemberl3 November February July July June June January February April Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January Mayl September. January August June January January April June February August August Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues The Chair of the Council Janet L. Yellen was appointed Chair on February Dr. Yellen replaced Joseph E. Stiglitz who left the Council to become Senior Vice President of Development Economics and Chief Economist of the World Bank. Before becoming Chair of the Council Dr. Yellen served as a Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Dr Yellen is on leave from the Haas School of Business at the University of California Berkeley where she is the Bernard T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Business and Trade. Dr. Yellen is responsible for communicating the Council 's views on economic matters directly to the President through personal discussions and written reports. Dr. Yellen also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the National Economic Council ( NEC ) daily White House senior staff meetings budget team meetings with the President and other formal and informal meetings with the President senior White House staff and other senior government officials. Dr. Yellen is the Council 's chief public spokesperson. She directs the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the professional staff The Members of the Council Jeffrey A. Frankel is a Member of the Council of Economic Advisers Dr. Frankel is on leave from the University of California Berkeley where he is Professor of Economics. He previously directed the program on International Finance and Macroeconomics at the National Bureau of Economic Research and is a former Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics Alicia H. Munnell was a Member of the Council of Economic Advisers until August Dr. Munnell currently holds the Peter F. Drucker Chair in Management Sciences at Boston College 's Carroll School of Management. The President has nominated Rebecca M. Blank to suc- ceed Dr. Munnell as a Member of the Council. While awaiting confirmation Dr. Blank has been serving as Chief Economist. She is on leave from Northwestern University where she is Professor of Economics. Dr. Blank previously served as the first Director of the Northwestern University/University of Chicago Joint Center for Poverty Research and was a faculty affiliate at Northwestern University 's Institute for Policy Research The Chair and Members work as a team on most economic policy issues. Dr. Frankel and Dr. Munnell shared responsibility for domestic macroeconomic analysis the Administration 's economic forecast and budget and tax issues. Dr. Frankel is primarily responsible for international economic issues and certain microeconomic issues including those relating to natural resources the environment and industrial organization. Dr. Munnell was primarily responsible for retirement health care welfare reform and labor issues. Dr. Blank has taken over responsibility for these issues. She is also responsible for child and family policy issues and is working closely with the President 's Initiative on Race. The Chair and Members participate in the deliberations of the NEC and Dr. Yellen is a member of the NEC Principals Committee WEEKLY ECONOMIC BRIEFINGS Dr. Yellen and the Members continued during to conduct a weekly economic briefing for the President the Vice President and the President 's other senior economic and policy advisers. The Council in cooperation with the Office of the Vice President prepares a written Weekly Economic Briefing of the President which provides analysis of current economic developments more extended discussions of a wide range of economic issues and problems and summaries of economic developments in different regions and sectors of the economy. This document serves as a basis for the oral economic briefing of the President MACROECONOMIC POLICIES A primary function of the Council is to advise the President on all major macroeconomic issues and developments. The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff almost daily memoranda that report key economic data and analyze current economic events The Council the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Administration 's economic " troika " are responsible for producing the economic forecast that underlies the Administration 's budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the Members initiates the forecasting process twice each year. In preparing these forecasts the Council consults with a variety of outside sources including leading private sector forecasters In the Council continued to take part in discussions about the President 's balanced budget plan. The Council also participated in meetings on a range of budget issues including Medicare reform discretionary spending priorities and the Administration 's tax proposals. The Council participated in discussions regarding proposals to strengthen the Social Security system and in an interagency effort to develop a package of proposed reforms to the private pension system to promote higher rates of national saving and greater retirement security The Council participates in the Working Group on Financial Markets an interagency group that monitors developments related to financial markets and the banking sector. The group includes representatives from the Treasury the Federal Reserve the NEC and various regulatory agencies The Council continued its efforts to improve the public 's understanding of economic issues and the Administration 's economic agenda through regular briefings with the economic and financial press frequent discussions with outside economists and presentations to outside organizations. Drs. Yellen Frankel Munnell and Blank also regularly exchanged views on the macroeconomy with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES The Council was an active participant in in the international economic policymaking process through the NEC and the National Security Council providing both technical and analytical support and policy guidance. In particular the Council has helped assess the economic impact of international sanctions against foreign nations and the efficacy of relaxing restrictions in the U.S.-Japan civil aviation market. The Council has taken an active role on a range of other international economic issues including evaluating and explaining the case for trade liberalization the Administration 's policy approach to Asia 's financial turmoil U.S. trade remedy laws ( antidumping countervailing duties safeguards and Section actions ) and the agendas of multilateral and regional forums such as the World Trade Organization the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum and the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas The Council played a significant role in preparing both the Administration 's Study on the Operation and Effects of the North American Free Trade Agreement and the APEC Economic Outlook The Weekly Economic Briefing of the President also regularly included articles on international events and issues Because of the growing importance of international economic issues to the U.S. economy the Council often represents the United States at international meetings and forums. In November Dr. Yellen gave the keynote address at the U.S.-R.O.C. Economic Council Plenary Session Also in November Dr. Frankel participated in the annual meeting of the APEC Senior Economic Advisers a meeting initiated in by the Council during the APEC Leaders Summit. At this meeting Dr Frankel presented a Council paper on the long-term determinants of growth. In December Dr. Frankel participated in the Joint Economic Development Group with Israel. The Council also continued annual meetings with the Economic Planning Agency of Japan and the State Planning Commission of China the Council 's counterparts in those countries The Council is a leading U.S. participant in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the principal forum for economic cooperation among the high-income industrial countries The Council heads the U.S. delegation to the semiannual meetings of the OECD 's Economic Policy Committee ; Dr. Yellen serves as that committee 's chair. In Dr. Frankel participated in Working Party on macroeconomic policy coordination. Dr. Steven N. Braun Director Macroeconomic Forecasting at the Council led the U.S. delegation to the OECD annual examination of the United States and to the Short-term Economic Forecasters ' Meeting. Dr. Christopher Carroll Senior Economist at the Council led the U.S. delegation to the Working Party meeting on structural issues MICROECONOMIC POLICIES During the Council was an active participant in a range of microeconomic policy discussions. The Council participated in various interagency policy discussions on labor market issues health care education child care and welfare reform ; in the development of the Child Health Insurance Program ; in interagency discussions of proposals to increase health insurance coverage for older workers ; and in a working group investigating alternative measures of poverty. The Council also participated in working groups on the minimum wage training initiatives for displaced workers and unemployment insurance reform The Council has been actively involved in the President 's Initiative on Race and is coordinating production of a document that will present important indicators of social and economic well-being by race and ethnicity for use by a national audience including educators and policymakers In May the Council issued a report titled Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt to The report examined the causes of the 20-percent decline ( million recipients ) in the welfare caseload that took place between and and concluded that roughly percent of the decline was due to the stronger economy roughly percent to welfare reform policies and the remainder to other factors such as the earned income tax credit The Council was involved in White House conferences on early childhood development and child care. In conjunction with the early child- hood development conference the Council released a white paper titled The First Three Years : Investments That Pay. This report documented the importance of programs to encourage children 's development in the first years of life and the high long-term payoff of such investments As a follow-up to the White House child care conference the Council issued a report titled The Economics of Child Care. This report reviewed the economics literature regarding the availability cost and quality of child care and the importance of policies to support access to affordable quality care In the areas of regulation and competition policy the Council helped develop important Administration initiatives to improve the performance of markets both domestically and internationally. On the domestic front the Council took part in interagency efforts to increase competition in electric power markets in a manner consistent with important environmental and social objectives. The Council contributed to the Administration 's analysis of whether and how much to reform product liability law and to discussions of the Federal Communications Commission 's methods for pricing telecommunications services. The Council also worked with the Federal Trade Commission the Department of Justice and the Department of the Treasury to consider questions raised by the proposed industry-wide tobacco settlement. In addition the Council worked with the Treasury the Department of Education and the Office of Management and Budget to develop reforms of the college financial aid system to make it fairer and more efficient With respect to international regulation and competition policy the Council cooperated with the Department of State and other agencies to bring more competition to the satellite communications industry to support the OECD 's adoption of principles for economically sound regulation to promote efficient infrastructure development in the AsiaPacific region and to coordinate merger policy with the European Union The Council was also active in a range of policy discussions on natural resources and the environment. The Council took part in the interagency evaluation of National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone and particulate matter under the Clean Air Act and the implementation plans for the revised standards. The Council was actively involved in the development and analysis of the Administration 's global climate change policy The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The professional staff of the Council consists of the Chief of Staff the Senior Statistician senior economists staff economists and research assistants. The professional staff and their areas of concentration at the end of were : Chief of Staff and General Counsel Michele M. Jolin Senior Economists Steven N. Braun Christopher D. Carroll Aaron S. Edlin Keith O. Fuglie Maria J. Hanratty Jon D. Haveman Sanders D. Korenman Randall W. Lutter Adele C. Morris Jeremy B Rudd Charles F. Stone Director Macroeconomic Forecasting Macroeconomics and Aging Regulation Industrial Organization and Antitrust Agriculture and Natural Resources Health Care and Labor International Economics Labor Welfare and Education Regulation and Environment Environment and Natural Resources Macroeconomics Macroeconomics and Editor Weekly Economic Briefing of the President Senior Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Staff Economists Joseph E. Aldy Amy N. Finkelstein Mark R. Hopkins Mark C. Rainey Sarah J. Reber Environment and Natural Resources Labor and Public Finance International Economics Industrial Organization and Regulation Health Care and Environment Senior Research Assistant Ha Yan Lee Macroeconomics Research Assistants Zachary M. Candelario Daniel K. Chang Weekly Economic Briefing of the President Labor and Environment Weekly Economic Briefing of the President and International Economics Statistical Office Mrs. Furlong directs the Statistical Office. The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council 's statistical information oversees the publication of the monthly Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report and verifies statistics in Presidential and Council memoranda testimony and speeches Susan P. Clements Linda A. Reilly Brian A. Amorosi Statistician Statistician Research Assistant Administrative Officer Catherine Fibich Office of the Chairman Alice H. Williams Sandra F. Daigle Lisa D. Branch Francine P. Obermiller Executive Assistant to the Chairman Executive Assistant to the Chairman and Assistant to the Chief of Staff Executive Assistant to Dr. Frankel Executive Assistant to Dr. Blank Staff Secretaries Mary E. Jones Rosalind V. Rasin Mary A. Thomas International Economics Labor and Health Care Environment Industrial Organization and Public Finance Macroeconomics Mrs. Thomas also served as executive assistant for the Weekly Economic Briefing of the President Michael Treadway provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report. Michael A. Toman Resources for the Future served as a consultant during the year Student interns during the year were Aryeh J. Asian Elizabeth T Burns Carol L. Capece Quindi C. Franco Robert K. Kaproth Mark N. Levine Jennifer A. Meyers Andrew J. Miller Praveen Rangnath Katharine S. Rogers Ravi K. Sandill Kristen M. Scarafia Courtney A. Sweeney Harsh N. Trivedi and Jennifer H. Yoon. The following student interns joined the Council in January to assist with the preparation of the Economic Report : Keith H. Monk Jenny E. Pippin and Samuel G. Steckley DEPARTURES The Council 's senior economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Most of the senior economists who left the Council during returned to their previous affiliations. They are Timothy J. Brennan ( University of Maryland Baltimore County and Resources for the Future ) William B. English ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Phillip B. Levine ( Wellesley College ) John D. Montgomery ( International Monetary Fund ) Raymond Prince ( Department of Energy ) Christopher J Ruhm ( University of North Carolina Greensboro ) Jason F. Shogren ( University of Wyoming ) and David L. Sunding ( University of California Berkeley ) Mark J. Mazur became Senior Policy Adviser and Chief Economist at the Department of Energy Staff economists are generally graduate students who spend year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations Those who returned to their graduate studies in are Carrie S Cihak ( University of Michigan ) Cynthia K. Gustafson ( University of California Berkeley ) Andrea Richter ( London School of Economics ) Cristian J. Santesteban ( Stanford University ) and Caroline M Thompson ( Princeton University ) Jason L. Furman accepted a position with the World Bank. Thomas A. Rhoads accepted a position with Resources for the Future and has since returned to graduate studies at the University of Wyoming. After serving as research assistants at the Council Jennifer C. Daskal accepted a position at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and Diane M. Whitmore began graduate studies at Princeton University Elizabeth A. Kaminski and Margaret L. Snyder retired in after serving the Council for and years respectively. Mrs Kaminski served most recently as Administrative Officer and Mrs Snyder retired from the Statistical Office Public Information The Council 's Annual Report is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration 's domestic and international economic policies. It is now available for distribution as a bound volume on CD-ROM and on the Internet where it is accessible at http : //www.access.gpo.gov/eop The Council also has primary responsibility for compiling the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. The Internet address for the Economic Indicators is www.access.gpo.gov/congress/cong002.html Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B-ll B-12 B-13 B-14 B-15 B-16 B-17 B-18 B-19 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 B-30 B-31 B-32 B-33 Gross domestic product Real gross domestic product Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes Percent changes in real gross domestic product Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Gross domestic product by major type of product Real gross domestic product by major type of product Gross domestic product by sector Real gross domestic product by sector Gross domestic product by industry Real gross domestic product by industry Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business Output costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Real personal consumption expenditures Private gross fixed investment by type Real private gross fixed investment by type Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Inventories and final sales of domestic business Real inventories and final sales of domestic business Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Real exports and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments of factor income Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and real dollars Gross saving and investment Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Page Page POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B-34 B-35 B-36 B-37 B-38 B-39 B-40 B-41 B-42 B-43 B-44 B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 B-49 B-50 Population by age group Civilian population and labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B-51 B-52 B-53 B-54 B-55 B-56 B-57 B-58 B-59 Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufactures Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New housing units started and authorized Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods PRICES : B-60 B-61 B-62 B-63 B-64 B-65 B-66 B-67 B-68 Page MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B-69. Money stock liquid assets and debt measures B-70. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets 195&-97 B-71. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base B-72. Bank credit at all commercial banks B-73. Bond yields and interest rates B-74. Credit market borrowing B-75. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-76. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder B-77. Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B-78. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years B-79. Federal budget receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years B-80. Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years B-81. Federal receipts outlays deficit and debt fiscal years B-82. Federal Government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) B-83. Federal and State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) B-84. Federal and State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type B-85. State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) B-86. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years B-87. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation B-88. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors B-89. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B-90. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments B-91. Corporate profits by industry B-92. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries B-93. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations B-94. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations B-95. Common stock prices and yields B-96. Business formation and business failures Page AGRICULTURE : B-97. Farm income B-98. Farm business balance sheet B-99. Farm output and productivity indexes B-100. Farm input use selected inputs B-101. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers B-102. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B-103. U.S. international transactions B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category B-105. U.S. international trade in goods by area B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis B-107. International investment position of the United States at yearend B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B-109. Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B-110. Foreign exchange rates B-lll. International reserves selected years B-112. Growth rates in real gross domestic product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregates. In addition the Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series. This change is reflected in these tables Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : P Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies from February through early February NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross domestic product [ BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EXCEPT AS NOTED ; QUARTERLY DATA AT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter I960 ? II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV * Gross domestic product Total NonDurable durable goods goods Nonresidential Services See next page for continuation of table Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE B-l. Gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports Exports Imports National defense Federal Year or quarter Total Total Nondefense ZZ : -3'.1 '.. " * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : IJ Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV/> Gross domestic product ( GOP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of GDP plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ; ; State and local Percent change from preceding Final period Gross Addendum : sales of domes- Gross domesGross Gross tic national domes- domespurtic tic tic product chases l product ^ purproduct chases l goods and services TABLE B-2. Real gnus domestic product [ Billions ef chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates } Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter I960 Z ! " Ill ! * : : : : II III IV : | | Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : | | III IV : | | III IV " Gross domestic product 6,610J Total Durable goods Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nondurable Services goods Nonresktential Total See next page for continuation of table Total Total Structures Producers ' Residurable dential equipment P business inventories 1LO TABLE B-2. Real gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense Gross Final sales of domesdomestic State purtic and product chases ] local : II Ill IV II Ill IV -S0.5 : II Ill IV : II III IV : | | III IV II Ill IV * > Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services GOP plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis I960 * Addendum : Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prod- puruct chases * 3i3 ! o L9 TABLE B-3. Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Percent change from preceding period l Index numbers = Year or quarter GDP ( current dollars ) Real GDP GDP ( chain-type chain-type quantity price index index ) 1997p H Ill IV II III IV t | | Ill IV | | III IV : | | HI IV II Ill IY/ GDP implicit price deflator GDP ( current dollars ) Percent changes based on unrounded data. Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Real GDP GDP ( chain-type chain-type quantity price index index ) 3i3 ? 2iO ^ GDP implicit price deflator TABLE B-4. Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter 1997/> II Ill IV II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Gross domestic product ^ ^ ! Exports and im- Government consumpports of goods tion expenditures and and services gross investment Gross private domestic investment Nonresidential fixed Total Durable goods Nondurable goods 2'.2 L2 2i8 Services Total Structures ^ ? ^ Note. Percent changes based on unrounded data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Producers ' Residura- dential ble equipment ^ ^ Exports Imports in Total 4i9 L7 ! i ! o Federal -LO \ State and local ^ 3'.3 TABLE B-5. Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter I960 1997/> : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV | | III IV | | III IV : II Ill IVA> Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Fixed investment Total NonDurable durable goods goods ! i Nonresidential Services See next page for continuation of table Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential Change in business inventories TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports of goods and services '.2 o ' '.1 1i Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis -is _4 -A _j -il _i o ' -A il -fi I I I _5 is I _2 O O l l l l Serv- Total Total National Nondedefense fense ices l II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV/> Goods '.2 _2 il _g -A _i -il _ } 'A -i _2 il _i State and local CD | CD II Ill IV II Ill IV II III IV _ jj -L3 Total CD : Services CD ^ Federal Imports Exports Net exports Total Goods I Year or quarter TABLE B-6. Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter I960 * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III IV II III IV : | | III IV : II III \ \ IP Gross domestic product Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services See next page for continuation of table Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential TABLE B-6. Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Total Goods Source : Department of Commerce Bureau I960 * II Ill IV II III IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill \ \ ! P Services Total of Economic Analysis Goods Services Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local TABLE B-7. Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Gross domestic product Year or quarter * : | | III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II III \ Mp Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services See next page for continuation of table Total Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential TABLE B-7. Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Exports Total Year or quarter Imports Federal Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales of domestic product Total Gross domestic Gross Gross purnado- chases ' Less tional food product mestic Less and prodfood energy uct Total and energy : II Ill IV II Ill IV ' Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Percent changes based on unrounded data. Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis I960 Z Z 1997/> II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV Percent change Gross domestic purchases ' ? ? S ? S8 6S S3 ? S8 ? 2A TABLE B-8. Gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Final Change in Gross sales of busidomestic domes- ness product tic product inventories Year or quarter I960 ^ : | | III IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : Total Change in business inventories Total Final sales II III IVp Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Durable goods Change business inventories Final sales Nondurable goods Final sales Change in business inventories -S.9 '.4 Services Structures TABLE B-9. Real gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter I960 * : II III IV II Ill IV : | | Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV/> Final Change in Gross sales of busidomestic domes- ness tic product product inventories Total Total Final sales Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Durable goods Change in business inventories Final sales 1LO Change in business inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in business inventories Services Structures 484J5 TABLE B-10. Gross domestic product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business ' Year or quarter Gross domestic product Households and institutions Nonfarm ' Total Total Nonfarm less housing Housing Farm Total Private households Nonprofit institutions General government Total Federal : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV * Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general ment. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business product less gross farm product Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis * State and local govern- TABLE B-ll. Real gross domestic product by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business ' Year or quarter Gross domestic product Households and institutions Nonfarm ' Total Total Nonfarm less housing Housing Farm Total Private households Nonprofit institutions General government Total Federal : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV * Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general ment. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business product less gross farm product Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis * State and local govern- TABLE B-12 ross domestic product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Private industries Gross AgriculManufacturing domes- ture Contic for- Mining strucproduct estry tion Dura- Nonble durable and Total fishing goods goods Year Finance TransStainsurporta- Wholetistition sale Retail ance Services cal and trade and dispublic trade real creputilities estate ancy Government Based on SIC : I960 Based on SIC : Equals gross domestic product ( GDP ) measured as the sum of expenditures less gross domestic income Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-13. Real gross domestic product by industry [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ] Private industries Year Gross AgriManufacturing culdomes- ture Contic for- Mining strucproduct estry Dura- Nontion ble durable and Total fishing goods goods Not StaTransalloFinance porta- Wholetisti- Gov- cated insurerntion sale Retail ance Services cal ment by disindusand trade and try ' public trade real creputilities ancy estate Based on SIC : Based on SIC : Equals the current-dollar statistical discrepancy deflated by the implicit price deflator for gross domestic business product Equals GDP less the statistical discrepancy and the sum of the most detailed industry groups shown here Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross domestic product of nonfinaneial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net domestic product Year or quarter Gross domestic product of noninancial corporate business Domestic income Consumption of fixed capital Total Indirect business Total axes Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments CompensaProfits tion Profits after tax of employ- Total Profits Profits ees before tax Divi- Undistax iability Total dends tributed profits : II Ill IV : II Ill ! IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis ZII * ; Inventory valuation adjustment -2LJ -8.f .i -is A ! o -L2 1L4 Capital Net con- ntersump- est tion adjustment fi fi TABLE B-15. Output costs and profits of nonflnandal corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current Chained ( ) dollars dollars I960 Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of real output ( dollars ) Total cost and profit Consumption of fixed capital Indirect business taxes Compensation of employees Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax Net interest : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II III IV : jl III IV : II Ill IV II Ill 'Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in chained ( ) dollars This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two places to the3 left Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter FurniPersonal conMotor ture vehi- and sumption expendi- Total cles house- Total tures and hold parts equipment Nondurable goods Cloth- Gasoing line and and shoes oil Food 1997/> II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill \ \ lp Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis : : : Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total1 Housing Trans- MediElec- porta- cal tricity tion care Total and gas 855.C TABLE B-17. Real personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter FurniPersonal Motor ture consumption vehi- and expendi- Total cles house- Total ' tures and hold parts equipment Food Cloth- Gaso- Fuel oil line ing and and and coal shoes oil : 229i4 296J 1I459.3 : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Note. See Table B-2 for data for total personal consumption expenditures for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis * Services Nondurable goods Household operation TotaM Housjpo2 Total 2>65.2 Trans- MediElec- porta- cal tricity tion care and gas TABLE B-18. Private gross fixed investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Structures Year or quarter i * Private fixed investment Total nonresidential Total Nonresidential Utilibuildings ties including farm Producers ' durable equipment Mining exploration shafts and wells : II Ill IV : II III. IV : II III. IV : II III. IV : II Ill IV. : II III. Includes other items not shown separately Includes new computers and peripheral equipment only Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Information processing and related equipment Total Total Computers and peripheral Other Industrial equipment T> Transportation and related equipment Residential TABLE B-19. Real private gross fixed investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Producers ' durable equipment Structures Year or quarter Priuato nlvaie fixed investment Total nonresidential Total Nonresidential buildings including farm Utilities Mining exploration shafts and wells Information processing and related equipment Total : II III. IV : II " Ill IV. : II Ill IV. : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV/> Includes other items not shown separately Includes new computers and peripheral equipment only Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 1997/> Total Computers and peripheral equipment Other Industrial equipment Transportation and related equipment Residential TABLE B-20. Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Year or quarter Total Total Tntfll lUldl National defense P P ufOSS sumpinvestment tinn lion expend- Struc- Equiptures ment itures : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II I I I IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV/> Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 1997/> State and local Nondefense Tntfll lUlal P sumptinn lion expenditures P investment Structures Pnn i on- Total Equipment tion expenditures Gross investment < \ trnr oiruc- tures equipment TABLE B Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment State and local Federal Voor or Tear nr quarter 1997/> : II Ill IV.. : II Ill IV.. : II Ill IV.. : II Ill IV.. : II Ill IV.. II Ill IVp Tntfll luuJI Total Tntal luldl National defense r uiOSS iiOnsumpinvestment tinn HOD expend- Struc- Equipitures tures ment Nondefense Total lUlal r Pnn oiOSS uonsumpinvestment uun expend- Struc- Equipitures tures ment Con- tion Total CAJJCIIU- itures Note. See Table B-2 for data for total Government consumption expenditures and gross investment for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Gross Cfrnr ouuc- tures equipment TABLE B-22. Inventories and final sales of domestic business [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories Quarter Fourth quarter : II Ill IV : M III IV II Ill IV : | | III IV : II III IV : | | III \ Mp Nonfarm Total2 Farm Total * Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Final sales of domestic business3 Ratio of inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in business inventories ( CBI ) component of GDP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at their respective end-of-quarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas CBI is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates for nonfarm industries other than manufacturing and trade for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Manufacturing estimates for and earlier periods and trade estimates for and earlier periods are based on the SIC ; later estimates for these industries are based on the SIC. The resulting discontinuities are small Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-23- Real inventories and final sales of domestic business [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Inventories l Nonfarm Quarter Fourth quarter : : II Ill IV Total Farm Total2 Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other Final sales of domestic business3 Ratio of inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm : II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV : | | III IV * Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the change in business inventories component of GOP is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction establishments are included in " other " nonfarm inventories Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farms Note The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates for nonfarm industries other than manufacturing and trade for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Manufacturing estimates for and earlier periods and trade estimates for and earlier periods are based on the SIC ; later estimates for these industries are based on the SIC. The resulting discontinuities are small Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-24. Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter 1997/ : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV * Receipts from rest of the world Exports of goods and Reservices ceipts of Tntal i oiai * factor inTotal Goods2 Services2 come Payments to rest of the world Transfer payments pay ray ( net ) ments of From From Serv- factor Total inpersons governices2 come ment ( net ) ( net ) Imports of goods and services Total Total Goods Includes From business Net foreign investment capital grants received by the United States ( net ) not shown separately. See Table B-32 for data Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-25. Real exports and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments of factor income [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Goods1 Year or quarter Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services1 Receipts of factor income Imports of goods and services Goods1 Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services1 Payments of factor income 1997p : | | III IV II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV : services Beginning with | | III IV Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Note. See Table B-2 for data for total exports of goods and services and total imports of goods and services for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis II Ill IV/> TABLE B-26. Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] PIUS : Rpreintc Receipts Year or quarter occ L6SS : Payments Gross of factor of factor Equals : Gross domestic income income national from to product rest of rest of product the tha me world world Less : Consumption of fixed capital Total ; : II ? Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Z " Less : Eg * Indirect Busibusi- ness Statistical naness Govern- tional tax and trans- disfer crepanPrivate ment product nontax paycy liability ments ; -L5 PIUS : Subsidies less cur- Equals : rent sur- National plus of govern- income ment enterprises TABLE B-27. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] L ( JSS : Year or quarter " National income Corporate profits with inventory valuation Net and capital interest consumption adjustments PI US : Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements : II Ill IV : | | III | IV : | | III IV | | III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV/> Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 1>59.4 ] 4>61.6 | o _1 o _1 Personal interest income Equals : Govern- Business ment Personal transfer transfer Personal dividend payments payments income to income to persons persons U15.9 M59.4 l ! 3i888.7 4i981.6 5i519.2 5J429.3 * ^ 6'l79.1 TABLE B-28. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Wages and salaries Total Year or quarter National income ' Supplements to wages and salaries Government Other Total Employer contributions for social insurance labor income Total ftthpr UlllCI Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation capnai consumption adjustments Nonfarm Farm Total Total Proprietors ' income Total Proprietors ' income * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV.. II Ill IV * National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross domestic product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table : B-26 See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-28. National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Rental income of persons Capital consumption adjustment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Total Total Profits before tax : | | Ill IV II Ill IV : | | III IV : II Ill IV Without capital consumption adjustment Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis I960 1997/> | | Ill IV : II III IV Profits tax liability Profits after tax Total Divi- Undisdends tributed profits Capital conInven- sumptory tion valu- adjustation ment adjustment Net interest -L2 1L4 -2L9 -4l8 TABLE B-29. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements1 Private industries Year or quarter Personal income Total Total Goodsproducing industries Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Government Other labor income1 Proprietors ' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : II Ill IV/> 'The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table cludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table I960 : : : : : ; : Nonfarm B-28 in that it ex- TABLE B-29. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter I960 1997/ Transfer payments to persons Personal dividend income Personal interest income Total Old-age Governsurvivors Government ment disability unememployand ployment Veterans ees health insur- benefits retireinsurance ment ance benefits benefits benefits Family assistance Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance : II III IV " Consists of aid to families with dependent children and beginning with assistance programs operating under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors ' income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis | | III IV : II Ill IV II Ill IV | | Ill IV II Ill IV TABLE B-30. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter 1997P Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal Total : | | Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill IV | | Ill IVp Percents based on data in millions of dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Personal Personal Interest transfer Equals : conpay- Personal sumption paid ments saving by expendi- persons to rest tures of the world ( net ) ! ! s Percent of disposable personal income ? Personal outlays Total Personal Personal consumption saving expenditures '9.5 TABLE B-31. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and real dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Year or 1997/> : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill \ \ ! P Disposable personal income Per capita Total ( billions of dollars ) ( dollars ) Chained Current Chained Current ( ) ( ) dollars dollars dollars dollars Personal consumption expenditures Total ( billions of Per capita ( dollars ) dollars ) Chained Current Chained Current ( ) ( ) dollars dollars dollars dollars ! * l',692'.3 2',144 Gross domestic per capita ( dollars ) Current Chained ( ) dollars dollars Population ( thousands ) 'Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-32. Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Gross government saving Gross business saving Year or quarter Total Total Undis- Corporate Perand nontrib- corporate sonal uted- consumpsaving Total corpotion of rate fixed profits2 capital Total * : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Includes private wage accruals less disbursements not shown separately With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Consists mainly of allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) See next page for continuation of table Capital grants ConConsump- Current sump- Current received by the tion surplus tion surplus United or or of of deficit Total fixed deficit States fixed ( ) capital ( NIPA ) capital ( NIPA ) ( net ) Federal Total State and local o TABLE B-32. Gross saving and investment Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Addenda : Gross investment Year or quarter I960 : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III IV : | | III IV II III IV : | | III IV * > Total For details on Gross private domestic investment Gross government investment Net foreign investment Statistical discrepancy Gross saving as a percent gross national product Personal saving as a percent of disposable personal income government investment see Table B-20 Net exports of goods and services plus net receipts of factor income from rest of the world less net transfers plus net capital grants received by the United States. See also Table B-24 Consists of a U.S. payment to India under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act. This payment is included in capital grants received by the United States net Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-33. Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Families ^ Year Number ( millions ) ALL RACES * WHITE BLACK * Median money income ( in dol- lars ) Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Female householder Total Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent Median money income ( in dollars ) of persons years old and over with income Males Number ( millions ) Percent All persons Females Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ * ? ! The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Current dollar median money income adjusted by CPI-U-X1 Prior to data are for persons years and over Based on census population controls,- comparable with succeeding years Reflects implementation of Hispanic population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census adjusted population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Note. Poverty rates ( percent of persons below poverty level ) for all races for years not shown above are : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI-U ) For details see " Current Population Reports " Series P-60 Source-. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-34. Population by age group [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) Julyl ' Total * * * * * * * * * ^ Under * * * * * * * * ^ * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 11>94 * * 15J786 * * * * * * * Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning All estimates are consistent with decennial census enumerations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census * * * * * * * * * 35il09 * * * * * and over * * * * * * * * * * * TABLE B-35. Civilian population and labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population ' Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural Non- X, Unemployment Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate * Thousands of persons years of age and over I9605 s Civil- Unemian em- ployploy- ment rate ment/ civilian tion workers4 ratio K Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional f Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force See next page for continuation of table population TABLE B-35. Civilian population and labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population1 Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural UnNon- employagriment cultural Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate2 sept ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " " Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept ' : : : " " : : : : : : : : : : : " : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July : : r : r : : : Aug I : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Sept oct : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec oct ..I : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : : : : : : : : : " Unemployment rate civilian workers4 Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan5 Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Civilian employment/ population ratio3 Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows : Beginning introduction of census data added about to population and to labor force total employment and agricultural employment. Beginning inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about to population to labor force and to nonagricultural employment. Beginning introduction of census data reduced population by about and labor force and employment by Beginning introduction of census data added about to civilian noninstitutional population and to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on census in March added to labor force and to employment. Beginning changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey added about to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected. Beginning the introduction of revised population controls added about to the civilian population and labor force and to civilian employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly affected Beginning the introduction of census-based population controls adjusted for the estimated undercount added about million to the civilian population and labor force to civilian employment and to unemployment. The overall unemployment rate rose by about percentage point Beginning data are not strictly comparable with earlier data because of the introduction of a major redesign of the Current Population Survey and collection methodology Beginning data are not strictly comparable with earlier data due to the introduction of revised population controls which added about to the civilian population to the labor force and to employment. Unemployment rates and other percentages of labor market participation were not affected Note. Labor force data in Tables B-35 through EM4 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-36. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Total years years and over Total years ^ Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Unemployment Males Females Females years and over Total Total years Total years years and years and over over TABLE B-37. Chilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month '... : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June All civilian workers July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June { uiy Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec & : : Total Males Females Both sexes 5i593 Total Males Females Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Black Black and other White Both sexes Total FeMales males Both sexes ' TABLE B-38. Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian workers " : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Total Males June J iy Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor fc- Black and other White Females Both sexes Total 2>72 2i435 Statistics Males Females Black Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Employment/population ratio Labor force participation rate Year or month I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Both Both All All Black sexes civilian Males Fe- sexes White Black Black civilian Males Feand and workworkmales males White other Black other years ers years ers " Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept ' ' Oct Nov Dec Civilian labor force or civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ocf zz : : in group specified " TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Males years Females years Total and over years Males years Total Total and over years Females years Total and over years years and over Black and other Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec MS Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. See Note Table B-39 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-41. Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black White Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Total Females Males years years Total and over years Females Males years Total Total and over years years Total and over years years and over Black and other I960 Black July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Marine { uiy Aug Sept Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June oct : : : : : : TABLE B-42. Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian work- Total ers Males Females June Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Data for are for March ; data for are for April Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar Slay'z : : ig : : : SP& : : : : : Expert- Rnth years years and Total years and years over over sexes years White Black and other Black : : : : : : : : : : wage and salary workers Women who men spouse maintain present families Marriprt " TABLE B-43. Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month White Black and other or black All Females Males Males Females civilian Total work- Total Total years Total years ers Total years Total years years and years and years and years and over over over over Black and other S9 Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug 4fi Oct Nov Dec 1997Jan Feb Mar Apr May : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See Note Table ^ Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics sept : : " " : no ? ftfi TABLE B-44. Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted1 ] Duration of unemployment Year or month Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks and weeks over Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Data for by reason for unemployment are not equal to total unemployment Beginning January job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue Sept Reason for unemployment Average Median Job losers3 ( mean ) duraduraOn tion tion Total layoff Other ( weeks ) ( weeks ) Job leavers Reen- New entrants trants TABLE B-45. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month Covered employment Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) " State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Insured unemployment Thousands 1997p Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aue Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr M20.567 May : : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Initial claims Exhaustions Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands [ * * * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Includes persons under the Mate UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs and UCX ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemembers effective October ) programs Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) Federal Supplemental Compensation and Emergency Unemployment Compensation programs except as noted in footnote Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Including Emergency Unemployment Compensation and Federal Supplemental Compensation total benefits paid for and would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for Note. Insured unemployment and initial claims programs include Puerto Rican sugar cane workers beginning Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods-producing industries Year or month Manufacturing Total Total I960 ? : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : : : : r : : : July Aug : " : " : " Sept Oct NOVP Dec * Mining Construction ] Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Note. Data in Tables B-46 and B-47 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables through B-44 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-46. Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Year or month I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Au Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr M ? y June July Aug Sept Oct NOVA> Dec * Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade 4il27 Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services Total Federal State and local Note ( cont 'd ) which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries 1959-97l [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Average weekly hours Year or month Total private Manufacturing Total Overtime Average hourly earnings Total private Current dollars dollars Manufacturing ( current dollars ) Average weekly earnings total private Level Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ $ Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Oct Nov Dec * For production or nonsupervisory workers ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B-46 Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Percent changes are based on data that are not seasonally adjusted Note. See Note Table Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " sept : : " : ; : " Percent change from year earlier Current dollars dollars ^ I'.l ~ : o ~ : e ~ : e ~ : & TABLE B-48. Employment cost index private industry Year and month Service-producing Goods-producing Total private Total Wages com- and pen- salasation ries Benefits Manufacturing Total Wages Total Wages com- and Bene- com- and Benepen- sala- fits pen- sala- fits sation ries sation ries Nonmanufacturing Total Wages Total Wages com- and Bene- com- and Benepen- sala- fits pen- sala- fits sation ries sation ries Index June = ; not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Deb Index June = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted : Mar June '. Sept ! s Deb : Mar LO June ^ Sept Dec Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics lie '.2 ! ! labor free from the influence of employment shifts among TABLE B-49. Productivity and related data business sector [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Hours of all persons2 Output1 Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector : : : ) : : : : : II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on 3establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : TABLE B-50. Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Output1 Compensation per hour3 Hours of all persons2 Real compensation per hour4 Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator * Vpor r ICdl quarter Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Nonfarm Busibusiness ness sector sector Business sector } Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm business ness business sector sector sector : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : I II Ill II Ill IV : _2 Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers Current dollar output divided by the output index Note. Percent changes are based on original data and may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-49 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-51. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month I960 1997p 1996Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Manufacturing Total Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octp Nov Dec ? Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Oct. " : : : : : : : : Durable Nondurable Mining Utilities TABLE B-52. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total industrial production Final products Total Total July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct " Nov/> Dec " 'Two components oil and gas well drilling and manufactured homes are Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Materials Intermediate De- prod- Total Auto- Other Nonmotive dura- durable Total ! Busi- fense ucts prodble ness and space ucts goods goods Consumer goods Equipment included in total equipment but Dura- Nonble durable " 2lO not in detail shown Energy " 5U TABLE B-53. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Primary metals Total I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June { uiy Aug Sept Oct * NOVP Dec * Iron and steel Fabricated metal products Durable manufactures IndusTransportation equipment trial Electrimacal chinery machinMotor and ery Total vehicles equipand parts ment Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Nondurable manufactures Lumber and products Apparel Textile Printing mill and prodprod- publishucts ucts ing Chemicals and products Foods TABLE B-54. Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Total industry Year or month 1997/> 1996-Jan Feb Mar Apr May : : : : sept Set Nov : " " '. ' " ' : : ; : : : : June July Aug Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr M ? y June July Aug Sept Otfp Nov/> Dec ^ Total Durable goods Output as percent of capacity Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Nondurable goods Primary processing Advanced processing Mining Utilities TABLE B-55. New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Total new construction Year or month Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction1 Total New housing units Total Commercial Industrial Total Other Federal State and local * I960 New series 1997p Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec/ ' Residential buildings " " " '. " ' Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Incjudes residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are4 included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm ( see also footnote ) public utilities ( telecommunications gas electric railroad and petroleum pipelines ) and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-56. New housing units started and authorized [ Thousands of units ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New private housing units authorized New housing units started Year or month Private ( farm and nonfarm ) Private and public Total ( farm and nonfarm ) l Type of structure Nonfarm Total unit to units units or more Type of structure Total unit to units units or more ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ( ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) Nov Dec 1997-Jan ) Feb ) Mar Apr May ( ) ) ) ( ) July ) ( ) A ! * ( ) Sept ( ) Oct ( ) ( ) NOVA330 ( ) ( ) Deep ( ) ( ) Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from total private starts Authorized by issuance of local building permit : in permit-issuing places beginning ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; in places for ; and in places prior I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Augy ffzuz : June : : : : : : : : : : : i ! i : j ( ( IS ( i | J iii P P ' i : i ! : i : i J ) Jj PI U ii ! to Series discontinued December Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-57. Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Sales1 Inventories2 ' 1996Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct * Nov f&V : : : : Annual Ratio3 Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Total manufacturing and trade Sales ' Inventories2 Ratio3 Sales1 Inventories2 Retail trade Ratio3 Sales1 Inventories2 Ratio3 data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are : beginning averages of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year ; and for earlier years weighted averages. Monthly data are ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for manufacturing and beginning for wholesale and retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-58. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Inventories2 Shipments1 Year or month Total ! X Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov ' : : : : Durable Nondurable goods goods indus- industries tries Total Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods I not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for prior periods Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Total Materials and supplies Work in Finished proc- goods ess TABLE B-59- Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month Total I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Peb Mar May " " Z ! " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov 85.B9 New orders1 Durable goods industries NonCapital durable goods goods Total industries industries nondefense Unfilled2 orders Total Unfilled orders shipments ratio NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries Total NonDurable durable goods goods industries industries 'Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Note. Data beginning are not strictly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Seasonally PRICES TABLE B-60. Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ? = ] Housing Food and beverages Year or month All items ( CPI-U ) Total Food Total HouseOther hold Apparel Trans- Medical Entergoods Fuel and furnish- and care tainment and Shelter other ings upkeep tion services utilities and operation May " ! ! " " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May " ! ! ! ! ! ! June J iy Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also Note. Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners ' costs Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar : : : : : : ! : included through Energy2 TABLE B-61. Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Shelter Food and beverages Year or month Total1 Total At home Away from home Total Fuels Rent residential Fuel oil and other houseTotal hold fuel commodities Total2 ZZ " I960 Z. " ! " " " ! ZZ... " '1616 ZZ... : Jan Feb Mar Apr { fay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately December = See next page for continuation of table Fuel and other utilities Renters ' costs Food Homeowners ' costs2 Maintenance Total and repairs ZZ " " " Gas ( piped ) and electricity ( energy services ) Other utilities and public services TABLE B-61. Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Continued [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month Total Total New cars Used cars Motor fuel Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes other new vehicles not shown separately. Includes direct Includes direct pricing of diesel fuel and gasohol beginning Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept oc ? : : Automobile maintenance and repair pricing of new trucks Other Public transportation Total Medical care commodities " and motorcycles beginning Medical care services 23S.2 TABLE B-62. Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Commodities Year or month All items ( CPI-U ) All commodities Food Services CommodiAll ties less services food Medical care services Special indexes Services less medical care services All items less food All items less energy All items less food and energy All items CPI-U-X1 less ( all items ) medi- ( Dec. cal = ) i care ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec CPI-U-X1 is a rental equivalence approach to homeowners ' costs for the consumer price index for years prior to the first year for which the official index ( CPI-U ) incorporates such a measure. CPI-U-X1 is rebased to the December value of the CPI-U ( = ) ; thus it is identical with CPI-U data for December and all subsequent periods. Data prior to estimated by moving the series at the same rate as the CPI-U for each year Note.-See Note Table B- * Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-63. Changes in special consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year or month I960 Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy All items less food Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less food and energy U Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less medical care L3 4i3 Year to year Percent change from preceding month Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept : : : : : : : : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted A '.3 ! ! '.2 o ' fti June ll July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec '.2 '.3 ! l ~ '.2 ! l '.3 A '.3 '.2 '.3 Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted o ' Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted '.2 'A '.2 ! '.1 '.2 '.I o ' Unadjusted '.2 A '.2 '.2 '.2 '.2 ! l '.2 Seasonally adjusted '.3 '.3 '.3 o ' o ' '.2 TABLE B-64. Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Total Dec to Dec.1 Food Year to year -L6 ^ Medical care Services Commodities Dec to Dec.1 Medical care Total Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Energy3 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year L3 L6 ! Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Commodities and services Household fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data have been revised through August to ject to revision months after original publication See next page for continuation of table Total Crude Processed reflect the availability of Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Total Total Durable Nondurable Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods " $ late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are sub- TABLE B-65. Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Foods and feeds : Jan Feb Mar Materials and components Other For manufacturing For construction June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1997Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics t : : : : : Crude materials for further processing Processed fuels and lubricants Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other TABLE B-66. Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Finished goods Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Ycsr or month Total Foods Energy Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 57ll 78i3 Consumer goods Capital excludequiping ment foods and energy 77i5 Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Data have been revised through August to reflect the ject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Foods and Energy feeds1 Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other ^ 6L1 ! availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are sub- TABLE B-67. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products " Z Oct Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Sept od Nov Dec Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month Data have been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections ject to revision months after original publication See next page for continuation of table Aug r " " : sept Aug r : : " " : Fuels and related products and power1 Chemicals and allied products1 by respondents. All data are sub- TABLE B-67. Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Year or month Rubber Lumber and and plastic wood products products I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sect Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of oct : : : : : : : : : : Pulp Metals Machinery Furniture Nonpaper and and metallic and and metal equipment household mineral allied durables products products products Labor Statistics Transportation equipment Total " " " Motor vehicles and equipment Miscellaneous products TABLE B-68. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Year or month Finished goods excluding consumer foods Finished consumer foods Total finished goods Consumer goods Total Finished energy goods Capital equipment Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to year year Dec.1 Dec.1 year year Dec.1 year Dec.1 Dec.1 -'3 4l6 ^ o ' Tie o ' ~ ! s L6 Year to year Dec. to Year to Dec.1 year ~ ! Dec to Dec.1 Finished goods excluding foods and energy Jo ! -9i2 -3JU -4il Percent change from preceding month SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeasonsonsonUnadsonsonsonUnadUnadUnad- son- UnadUnadUnadjusted ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally justed ally adadjusted justed justed justed justed justed justed : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June o ' July Aug ST.Nov Dec ! ! '.I LO -A ! ~ '.2 ] se o cf. : ! ~ ! s ~ '.3 ~ ! Changes from '6 '.2 '.2 -> ~ '.2 ~ '.6 -> o ' ! '.I o ' o ' ! s ! ? L5 o ' o ' o ' l ! o ' -' \ A ! l December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data nave been revised through August to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are subject to revision months after original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B Money stock liquid assets and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Ml December : I960 * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept M3 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Year and month M2 Ml plus retail MMMF balances savings deposits ( including MMDAs ) and small time deposits M2 plus large time deposits RPs Eurodollars and institutiononly MMMF balances L Debt M3 plus other liquid assets Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ( monthly average of adjacent month-end levels ) Percent change from year or months earlier Ml M2 M3 Debt ^ Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Oct Nov Dec * Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors ; data derived from flow of funds accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate Note. See Table B-70 for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System oct : v : : : " " sept ' : : : : : : : ! " " : " : : " ' : " " : : TABLE B-70. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Currency Travelers checks Demand deposits December : Small Other checkable denomination deposits time ( OCDs ) deposits1 Savings deposits including money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July p Sept Nov Dec/ * Small denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ Data prior to are savings deposits only ; MMDA data begin December See next page for continuation of table 1997p Jan Feb Mar Apr : & May " : : : : " : : : : : : : : : : : : : : " : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Aug oct : : : : : '.2 '.2 Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances Retail L7 Institution only TABLE B-70. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year and month Large denomination time deposits3 Overnight and term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) ( net ) December : I960 ^ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Overnight and term Eurodollars ( net ) Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sect Get Nov Deep Large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of more than $ Note. See also Table B-S9 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Oct. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Savings bonds Shortterm Treasury securities Bankers acceptances Commercial paper TABLE B-71. Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figuresl ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements2 Reserves of depository institutions Year and month Total December : I960 : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Non borrowed Nonborrowed plus extended credit Data Required Monetary base Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Total Seasonal Extended credit o are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-72. Bank credit at all commercial banks [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjustedl ] Loans and leases in bank credit Securities in bank credit Year and month December : New series Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sent Total bank credit ComU.S merTotal Other Total se- Govern- secu- loans and cial ment curities securi- rities leases2 and industies trial Real estate Total Revolving home equity Other Con- Secusumer rity Other Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data are Wednesday values or prorated averages of Wednesday values for domestically chartered commercial banks branches and agencies of foreign banks New York State investment companies ( through September ) and Edge Act and agreement corporations. Beginning Oct. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Excludes Federal funds sold to reverse repurchase agreements ( RPs ) with and loans to commercial banks in the United States Note. Data are not strictly comparable because of breaks in the series Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-73. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3month 6month Constant maturities 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade New- Commermunici- home pal cial bonds mort- paper gage ( Stand- yields3 ard & months Poor 's ) Prime rate charged bank 's Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal funds rate ( M.OO " " : ? Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the4 average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper. Series no longer published by Federal Reserve ( FR ) See FR release H.15 Selected Interest Rates dated May For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day 's transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-73. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month 3month 6month Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Constant maturities2 Bills ( new issues ) 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade Communici- home merpal cial mort- paper bonds ( Stand6 ard & months4 Poor 's ) Prime rate charged Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York High-low : Jan Feb Mar May June July Aug Sept OctP Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Federal funds rate6 High-low * : Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE B-74. Credit market borrowing [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item NONFINANCIAL SECTORS Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages FEDERAL GOVERNMENT DOMESTIC Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n e e Other loans and advances _9 Mortgages WTO Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n e e Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES _5 FINANCIAL SECTORS Federal Government related Government-sponsored enterprises securities Mortgage pool securities U S Government loans Private financial sectors Open market paper Corporate bonds Bank loans n e e Other loans and advances Mortgages BY INSTRUMENT BY SECTOR Commercial banking Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Federally related mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies Funding corporations Other * o o o o ALL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper U.S. Government securities Municipal securities and loans Bank loans n e e Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit Credit unions life insurance companies mortgage companies real estate investment trusts and brokers and dealers See next page for continuation of table TABLE B-74. Credit market borrowing Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC FEDERAL GOVERNMENT Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n e e Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Federal Government related Government-sponsored enterprises securities Mortgage pool securities U S Government loans Private financial sectors Open market paper Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Federally related mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies Funding corporations Other1 ALL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper U.S. Government securities Municipal securities and loans Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit III IV II III o o Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System II o " TABLE B-75. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten Total 1-to 4family houses Multi- Comfamily mercial proper- properties ties Conventional to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total II Ill IV : I II Ill IV II Ilk Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes commercial properties and multifamily properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations 1-to 4family houses TABLE B-76. Mortgage debt outstanding by bolder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings institutions I960 II Ill IV II HI IV II III ? Commercial banks Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies ' Individuals and others4 Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolution Trust Corporation ( through ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-77. Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Total consumer credit Year and month December I960 Revolving Others June July Aug Sept " Oct.. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ' : : : " ' : : ' : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ' : : : : : Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug " : : : : : Sept Oct Nov U77.3 U79.9 l',223.8 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Automobile Covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes. Credit secured by real estate is excluded Consists of credit cards at retailers gasoline companies and commercial banks and check credit at commercial banks. Excludes 30-day charge credit held by travel and entertainment companies. Prior to included in " other. " Beginning includes open-end credit at retailers previously included in " other. " Also beginning some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into consumer credit Includes mobile home loans and all other loans not included in automobile or revolving credit such as loans for education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured Data newly available in January result in breaks in many series between December and subsequent months Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-78. Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] On-budget Total Fiscal year or period Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Off-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Federal debt ( end of period ) Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product U69 J22.5 Transition quarter Not strictly comparable with later data Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The 3-month period from July through September is a separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year February for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-79. Federal budget receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period Receipts National defense Total 1C.2 Transition Quarter ] ' Estimates Note. See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Federal debt ( end of period ) Gross Federal Held by public -Til TABLE B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) Surplus or National Social deficit Interdefense insurIndi ( ) naIn ( onvidual Corpo- ance ration and come Social Net Depart- tion- Health Medi- secu- secu- inter- Other budget Total in- income retire- Other Total al care ment of and come Total Defense afrity rity est offtaxes taxes ment remilitary fairs budget ) ceipts Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period " 1S6 n ? ? ) Transition quarter Estimates Note.-See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget ' ? II '.2 ' ? s q oil .'2 ! '.6 ! TABLE B-81. Federal receipts outlays deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars,- fiscal years ] Estimates Actual Description Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance and retirement receipts OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit RECEIPTS AND OUTUYS : Total receipts total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Held by Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts : Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other > On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budeet Beginning includes universal service fund receipts. Beginning includes receipts from tobacco legislation Note.-See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-82. Federal Government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Consumption expenditures Contributions for social Total insurance Transfer payments To rest of the world ( net ) GrantsSubsiin-aid dies less to Net current State inter- surplus of and est local paid government goventerernprises ments Current surplus deficit NaTotal tional defense To persons : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV " Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Note. See Note Table B-78 Source.- Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Fiscal : Calendar : ^ II Ill IV ( NIPA ) TABLE B-83. Federal and State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Federal Government State and local government Year or quarter Current Receipts expenditures Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) Current Receipts expenditures Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) Current Receipts expenditures Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) : II Ill IV : | | III IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill IV : II Ill \ \ lp Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State Total government receipts and current expenditures nave been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 1997/> Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments and local receipts TABLE B-84. Federal and State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current expenditures Receipts Year or quarter ! I... ! * Personal Total tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax 'accruals | | III ! IV... : II Ill IV... : II Ill IV... : II Ill IV : II Ill IV... : II Ill IV * : Net interest paid InLess : direct ACC L6SS : Divibusi- ContriIntor Pnn uon- Transi mer- dends ness butions est tax for Total ' sump- fer retion Inter- reand social expend- pay- Total nai/4 ceived ceived est non- insurby itures paid ku governby tax ance govern- ment acment cruals l ! Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Prior to dividends received is included in interest received Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis o ! i Subsidies i.. less current surplus of government enterprises Addendum : Current Grantsin-aid surplus or to deficit State and ( NIPA ) local governments TABLE B-85. State and local government receipts and current expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Total Indirect ContriPersonal Corpo- business butions rate tax Federal tax for profits and social grantsand tax nontax in-aid nontax receipts accruals accruals Insurance TotaP Consumption expenditures Subsidies Net Transless interest current fer paid paysurplus less ments of divito dends governperment sons received enterprises : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IVp Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 1997/ Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) TABLE B State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General expenditures by function General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales Indiand vidual gross income receipts taxes taxes Revenue from Federal Government Corporation net income taxes All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other 1985-S6 1988-S9 Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans ' services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities and transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregations of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-87. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Total interestbearing public debt securities Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1997Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Nonmarketable Marketable Total1 Treasury bills Treasury notes Treasury bonds Total U.S savings securities2 Foreign series3 Government account series Other * ber Series previously shown as U.S. savings bonds. Beginning February includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in " other " nonmarketable interest-bearing public debt securities in this table. Data prior to February do not reflect this change Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks. See footnote Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-88. Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Ito5 years Within lyear to years to years years and over Years Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov Dec 1997-Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug ocf .zzz : : : zz ' " : : : zz : : : : : sept zz : zzz ; : Oct Nov Dec Average length * Months Treasury inflation-indexed notes first offered in are excluded from the average length calculation Note. All issues classified to final maturity Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B-89. Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors [ Par values ; billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Nonbank investors End of month June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec June Dec : June Dec : June Dec : June Dec June Dec : June Dec : June Dec June Dec : June Dec June Dec June Dec : June Dec : Mar June Sept Dec. : : : : : : : : : : : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Total Commercial banks Individuals Total Insur- Money Corp- State Foreign Other and ance and Other compa- market ora- local interna- inves4 tors8 Total Savings securi- nies funds tions govern- tional bonds ties ments6 U.S savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Includes domestically chartered banks U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks New York investment companies majority owned by foreign banks and Edge Act corporations owned by domestically chartered banks foreign banks and banks in U.S. affiliated territories Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes U.S. savings notes. Sales began May and were discontinued June Exclusive of banks and insurance companies State and local government holdings ( beginning ) include their fully defeased debt that is backed by U.S. Treasury securities. Includes State and local pension funds Consists of the investments of foreign and international accounts ( both official and private ) in U.S. public debt issues. Reflects benchmark through December ; December benchmark through ; and December benchmark thereafter Includes savings and loan associations credit unions nonprofit institutions mutual savings banks corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers certain Government deposit accounts and Government-sponsored enterprises Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments I960 : | | Ill IV II Ill IV II IV | | Ill .IV : | | III IV II Ill Ill Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-91. Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter Financial l Total Total Total Nonfinancial Federal Reserve banks Transporta- Wholetion sale and public trade utilities Other Total Manufacturing Retail trade Other Rest of the world * : II Ill IV II Ill IV : II III IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : II Ill 'Consists of the following industries : Depository institutions ; nondepository credit institutions ; security and commodity brokers ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-92 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-92. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products ElecIndus- tronic Motor i ! trial and machin- other vehicles and ery and electric equipequip- equipment men ment Other Total Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Other ^ : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill IV : II Ill Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown. In the SIC the categories shown here as " industrial machinery and equipment " and " electronic and other electric equipment " were identified as " machinery except electrical " and " electric and electronic equipment " respectively Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-93. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity2 Nondurable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Before After income income taxes1 taxes Stockholders ' equity2 ...'..'..' : IV New series : : IV II Ill IV II Ill IV II Ill In the old series " income taxes " refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Data for ( most significantly : ) reflect the early adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ( Employer 's Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits Other Than Pensions ) by a large number of companies during the fourth quarter of Data for : also reflect adoption of Statement Corporations must show the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle in the first quarter of the year in which the change is adopted Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting principles industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations " Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-94. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent1 Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All All Durable manufacturing corporations industries Nondurable goods industries manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries I960 IV New series : : IV : | | III IV : | | III IV : HI Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only * See footnote Table B-93 Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-93 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-95. Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices ' New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Year or month Composite I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept " : Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug sept " " : : Oct Nov Dec Industrial Transportation Utility Finance : : : : : : : : ' Dow Jones industrial average2 Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Standard & Poor 's composite index ( = ) Dividendprice ratio5 Earningsprice ratio6 " Averages of daily closing prices except NYSE data through May are averages of weekly closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( more than ) ; for Dow-Jones industrial average stocks ; and for S&P composite index stocks 'Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. Annual indexes prior to reflect the doubling Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Note. All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corporation ( S&P ) TABLE B-96. Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate2 ( ) ( ) Number of failures Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Seasonally adjusted ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) June ( ) July ( ) Aug ( ) ( ) ( ) Nov ( ) Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data beginning are based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data Data for and are preliminary and subject to revision Failure rate per listed enterprises Series discontinued in Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May : : ffzz AGRICULTURE TABLE B-97. Farm income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year or quarter Cash marketing receipts Total i Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes2 Production expenses '.2 ~ ! e ! marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments other farm cash income and nonmoney income furnished by : | | III IV : | | III IV \ P \ \ p Net farm income Cash farms Physical changes in end-of-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period Note. Data include net Commodity Credit Corporation loans and operator households Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service TABLE B-98. Farm business balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Physical assets End of year Nonreal estate Total assets Real estate Livestock and poultry ^ Financial assets InvestTotal Pur- ments Other claims Machinin ery and Crops2 chased cooperin- atives motor vehicles P Ut S Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt Excludes commercial broilers ; excludes horses and mules beginning ; excludes turkeys beginning Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC Includes fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Currency and demand deposits Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data exclude operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service Proprietors ' equity TABLE B-99. Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Productivity indicators * Farm output Year Total ' Livestock and products Crops Total2 Gross production Includes items not included in groups shown See Table B-100 for farm inputs Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service Feed crops Food grains Oil crops Farm output per unit of total factor input Farm output per unit of farm labor TABLE B-100. Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April i Year * As Number percent ( thou- of total sands ) population Selected Farm employment input use ( thousands ) harSelfvested emFarm Dura ( milployed Hired ble Total and work- lions of Total Farm real equip5 labor estate unpaid ers acres ) ment workers4 2>67 ^ indexes of ( = ) Feed seed Other P and purEner- cultural gy chemi- chased chased cals6 live- inputs stock ^ A 'Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. See also footnote Series discontinued in Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-35 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Prior to this category was termed " family workers " and did not include nonfamily unpaid workers Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Fertilizer lime and pesticides Includes purchases of broiler- and egg-type chicks and turkey poults and livestock imports for purposes other than immediate slaughter Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-101. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers [ = except as noted ] Prices received by farmers Year or month ..'. '. : Jan Feb Mar & : : : : : June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec = Jan Feb Mar Apr $ r June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec LiveAil farm Crops stock and prodproducts ucts All commodities services interest taxes Total * Feed and wage rates Prices paid by farmers Production items AgriLiveFarm Farm Wage stock Fertil- culmaand izer tural Fuels chin- serv- Rent rates chemipoulery ices cals try Includes 8J AddendUITl : Average farm real estate value per acre ( dol- lars ) items used for family living not shown separately Includes other production items not shown separately Average for States. Annual data are : March for February for April for February for and January for Note Oata on a base prior to have not been calculated by Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Agriculture ( National Agricultural Statistics Service and Economic Research Service ) TABLE B-102. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Imports Exports Year TotaM Feed grains Food grains Oilseeds and products ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ft ( ) ( ) ! i ( ) ( ) Jan-Wov : z : : : z : : : w ( ) Cotton Tobacco 'l ( ) '.1 ! i Animals and products Total includes items not shown separately Rice wheat and wheat flour Includes nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Less than $ million Crops fruits and vegetables3 Animals and products ( ) '5 '.1 '.3 ! Total ( ) Coffee Cocoa beans and products '.2 Agricultural trade balance _1 ( ) _1 '2 For totals include transshipments through Canada that are not reflected in commodity groupings. Prior data reflect the transshipments Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-103. U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Goods1 Year or quarter Exports Imports Services Net : Investment income Balance Net Net travel Other on goods Receipts Payments on on U.S. foreign military and services and services assets assets in transac- transpor- net abroad tation tions U.S receipts Net Unilateral Balance on transfers current net account -U03 'Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing ; excludes military Quarterly data are not seasonally adjusted Includes transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs See next page for continuation of table | | III IV : | | III IV : I II Ilk TABLE B-l03. U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Foreign assets in the U.S. net [ increase/capital inflow { ) ] U.S. assets abroad net [ increase/capital outflow ( ) ] Year or quarter Total I960 IIIZI : : : i : : i : : H " I ! ! ! ! ! ! " ! ! ! ! " " ! ! ! HI IV U.S official reserve assets25 * Total Foreign official assets2 Other foreign assets U.S private assets i ' " l39 : = : : Statistical discrepancy Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy | : | | Ill IV Other U.S Government assets Allocations of special drawing rights ( SDRs ) : I II Ilk Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies,and the Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) TABLE B-104. U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Imports Exports Nonpetroleum products Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total Agricultural products Industrial supplies Total and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive Other Petroleum Total and prod- Total ucts Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive Other : II Ill P * ! ! II Ill IV II Ill IV End-use categories beginning are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for goods exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign goods ) are assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic goods Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-105. U.S. international trade in goods by area [ Billions of dollars ] Item EXPORTS Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC34 Other Eastern Europe2 International organizations and unallocated IMPORTS Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC3 Other4 Eastern Europe2 International organizations and unallocated BALANCE ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe2 Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC34 Other Eastern Europe2 International organizations and unallocated first quarters at annual rate1 * 'Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted The former German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) included in Western Europe beginning fourth quarter and in Eastern Europe prior to that time Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Ecuador ( through ) Gabon Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin America other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods : Exports ( f.a.s.value ) Goods : Imports ( customs value except as noted ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Year or month Total BOP Total basis3 Census basis Foods feeds and beverages Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Census basis ( by end-use category ) Consumer goods Total ( non- BOP Total food ) basis Census exbasis4 cept automotive F.a.s. value Services ( BOP basis ) Foods feeds and beverages Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Exports Imports F.a.s. value W ? Customs value MaVZZ ! ' June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov/> 'Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Includes undocumented exports to Canada through Beginning undocumented exports to Canada are included in the appropriate end-use category Total includes " other " exports or imports not shown separately Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Goods on a Census basis are adjusted to a BOP basis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in line with concepts and definitions used to prepare international and national accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in international accounts and to value transactions according to a standard definition Data include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) : Jan Feb Mar ' TABLE B-107. International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value -S313 U.S. ASSETS ABROAD : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. Government assets other than official reserves U S credits and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars U.S. official reserve assets Gold1 Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S. short-term assets U.S. private assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment abroad : At current cost At market value Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U S nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere 2'933.3 FOREIGN ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Foreign official assets in the United States U.S. Government securities U S Treasury securities Other Other U S Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment in the United States : At current cost At market value U.S. Treasury securities U.S currency U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Valued at market price Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-108. Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada Japan European Union France Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( Index = ) * : II III IV : II III IV/> Consumer prices ( Index = ) ' Consists of Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Sweden and United Kingdom Prior to data are for West Germany only All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : National sources as reported by Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 1997/> II Ill IV II III IV " TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Civilian unemployment rate ( Percent ) II Ill IV II Ill IV L6 M.3 M.6 />5.7 * " pl.2 * >7.3 * ML3 />12.0 pl2.1 A>123 " Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( Index = ) Data are for West Germany only Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France and Germany should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data 3There are breaks in the series for Germany ( ) France ( ) Italy ( and ) and United States ( and ) Based on the prior series the rate for Germany was percent in the rate for France was in in in and in and the rate for Italy was percent in and in The break in raised Italy 's rate by approximately percentage point. For details on break in series in and for United States see footnote Table B-35 Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( wage and salary earners and the selfemployed ) in the United States Canada Japan France and Germany and to all employees ( wage and salary earners ) in the other countries For France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-110. Foreign exchange rates [ Currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ] Period Belgium ( franc ) March : | | III IV : | | Ill IV Netherlands ( guilder ) Canada ( dollar ) Sweden ( krona ) : | | III IV : | | III IV WalueisU.S. dollars per pound Adjusted by changes in consumer prices Note. Certified noon buying rates in New York Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System March France ( franc ) Switzerland ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) United Kingdom ( pound ) Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) Multilateral trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar ( March = ) Nominal Real TABLE B-lll. International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country All countries Industrial countries1 United States Canada Australia Japan New Zealand Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spam Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area- Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data Oct Nov " " 50,'986 for Luxembourg Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities ' holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : and ; ; ; ; ; October ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics TABLE B-112. Growth rates in real gross domestic product [ Percent change at annual rate ] Area and country World Advanced economies Major industrial countries United States Japan Germany2 France Italy United Kingdom3 Canada Other advanced economies Developing countries Africa Asia Middle East and Europe Western Hemisphere Countries in transition Central and eastern Europe Russia Transcaucasus and central Asia All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund. For United States preliminary estimates by the Department of Commerce show that real GDP grew percent in Through data are for West Germany only Average of expenditure income and output estimates of GDP at market prices Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and International Monetary Fund O